### Accession
PXD013605

### Title
Co-utilization of sugar and aromatic carbons in Pseudomonas putida

### Description
Pseudomonas species thrive in different nutritional environments and can catabolize divergent carbon substrates. These capabilities have important implications for the role of these species in natural and engineered carbon processing. However, the metabolic phenotypes enabling Pseudomonas to utilize mixed substrates remain poorly understood. This work is part of a multi-omics approach involving stable isotope tracers, metabolomics, fluxomics, and proteomics in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to investigate the constitutive metabolic network that achieves co-utilization of glucose and benzoate, respectively. The data used to estimate the changes in protein abundance are deposited here and were found to partially predicted the metabolic flux changes in cells grown on the glucose:benzoate mixture versus on glucose alone. Notably, flux magnitude and directionality were also maintained by metabolite levels and regulation of phosphorylation of key metabolic enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction was conducted at 4oC. 25-mL culture aliquots were harvested (n = 3). Samples were centrifuged. The supernatant was removed and the pellet washed twice with deionized  water and stored at -20°C. Pellet were resuspended in 4-mL of 2.5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7) and vortexed. Cells were lysed in a French press. The lysates were centrifuged and an aliquot of the supernatant (2 mL) was concentrated to 200 μL using ultrafiltration. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C in 9 volumes of cold 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone. The solution was centrifuged and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed two times in cold acetone. Urea (7 M) was used for protein dissolution. Dissolved pellets were then diluted in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). The final sample contained < 1 M urea contamination. The protein concentration for each sample was determined by Bradford assay and validated by running on a precast NOVEX 12% Tris/Glycine mini-gel. The SDS gel was visualized with colloidal Coomassie blue stain, imaged and analyzed by ImageQuant TL 8.1.  A total of 200 µg protein of each sample in 7 M urea and 50 mM TEAB was reduced with 11 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 1 h at room temperature, alkylated with 37 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark and then quenched by addition of 40 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). The alkylated proteins were diluted with 240 µL of 100 mM TEAB. Each sample was digested with 18 μg trypsin for 18 h at 35 °C and an additional 2 μg trypsin was added and incubated for 4 h. The TMT 10-plex labels were reconstituted with 45 µL of anhydrous ACN prior to labeling and added to each of the tryptic digest samples. The samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in order to TMT label. The peptides from 10 samples were mixed with each tag of TMT10plex separately. Equal amounts of peptide from the 10 digested samples were pooled together. The pooled peptides were evaporated to 200 µL and subsequently purified by solid-phase extraction (SPE) and dried at reduced pressure in a Speed-Vac concentrator. Tryptic peptides were subjected to a first dimensional fractionation via high-pH reverse phase chromatography, using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. The TMT tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate at pH 9.5 (eluent A) and loaded onto an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 2.1x 150 mm) from Waters, equilibrated with eluant A. 80% ACN/20% 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 9.5). The chromatography was carried out using a gradient from 10-45% eluent B over 30 min at a flow rate 200 µL/min. Forty-eight fractions were collected at 1-min intervals and pooled into a total of 10 fractions based on the absorbance at 214 nm and with multiple fraction concatenation strategy. Ten percent of each fraction was pooled, dried and reconstituted in 120 µL of 2% ACN/0.5% FA for low pH nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The remainder of each sample was pooled into 5 fractions, dried and enriched using TiO2. Enrichment was conducted using a TiO2 Mag Sepharose. The tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 400 µL 1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA. The TiO2 slurry (75 µL) was incubated with the sample for 30 min at 1,800 rpm vortex. After washing the beads with 80% acetonitrile, 1%TFA, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 100 µL of 5% ammonium hydroxide. The eluted fraction was dried and reconstituted in 25 µL of 0.5% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano HPLC.  2-3 µL of each sample was used for global proteome analysis. 5-8 µL was used to enrich for phosphopeptides. Samples were injected onto a trap column. The bound peptides were then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP column (75 µm x 25 cm, 3.5 µm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. using a gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  The Orbitrap Fusion was in the positive ion mode with spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. All mass analyzers were externally calibrated. The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA mode. The FT mass analyzer was used for survey scans followed by 3 second top speed data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans using a normalized collision energy of 37.5% for all precursor ions with between 2 and 7 charges per ion. The threshold ion count was > 10,000.  MS survey scans were conducted at a resolving power of 120,000 FWHM for all the masses in the range of m/z 400-1600 using the settings AGC = 3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms. The MS/MS scans were conducted using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 60,000 FWHM resolution for the mass range m/z 105-2000. The AGC setting, Max IT, and Q isolation window were set to 1e5, 120 ms and ±1.6 Da, respectively. The dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 with a 45 second exclusion duration with a ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data were acquired using the Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired using the Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0. For comparisons of data from growth and metabolomics experiments at the two growth conditions (glucose:benzoate mixture versus glucose alone), statistical analysis was done using unpaired two-tailed t-test. Statistically-significant difference was determined at p ≤0.05.  To estimate the thresholds of significant change from the proteomics data, the expression ratios from each of the data sets were log2 transformed and fit to 60 different statistical distributions using the program EasyFit (MathWave Technologies). Goodness of fit was determined by the Kalmogrov/Smirnov, Anderson Darling and Chi Squared tests. In each case the best fit was determined to be to the four-parameter Dagum distribution. The 95% confidence intervals were estimated by generating distributions randomly using the exact parameters of the experimentally derived distributions.  A two tailed heteroscedastic t-test was conducted to evaluate the difference between the means of the samples being compared. An expression ratio is considered to have changed significantly if the magnitude of the change is greater than what would be expected to be observed by chance with a probability of 0.05 and if its associated p-value was < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
High-affinity iron (Fe) scavenging compounds, or siderophores, are widely employed by soil bacteria to survive scarcity in bioavailable Fe. Siderophore biosynthesis relies on cellular carbon metabolism, despite reported decrease in both carbon uptake and Fe-containing metabolic proteins in Fe-deficient cells. Given this paradox, the metabolic network required to sustain the Fe-scavenging strategy is poorly understood. Here, through multiple <sup>13</sup>C-metabolomics experiments with Fe-replete and Fe-limited cells, we uncover how soil <i>Pseudomonas</i> species reprogram their metabolic pathways to prioritize siderophore biosynthesis. Across the three species investigated (<i>Pseudomonas putida</i> KT2440, <i>Pseudomonas protegens</i> Pf-5, and <i>Pseudomonas putida</i> S12), siderophore secretion is higher during growth on gluconeogenic substrates than during growth on glycolytic substrates. In response to Fe limitation, we capture decreased flux toward the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle during the metabolism of glycolytic substrates but, due to carbon recycling to the TCA cycle via enhanced anaplerosis, the metabolism of gluconeogenic substrates results in an increase in both siderophore secretion (up to threefold) and Fe extraction (up to sixfold) from soil minerals. During simultaneous feeding on the different substrate types, Fe deficiency triggers a hierarchy in substrate utilization, which is facilitated by changes in protein abundances for substrate uptake and initial catabolism. Rerouted metabolism further promotes favorable fluxes in the TCA cycle and the gluconeogenesis-anaplerosis nodes, despite decrease in several proteins in these pathways, to meet carbon and energy demands for siderophore precursors in accordance with increased proteins for siderophore biosynthesis. Hierarchical carbon metabolism thus serves as a critical survival strategy during the metal nutrient deficiency.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Benzoate, Fluxomics, Metabolic flux, Bacterial metabolism, Proteomics, Metabolic regulation, Glucose, Pseudomonas, Mixed-carbon metabolism

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


