### Accession
PXD005442

### Title
The proteome of Fibrobacter succinogenes S85 outer membrane vesicles

### Description
Here, we illustrate the proteomic composition and hydrolytic capacity of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) produced by F. succinogenes during growth on Avicel cellulose and show that the OMVs are equipped with a highly versatile polysaccharide-degrading machinery. Proteomic assessment identified an enrichment of acidic proteins as well as carbohydrate-active enzymes of varying putative functions. Further, we show that the OMVs contain a membrane-bound multiprotein complex containing four proteins.

### Sample Protocol
OMV proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE in two biological replicates for analysis of OMV content by proteomics. Further, high-resolution clear native electrophoresis (hrCNE) in concert with proteomics was used to identify membrane-bound multiprotein complexes, presumingly with hydrolytic activity.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Perseus was used for quantitatively analyzing the proteins in the OMVs. Mascot and emPAI was used for gel spots from 2D-hrCNE-SDS-PAGE gels.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrobacter succinogenes is an anaerobic bacterium naturally colonising the rumen and cecum of herbivores where it utilizes an enigmatic mechanism to deconstruct cellulose into cellobiose and glucose, which serve as carbon sources for growth. Here, we illustrate that outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) released by F. succinogenes are enriched with carbohydrate-active enzymes and that intact OMVs were able to depolymerize a broad range of linear and branched hemicelluloses and pectin, despite the inability of F. succinogenes to utilize non-cellulosic (pentose) sugars for growth. We hypothesize that the degradative versatility of F. succinogenes OMVs is used to prime hydrolysis by destabilising the tight networks of polysaccharides intertwining cellulose in the plant cell wall, thus increasing accessibility of the target substrate for the host cell. This is supported by observations that OMV-pretreatment of the natural complex substrate switchgrass increased the catalytic efficiency of a commercial cellulose-degrading enzyme cocktail by 2.4-fold. We also show that the OMVs contain a putative multiprotein complex, including the fibro-slime protein previously found to be important in binding to crystalline cellulose. We hypothesize that this complex has a function in plant cell wall degradation, either by catalysing polysaccharide degradation itself, or by targeting the vesicles to plant biomass.

### Keywords
Hydrolytic enzymes, Outer membrane vesicles, Omv

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Eijsink
Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


