### Accession
PXD035682

### Title
Rapid trypsin digestion at elevated temperature with calcium for enhanced bottom-up proteome analysis

### Description
Trypsin is frequently employed to cleave proteins ahead of mass spectrometry characterization. Traditionally, enzyme digestion involves overnight incubation of proteins at 37 °C, which is not only time consuming but can still yield in poor digestion efficiency. While raising the temperature should theoretically accelerate the digestion, this also destabilizes the enzyme and enhances trypsin degradation. We therefore questioned whether elevated temperature digestion is beneficial for improving tryptic digestion. Here we quantify protein digestion kinetics at elevated temperatures for calcium-stabilized trypsin and enforce the critical importance of calcium ions to preserve the enzyme. We quantitatively demonstrate that 1 hour at 47 °C provides a superior digest when compared to conventional (overnight, 37 °C) processing of the proteome. The impact of our enhanced digestion protocol is shown through bottom-up mass spectrometry analysis of a complex proteome mixture.

### Sample Protocol
A S. cerevesiae proteome was extracted in the presence of SDS, precipitated in the ProTrap XG, re-solubilized with 8 M urea, and subject to a variety of trypsin digestion conditions, ranging in temperature, digestion time, and added calcium ions. Digestion products from experimental digests were labeled by reductive dimethylation "light" (+ 28.03 u) and pooled with a "heavy"-labeled (+ 36.08 u) conventional control digest for bottom-up LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched in MaxQuant with a FDR of 0.01. The relative abundance of fully-cleaved and miscleaved peptides were compared across experimental conditions vs. the control sample to elucidate an optimized rapid approach to proteome digestion with trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics relies on efficient trypsin digestion ahead of MS analysis. Prior studies have suggested digestion at elevated temperature to accelerate proteolysis, showing an increase in the number of MS-identified peptides. However, improved sequence coverage may be a consequence of partial digestion, as higher temperatures destabilize and degrade the enzyme, causing enhanced activity to be short-lived. Here, we use a spectroscopic (BAEE) assay to quantify calcium-stabilized trypsin activity over the complete time course of a digestion. At 47 &#xb0;C, the addition of calcium contributes a 25-fold enhancement in trypsin stability. Higher temperatures show a net decrease in cumulative trypsin activity. Through bottom-up MS analysis of a yeast proteome extract, we demonstrate that a 1 h digestion at 47 &#xb0;C with 10 mM Ca<sup>2+</sup> provides a 29% increase in the total number of peptide identifications. Simultaneously, the quantitative proportion of peptides with 1 or more missed cleavage sites was diminished in the 47 &#xb0;C digestion, supporting enhanced digestion efficiency with the 1 h protocol. Trypsin specificity also improves, as seen by a drop in the quantitative abundance of semi-tryptic peptides. Our enhanced digestion protocol improves throughput for bottom-up sample preparation and validates the approach as a robust, low-cost alternative to maximized protein digestion efficiency.

### Keywords
Trypsin; calcium; bottom-up proteomics; mass spectrometry; accelerated digestion; digestion efficiency; quantitative proteomics; sample preparation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Jessica Nickerson

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Austin Doucette
Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada


