### Accession
PXD024131

### Title
Puf6 ushers correct rRNA compaction during ribosome assembly

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the complex between the nucleolar factor, Puf6, and the yeast 60S ribosome. Disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) was used as the cross-linking reagent.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). The sample was digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin and the digest was fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography. Two SEC fractions were analyzed in duplicate by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. File numbers 156/157 and 158/159, respectively, are replicate injections of the same fraction. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest/xProphet (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins (Puf6 and ribosomal proteins) and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances -5 to +5 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. xProphet was used to adjust the false discovery rate to <5% at the nonredundant peptide pair level.

### Publication Abstract
Productive ribosomal RNA (rRNA) compaction during ribosome assembly necessitates establishing correct tertiary contacts between distant secondary structure elements. Here, we quantify the response of the yeast proteome to low temperature (LT), a condition where aberrant mis-paired RNA folding intermediates accumulate. We show that, at LT, yeast cells globally boost production of their ribosome assembly machinery. We find that the LT-induced assembly factor, Puf6, binds to the nascent catalytic RNA-rich subunit interface within the 60S pre-ribosome, at a site that eventually loads the nuclear export apparatus. Ensemble F&#xf6;rster resonance energy transfer studies show that Puf6 mimics the role of Mg<sup>2+</sup> to usher a unique long-range tertiary contact to compact rRNA. At LT, puf6 mutants accumulate 60S pre-ribosomes in the nucleus, thus unveiling Puf6-mediated rRNA compaction as a critical temperature-regulated rescue mechanism that counters rRNA misfolding to prime export competence.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; ribosome; ribosomal assembly

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


