### Accession
PXD047200

### Title
Proteomic analysis of WT and AP-2 KO NPCs at DIV3

### Description
Full proteome analysis of WT and AP-2 KO NPCs at DIV3 to detect dysregulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
NPCs were lysed in 8M Urea/50 mM TEAB buffer containing protease inhibitors. Samples were sonicated, followed by the centrifugation of lysates at 20,000 g for 15 min. Lysates were reduced (DTT), and alkylated (CAA). Digestion was performed using trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted and purified using Stagetips. All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-27% solvent B within 119.0 min, 27-50% solvent B within 19.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8, (Tyanova et al., 2016a)) using default parameters against the UniProt canonical mouse database (UP589, downloaded 15.08.2019) with the match-between-runs option enabled between replicates. Follow-up analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al., 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuronal progenitors, Microtubules, Ap-2, Centrosome

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Center for Physiology & CECAD Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Kononenko
Center for Physiology & CECAD Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne


