### Accession
PXD035715

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 N protein interacts with cellular G3BP

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) antagonizes stress granule formation, in part, via interaction between SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein and Ras-GTPase-activating SH3-domain-binding protein 1 (G3BP1). In this study, we assessed interaction between the N protein of SARS-CoV-2 S clade and G3BP1 in Calu-3 cells

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3 cells were cultured for 18 h at a density of 3 × 10^5 cells/well in 6-well plates. Cells were washed in PBS and infected with SARS-CoV-2 (S clade) at 0.1 multiplicity of infection (MOI) for 1 h, with shaking every 15 min, to allow adsorption of the virus, in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. The supernatants were then aspirated and replaced with DMEM, containing 2% FBS. After 72 h infection, cells were washed with PBS and lysed for 30 min at 4°C in cell-lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitor cocktail, and 10% NP-40). Cell lysates were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 20 min and then incubated with anti-SARS-CoV-2 N mAb and Protein A beads (CaptivAtm PriMAB 52% [v/v] slurry; REPLIGEN, Waltham, MA, USA) for 2 h at 4°C. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 N mAb and Protein A bead immunocomplexes were collected by centrifugation and resolved by 4–12% gradient sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using Bolt™ 4–12% Bis–Tris Plus gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Co-IP gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 or analyzed by western blot. After Co-IP with anti-SARS-CoV-2 N mAb, the protein bands of interest identified by 4–12% gradient SDS-PAGE were excised from gels and analyzed by Proteinworks Co (Seoul, South Korea). In brief, protein was digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were isolated using an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). These peptides were examined by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), using a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data obtained were processed in Proteome Discoverer (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific) v2.4. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys) and variable modifications included oxidation (Met) at peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da. pdResult file generated by PD were analyzed against the UniProt human database including the sequence of the G3BP1 protein (Q13283).

### Publication Abstract
Stress granule formation is induced by numerous environmental stressors, including sodium arsenite treatment and viral infection. Accordingly, stress granules can inhibit viral propagation and function as part of the antiviral host response to numerous viral infections. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) antagonizes stress granule formation, in part, via interaction between SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein and Ras-GTPase-activating SH3-domain-binding protein 1 (G3BP1). However, it is unclear whether there are differential effects in different cell types. In this study, we assessed interaction between the N protein of SARS-CoV-2 S clade and G3BP1/2 in Vero and Calu-3 cells and investigated the effect of various SARS-CoV-2 strains on sodium arsenite-induced stress granule formation. Our data show that SARS-CoV-2 S clade N protein interacts with both G3BP1 and G3BP2 more strongly in Calu-3 <i>vs</i>. Vero cells. Consistent with this observation, infection with SARS-CoV-2 S clade induces stress granule formation in Vero but not in Calu-3 cells. However, infection with SARS-CoV-2 S clade, as well as other SARS-CoV-2 variants, inhibits sodium arsenite-induced stress granule formation in both cell lines. Taken together, our results show differential effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on stress granule formation that is dependent on host cell type, rather than virus strain type.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Calu-3, N protein, G3bp1

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea
Institute of Medical Science, College of Medicine, Hallym University

### Submitter
Dongbum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Hyung-Joo Kwon
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea


