### Accession
PXD029504

### Title
Identification of site-specific incorporation of Kacyl/K*acyl in full-length histones in E. coli and mammalian cells

### Description
With the evolution of the PylRS system, we identified the PylRS variants for incorporation of all synthesized Kacyl and Kacyl* in the full-length H3 protein both in E. coli and mammalian cells, which covered the tail domain (eg. K23, K27, K56) as well as the globular domain that are difficult for chemical synthesis (eg. K64, K79, K122).

### Sample Protocol
1. For E. coli, E. coli DH10B cells harboring plasmids pBAD-H3K23/27TAG and the relative PylRS/tRNA were grown in LB medium with ampicillin (100 g/ml) and chloramphenicol (34 g/ml) overnight at 37 °C. After regrown by 1:100 dilution, 1 mM K*acyl or Kacyl was added to the bacterial culture when OD600 reached 0.4, while 20 mM NAM and 0.2% ARA were added when OD600 reached 0.8. Bacterial culture was harvested after expression at 37 °C for 12 hours. The cells were lysed and the inclusion bodies were dissolved by using 6 N guanidine hydrochloride buffer (pH 8.0) and further purified with Ni-NTA particle beads. HPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed to verify the site-specific incorporation. 2. For mammalian cells, plasmids pcDNA4-H3-K56/79TAG was transfected into the relative PylRS stable cell line of HEK293T and supplemented with 0.2 mM Kacyl/K*acyl. After growing for 6 h, the cells were changed into DMEM with 1mM Kacyl/K*acyl. The cells were cultured for additional 36 hours to express the corresponding H3 protein (H3K56acyl, H3K*56acyl or H3K*79acyl). Cells were collected by centrifugation (500×g, 10 min) at 4 °C. The histones were extracted by TCA precipitation and enriched by his-tag isolation. The eluents were combined, concentrated and separated by SDS-PAGE. The relative H3 bands were cut and subjected to HPLC-MS/MS for modification identification.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched against self-designed fasta database based on the amino acid sequence by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0), with the following parameters: The carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as the fixed modification, Kcr/K*ac-N2/K*pr-N2/K*bu-N2/K*hib-N2/K*cr-N2/K*bhb-N2 was set as variable modification. +/- 10 ppm was set for peptide pass tolerance and +/- 0.6 Da was set for fragment mass tolerance. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
A generalizable strategy with programmable site specificity for in situ profiling of histone modifications on unperturbed chromatin remains highly desirable but challenging. We herein developed a single-site-resolved multi-omics (SiTomics) strategy for systematic mapping of dynamic modifications and subsequent profiling of chromatinized proteome and genome defined by specific chromatin acylations in living cells. By leveraging the genetic code expansion strategy, our SiTomics toolkit revealed distinct crotonylation (e.g., H3K56cr) and &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation (e.g., H3K56bhb) upon short chain fatty acids stimulation and established linkages for chromatin acylation mark-defined proteome, genome, and functions. This led to the identification of GLYR1 as a distinct interacting protein in modulating H3K56cr's gene body localization as well as the discovery of an elevated super-enhancer repertoire underlying bhb-mediated chromatin modulations. SiTomics offers a platform technology for elucidating the "metabolites-modification-regulation" axis, which is widely applicable for multi-omics profiling and functional dissection of modifications beyond acylations and proteins beyond histones.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Lc-ms/ms, Purified proteins, E. coli

### Affiliations
Professor and Chair of Chemical Biology,  Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences Peking University, Beijing, China. Associate Editor, ACS Chemical Biology
Peking University

### Submitter
Fangfei Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Peng R. Chen
Professor and Chair of Chemical Biology,  Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences Peking University, Beijing, China. Associate Editor, ACS Chemical Biology


