### Accession
PXD014657

### Title
Palaeoproteomic identification of breast milk protein residues from the archaeological skeletal remains of a neonatal dog

### Description
Accurate postmortem estimation of breastfeeding status for archaeological or forensic neonatal remains is difficult. Confident identification of milk-specific proteins associated with these remains, would provide direct evidence of breastmilk consumption. We used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS) to confidently identify beta-lactoglobulin-1 (LGB1) and whey acidic protein (WAP), major whey proteins associated with a neonatal dog (Canis lupus familiaris) skeleton (430–960 cal AD), from an archaeological site in Hokkaido, Japan. The age at death of the individual was estimated to be approximately two weeks after birth. Protein residues extracted from rib and vertebra fragments were analyzed and identified by matching tandem MS spectra against the dog reference proteome. A total of 200 dog protein groups were detected and at least 1 peptide from canine LGB1 and two peptides from canine WAP were confidently identified. These milk proteins most probably originated from the mother’s breastmilk, ingested by the neonate just before it died. We suggest the milk diffused outside the digestive apparatus during decomposition, and by being absorbed into the bones, it partially preserved. The result of this study suggests that proteomic analysis can be used for postmortem reconstruction of the breastfeeding status at the time of death of neonatal mammalian, by analyzing their skeletal archaeological remains. This method is also applicable to forensic and wildlife studies.

### Sample Protocol
Ancient proteins were extracted from an entire 2017HA1016 vertebra body and three rib fragments. As negative controls, a fish bone and a soil specimen, collected less than 10 cm away from the 2017HA1016 remains, were also processed using the same experimental workflow. Bones were decalcified with EDTA solution and the proteins in the EDTA supernatant and in the collagenous pellet were separately denatured, reduced, and alkylated. Protein solutions were then digested using trypsin overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides from both fractions of each bone extract were purified using Stage Tips with C18 membrane and analyzed separately, unless otherwise specified, by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS), using an EASY-nLC 1200 connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher, Bremen - Germany).

### Data Protocol
RAW data files generated by LC-MS/MS were searched against a Canis lupus familiaris proteome database downloaded from Uniprot, and a common laboratory contaminant database, with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30. Protein groups having at least 2 different non-overlapping peptides were considered confidently identified, unless otherwise indicated. All protein hits that could be considered possible contamination products were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate postmortem estimation of breastfeeding status for archaeological or forensic neonatal remains is difficult. Confident identification of milk-specific proteins associated with these remains would provide direct evidence of breast&#xa0;milk consumption. We used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS) to confidently identify beta-lactoglobulin-1 (LGB1) and whey acidic protein (WAP), major whey proteins associated with a neonatal dog (Canis lupus familiaris) skeleton (430-960&#x2009;cal AD), from an archaeological site in Hokkaido, Japan. The age at death of the individual was estimated to be approximately two weeks after birth. Protein residues extracted from rib and vertebra fragments were analyzed and identified by matching tandem MS spectra against the dog reference proteome. A total of 200 dog protein groups were detected and at least one peptide from canine LGB1 and two peptides from canine WAP were confidently identified. These milk proteins most probably originated from the mother's breast&#xa0;milk, ingested by the neonate just before it died. We suggest the milk diffused outside the digestive apparatus during decomposition, and, by being absorbed into the bones, it partially preserved. The result of this study suggests that proteomic analysis can be used for postmortem reconstruction of the breastfeeding status at the time of death of neonatal mammalian, by analyzing their skeletal archaeological remains. This method is also applicable to forensic and wildlife studies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Palaeoproteomics, Bone, Dog

### Affiliations
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Takumi Tsutaya

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


