### Accession
PXD043692

### Title
Proteomic profiling of centrosomes isolated from HAP1 cells

### Description
Centrosomes are cytoplasmic membraneless organelles that comprise a pair of centrioles, and a pericentriolar material. We developed a new centrosome affinity capture method termed CAPture that achieves high-coverage proteomes from 20-30 million cells. Here we present CAPture-MS data from HAP1 cells (WT and two CEP83-KO clones) demonstrating the power and sensitivity of CAPture-MS to detect centrosomal distal appendages hierarchical interactions.

### Sample Protocol
We proceeded with centrosome isolation using CAPture peptide-coated beads (Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin, Invitrogen) and incubated with lysate from HAP1 cells (4 biological replicates termed A, B, C and D for each CEP83-KO clone (F9 and G1) and WT). Streptavidin beads with CAPture peptide and centrosomes were reduced with 5mM DTT at 56oC for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were incubated with Lys_C (Promega) for 4h at 37oC, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega). Supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, beads were washed once with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and washes were combined with the corresponding supernatants. Samples were then acidified, speed vac (Savant) to remove acetronitrile and desalted using home-made C18 stage tips (3M Empore)packed with oligo R3 (Thermo Scientific) resin. Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% acetronitrile in 0.5% FA and partially dried in Speed Vac.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS (2 technical replicates each, termed 1 and 2) using a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled on-line to a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) at the MRC LMB, Cambridge (United Kingdom) by Dr. Sew-Yeu Peak-Chew. Peptides were trapped by a 100 µm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and separated on a 75 µm x 25 cm nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (Waters) using a binary gradient cosisting of buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode, performed full-scan MS1, at m/z = 380-1600 with a resolution of 70K, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 17.5K. NCE of 27% and isolation window = 1.5 m/z were used. Dynamic exclusion was set for 40s. Data from LC-MS/MS were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.6.3.3). Cysteines carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal and glutamine to pyro-Glu were set as variable modifications. Tryptic digestion up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. 

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomes are the major microtubule-organizing centers in animals and play fundamental roles in many cellular processes. Understanding how their composition varies across diverse cell types and how it is altered in disease are major unresolved questions, yet currently available centrosome isolation protocols are cumbersome and time-consuming, and they lack scalability. Here, we report the development of centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a powerful one-step purification method to obtain high-resolution centrosome proteomes from mammalian cells. Utilizing a synthetic peptide derived from CCDC61 protein, CAPture specifically isolates intact centrosomes. Importantly, as a bead-based affinity method, it enables rapid sample processing and multiplexing unlike conventional approaches. Our study demonstrates the power of CAPture-MS to elucidate cell-type-dependent heterogeneity in centrosome composition, dissect hierarchical interactions, and identify previously unknown centrosome components. Overall, CAPture-MS represents a transformative tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell-type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human, Hap1, Centrosome

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
School of Biological & Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Ivan Rosa e Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Mark van
School of Biological & Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of London


