### Accession
PXD041727

### Title
Presynaptic proteins in the orbitofrontal cortex predict Alcohol Use Disorder

### Description
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a life-threatening disease characterized by compulsive drinking, cognitive deficits, and social impairment that continue despite negative consequences, which are driven by dysfunction of cortical areas, such as the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), that normally balances decisions related to reward and risk. In this study, proteomics and machine learning analysis of post-mortem OFC brain samples collected from individuals with AUD revealed dysregulation of presynaptic (e.g., AP2A1) and mitochondrial proteins that predicted the occurrence and severity of AUD. Alcohol-sensitive OFC proteins also mapped to abnormal social behaviors and interactions. Validation using reverse genetics, we found that prefrontal Ap2a1 regulates alcohol drinking in genetically diverse mouse strains. Furthermore, we demonstrated sexual dimorphism in human OFC proteins that regulate extracellular matrix structure and signaling. Together, these findings highlight the impact of excessive alcohol consumption on the human OFC proteome and identify important cross-species cortical mechanisms underlying AUD.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects: Postmortem samples of the lateral orbitofrontal cortex from 14 pairs of age- and gender-matched samples from controls who abstained or were social drinkers of alcohol (approximately 5 drinks/week) and those with alcohol use disorder, diagnosed according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-5) were analyzed. The lateral OFC (area 13L of OP 13) was identified and collected by qualified pathologists under full ethical clearance with informed, written consent from next of kin. Samples were frozen and stored at -80C until processing. Brain samples and the demographic information used in this study were provided by the New South Wales Brain Tissue Resource Centre (NSW BTRC [Ethnics Committee Approval Number: X11-0107]) at the University of Sydney.  TMT Labeling and Fractionation of Peptides: Tissue samples were solubilized in 9 M Urea (Sequanal grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 units/mL universal nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with brief sonication. Homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature to remove debris and the concentration of protein in the supernatant determined by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein (180 micrograms per sample) was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37C and cysteines alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at 25C in the dark. The concentration of urea was diluted to less than 2 M with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Lys-C endoprotease (Waco) digestion was performed at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 for 2 hours at 25C followed by trypsin (Sigma) digestion at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37C. The digestion reactions were quenched by acidifying with 5% (v/v) formic acid. Digested peptides were desalted using 1 cc (50 mg) Sep-Pak Vac tC18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and the concentration determined using the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  To accommodate twenty-eight samples, two tandem mass tag (TMT) kits each with 16 reagents (16-Plex TMTpro, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for isobaric labeling. For normalization and batch correction across the two TMT experiments, a pooled reference standard comprised of 27 µg of protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated, digested, and dried in parallel with the individual samples. A portion of this digestion mixture was labeled with the 126 reagent and a second portion labeled with 134N. Aliquots of the 126 and 134N labeled peptides were combined with labeled peptides from individual patient samples in each TMT experiment. Digested peptides (100 micrograms per TMT channel) were resuspended in 100 microliters of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). TMT reagents were dissolved in 20 microliters of anhydrous acetonitrile and added to the corresponding sample or standard. Each 16-plex experiment contained two aliquots of the standard labeled with the 126 or 134N reagent and fourteen patient samples labeled with the remaining reagents. The reactions were incubated for 2 hours at room temperature in the dark and stored at -80°C while confirming the labeling efficiency. To check for sufficient labeling and accurate mixing, two microliters from each reaction were quenched, combined, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described below. Mass spectrometric data were searched against a UniProt Swiss-Prot human protein database (20,354 entries downloaded February 4, 2020) using the SequestHT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. TMTpro tags on the peptide N-termini and lysines were included as variable modifications. The percentage of peptide spectral matches (PSM) with labeled N-termini and/or lysine as compared to the total number of PSMs identified was >95%. To assess the accuracy in combining the samples at equal amounts, the data were searched with the TMTpro labels as fixed modifications and the sum of reporter ion intensities for each reagent channel were compared. After confirming efficient labeling and equal mixing ratios, the TMT reactions were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, combined, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Labeled peptides were desalted using 3cc (200 mg) Sep-Pak Vac tC18 cartridges (Waters).  For each TMT experiment, a 100-microgram aliquot of the labeled, combined, desalted peptides was separated into 9 fractions with the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fractions with increasing percentages of acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% triethylamine as well as the flow through were collected. The elution solutions contained 5% ACN, 7.5% ACN, 10% ACN, 12.5% ACN, 15% ACN, 17.5% ACN, 20% ACN, and 50% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried and desalted using Stage tips.

### Data Protocol
Subjects: Postmortem samples of the lateral orbitofrontal cortex from 14 pairs of age- and gender-matched samples from controls who abstained or were social drinkers of alcohol (approximately 5 drinks/week) and those with alcohol use disorder, diagnosed according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-5) were analyzed. The lateral OFC (area 13L of OP 13) was identified and collected by qualified pathologists under full ethical clearance with informed, written consent from next of kin. Samples were frozen and stored at -80C until processing. Brain samples and the demographic information used in this study were provided by the New South Wales Brain Tissue Resource Centre (NSW BTRC [Ethnics Committee Approval Number: X11-0107]) at the University of Sydney.  TMT Labeling and Fractionation of Peptides: Tissue samples were solubilized in 9 M Urea (Sequanal grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 units/mL universal nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with brief sonication. Homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature to remove debris and the concentration of protein in the supernatant determined by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein (180 micrograms per sample) was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37C and cysteines alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at 25C in the dark. The concentration of urea was diluted to less than 2 M with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Lys-C endoprotease (Waco) digestion was performed at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 for 2 hours at 25C followed by trypsin (Sigma) digestion at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37C. The digestion reactions were quenched by acidifying with 5% (v/v) formic acid. Digested peptides were desalted using 1 cc (50 mg) Sep-Pak Vac tC18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and the concentration determined using the Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  To accommodate twenty-eight samples, two tandem mass tag (TMT) kits each with 16 reagents (16-Plex TMTpro, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for isobaric labeling. For normalization and batch correction across the two TMT experiments, a pooled reference standard comprised of 27 µg of protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated, digested, and dried in parallel with the individual samples. A portion of this digestion mixture was labeled with the 126 reagent and a second portion labeled with 134N. Aliquots of the 126 and 134N labeled peptides were combined with labeled peptides from individual patient samples in each TMT experiment. Digested peptides (100 micrograms per TMT channel) were resuspended in 100 microliters of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). TMT reagents were dissolved in 20 microliters of anhydrous acetonitrile and added to the corresponding sample or standard. Each 16-plex experiment contained two aliquots of the standard labeled with the 126 or 134N reagent and fourteen patient samples labeled with the remaining reagents. The reactions were incubated for 2 hours at room temperature in the dark and stored at -80°C while confirming the labeling efficiency. To check for sufficient labeling and accurate mixing, two microliters from each reaction were quenched, combined, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described below. Mass spectrometric data were searched against a UniProt Swiss-Prot human protein database (20,354 entries downloaded February 4, 2020) using the SequestHT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. TMTpro tags on the peptide N-termini and lysines were included as variable modifications. The percentage of peptide spectral matches (PSM) with labeled N-termini and/or lysine as compared to the total number of PSMs identified was >95%. To assess the accuracy in combining the samples at equal amounts, the data were searched with the TMTpro labels as fixed modifications and the sum of reporter ion intensities for each reagent channel were compared. After confirming efficient labeling and equal mixing ratios, the TMT reactions were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, combined, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Labeled peptides were desalted using 3cc (200 mg) Sep-Pak Vac tC18 cartridges (Waters).  For each TMT experiment, a 100-microgram aliquot of the labeled, combined, desalted peptides was separated into 9 fractions with the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fractions with increasing percentages of acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% triethylamine as well as the flow through were collected. The elution solutions contained 5% ACN, 7.5% ACN, 10% ACN, 12.5% ACN, 15% ACN, 17.5% ACN, 20% ACN, and 50% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried and desalted using Stage tips.

### Publication Abstract
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a life-threatening disease characterized by compulsive drinking, cognitive deficits, and social impairment that continue despite negative consequences. The inability of individuals with AUD to regulate drinking may involve functional deficits in cortical areas that normally balance actions that have aspects of both reward and risk. Among these, the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is critically involved in goal-directed behavior and is thought to maintain a representation of reward value that guides decision making. In the present study, we analyzed post-mortem OFC brain samples collected from age- and sex-matched control subjects and those with AUD using proteomics, bioinformatics, machine learning, and reverse genetics approaches. Of the 4,500+ total unique proteins identified in the proteomics screen, there were 47 proteins that differed significantly by sex that were enriched in processes regulating extracellular matrix and axonal structure. Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that proteins differentially expressed in AUD cases were involved in synaptic and mitochondrial function, as well as transmembrane transporter activity. Alcohol-sensitive OFC proteins also mapped to abnormal social behaviors and social interactions. Machine learning analysis of the post-mortem OFC proteome revealed dysregulation of presynaptic (e.g., AP2A1) and mitochondrial proteins that predicted the occurrence and severity of AUD. Using a reverse genetics approach to validate a target protein, we found that prefrontal Ap2a1 expression significantly correlated with voluntary alcohol drinking in male and female genetically diverse mouse strains. Moreover, recombinant inbred strains that inherited the C57BL/6J allele at the Ap2a1 interval consumed higher amounts of alcohol than those that inherited the DBA/2J allele. Together, these findings highlight the impact of excessive alcohol consumption on the human OFC proteome and identify important cross-species cortical mechanisms and proteins that control drinking in individuals with AUD.

### Keywords
Orbitofrontal cortex, Mitochondria, Alcohol use disorder, Quantitative proteomics, Ap2a1, Machine learning, Presynapses, Extracellular matrix, Alcohol drinking, Isobaric labeling, Sexual dimorphism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina Charleston Alcohol Research Center Department of Neuroscience and Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences 30 Courtenay Drive, BM629C Charleston, SC 29425-8610 USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick J. Mulholland, PhD
Medical University of South Carolina Charleston Alcohol Research Center Department of Neuroscience and Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences 30 Courtenay Drive, BM629C Charleston, SC 29425-8610 USA


