### Accession
PXD016589

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of Escherichia coli mutants

### Description
We performed two dimensional thermal proteome profiling (2D-TPP) in Escherichia coli mutants to measure changes in abundance and thermal stability.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Mateus et al., Mol Sys Biol (2018), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Recent developments in high-throughput reverse genetics<sup>1,2</sup> have revolutionized our ability to map gene function and interactions<sup>3-6</sup>. The power of these approaches depends on their ability to identify functionally associated genes, which elicit similar phenotypic changes across several perturbations (chemical, environmental or genetic) when knocked out<sup>7-9</sup>. However, owing to the large number of perturbations, these approaches have been limited to growth or morphological readouts<sup>10</sup>. Here we use a high-content biochemical readout, thermal proteome profiling<sup>11</sup>, to measure the proteome-wide&#xa0;protein abundance and thermal stability in response to 121 genetic perturbations in Escherichia coli. We show that thermal stability, and therefore the state and interactions of essential proteins, is commonly modulated, raising the possibility of studying a protein group that is particularly inaccessible to genetics. We find that functionally associated proteins have coordinated changes in abundance and thermal stability across perturbations, owing to their co-regulation and physical interactions (with proteins, metabolites or cofactors). Finally, we provide mechanistic insights into previously determined growth phenotypes<sup>12</sup> that go beyond the deleted gene. These data represent a rich resource for inferring protein functions and interactions.

### Keywords
Genetic perturbation, Thermal proteome profiling, Escherichia coli, Mutants

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


