### Accession
PXD025301

### Title
TBK1 interacts with tau and enhances neurodegeneration in tauopathy

### Description
One of the defining pathological features of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the deposition of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain. Aberrant activation of kinases in AD has been suggested to enhance phosphorylation and toxicity of tau, making the responsible tau kinases attractive therapeutic targets. The full complement of tau interacting kinases in AD brain and their activity in disease remains incompletely defined. Here, immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) identified TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) as a tau-interacting partner in human AD cortical brain tissues. We validated this interaction in human AD, familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) caused by mutations in MAPT (R406W & P301L) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD) postmortem brain tissues as well as human cell lines. Further, we document increased TBK1 activation in both AD and FTDP-17 and map TBK1 phosphorylation sites on tau based on in vitro kinase assays coupled to MS. Lastly, in a Drosophila tauopathy model, activating expression of a conserved TBK1 ortholog triggers tau hyperphosphorylation and enhanced neurodegeneration, whereas knockdown had the reciprocal effect, suppressing tau toxicity. Collectively, our findings suggest that increased TBK1 activation may promote tau hyperphosphorylation and neuronal loss in AD and related tauopathies.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cell lysates (1 mg) in 8M urea lysis buffer were reduced using 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in darkness. Samples were sequentially digested using Lys-C (Wako) and trypsin (Promega) at 30°C. Peptides were desalted and lyophilized using HLB columns and SpeedVac, respectively. High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (ThermoFisher, A32992) was used for phosphopeptide enrichment following manufacturing protocol. Briefly, lyophilized peptides are resuspended in binding buffer and loaded onto spin columns. Spin columns were washed, and phosphopeptides were eluted in elution buffer. Phosphopeptides were then immediately dried using SpeedVac for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine version v1.6.3.4 was used to identify and quantify phosphopeptides from TBK1 and Tau-transfected HEK cell lyastes enriched for phosphopeptides by IMAC,as previously described (78) (Table S1 and Table S2). UniProt protein sequences containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human protein sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015), were duplicated into a reverted (decoy) peptide database, searched, and used to control peptide and razor protein false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% within MaxQuant. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) were assigned as fixed modifications while phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) was assigned as variable modification. Tryptic peptides with only 2 mis-cleavages were included in each database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for high resolution Orbitrap MS/MS scans, or 0.6 Da for low resolution MS/MS scans obtained in the linear ion trap. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
One of the defining pathological features of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the deposition of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain. Aberrant activation of kinases in AD has been suggested to enhance phosphorylation and toxicity of tau, making the responsible tau kinases attractive therapeutic targets. The full complement of tau-interacting kinases in AD brain and their activity in disease remains incompletely defined. Here, immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) identified TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) as a tau-interacting partner in human AD cortical brain tissues. We validated this interaction in human AD, familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) caused by mutations in MAPT (R406W &amp; P301L) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD) postmortem brain tissues as well as human cell lines. Further, we document increased TBK1 activation in both AD and FTDP-17 and map TBK1 phosphorylation sites on tau based on in&#xa0;vitro kinase assays coupled to MS. Lastly, in a Drosophila tauopathy model, activating expression of a conserved TBK1 ortholog triggers tau hyperphosphorylation and enhanced neurodegeneration, whereas knockdown had the reciprocal effect, suppressing tau toxicity. Collectively, our findings suggest that increased TBK1 activation may promote tau hyperphosphorylation and neuronal loss in AD and related tauopathies.

### Keywords
Coip, Tbk1 mapt tau phosphorylation, Ikk

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine, Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine, Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


