### Accession
PXD010401

### Title
Notch2 controls non-autonomous Wnt-signalling in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia

### Description
The Wnt-signalling pathway is one of the core de-regulated pathways in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), activated in a subset of patients by somatic coding mutations. Here we describe an alternative mechanism of Wnt-activation in malignant B cells, mediated by Notch2 activity in mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) in the tumor microenvironment. We identified that tumor cells specifically induce and activate Notch2 in MSCs. Notch2 orchestrates the expression of target genes essential for the activation of canonical Wnt-signaling in CLL cells. Mechanistically, stromal Notch2 mediates the stabilization of â-catenin by inhibiting the activation of Gsk3-â in malignant B cells. Pharmacological inhibition of the Wnt-pathway mitigates microenvironment-mediated survival of malignant B cells in vitro. Similarly, inhibition of Notch-signaling impaired survival of CLL cells and disease engraftment in a PDX mouse model. Notch2 activation in the tumour microenvironment is a pre-requisite for the GSK3-â dependent activation of the canonical Wnt-signaling in tumor cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells are biotinylated at the cell surface by oxidiation of cell surface glycans using periodate and analyine catalysed addition of aminooxy biotin. Cells are then lysed in a non-denaturing buffer, nuclei spun out and lysate incubated with streptavidin beads. Beads are then throughoughly washed with lysis buffer, SDS and urea before trypsin digestion of the remaining bound proteins on the beads. Peptides are recovered, labelled with TMT, pooled and subjected to high pH reversed phase fractionation before analysis using an MS3 method for isolation of reporter ions using an Orbitrap Fusion instrument.

### Data Protocol
TMT labelled samples data were searched by Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 in two rounds of searching. First search was against the UniProt Mouse reference proteome and compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the Mouse trEMBL database. The following search parameters were used. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da. Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel. Protein/peptide abundance was calculated and output in terms of ‘scaled’ values, where the total s/n across all reporter channels is calculated and a normalised contribution of each channel is output. Proteins/peptides satisfying at least a ‘medium’ FDR confidence were taken forth to statistical analysis in R. This consisted of a moderated T-test (Limma) with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypotheses to provide a q value for each comparison.

### Publication Abstract
The Wnt signalling pathway, one of the core de-regulated pathways in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), is activated in only a subset of patients through somatic mutations. Here we describe alternative, microenvironment-dependent mechanisms of Wnt activation in malignant B cells. We show that tumour cells specifically induce Notch2 activity in mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) required for the transcription of the complement factor C1q. MSC-derived C1q in turn inhibits Gsk3-&#x3b2; mediated degradation of &#x3b2;-catenin in CLL cells. Additionally, stromal Notch2 activity regulates N-cadherin expression in CLL cells, which interacts with and further stabilises &#x3b2;-catenin. Together, these stroma Notch2-dependent mechanisms induce strong activation of canonical Wnt signalling in CLL cells. Pharmacological inhibition of the Wnt pathway impairs microenvironment-mediated survival of tumour cells. Similarly, inhibition of Notch signalling diminishes survival of stroma-protected CLL cells in vitro and disease engraftment in vivo. Notch2 activation in the microenvironment is a pre-requisite for the activation of canonical Wnt signalling in tumour cells.

### Keywords
Cll, Notch, Plasma membrane, Wnt

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust/ MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute & Department of Haematology, Univeristy of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Ingo Ringshausen
Wellcome Trust/ MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute & Department of Haematology, Univeristy of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.


