### Accession
PXD010778

### Title
Influence of International Space Station Conditions on Fungal ‘Omics’ in Aspergillus nidulans

### Description
This study presents the first global genomic, proteomic, and secondary metabolomic characterization of the filamentous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans, following growth on the International Space Station (ISS). The investigation included the A. nidulans wild-type and 3 mutant strains, two of which were genetically engineered to enhance secondary metabolite (SM) production. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) revealed that ISS conditions altered the A. nidulans genome in specific regions. In strain CW12001, which features overexpression of the SM global regulator laeA, ISS conditions induced a point mutation that resulted in the loss of the laeA stop codon. Differential expression of proteins involved in stress response, carbohydrate metabolic processes, and SM biosynthesis was observed. ISS conditions significantly decreased prenyl xanthone production in the wild-type strain and increased asperthecin production in LO1362 and CW12001, which are deficient in a major DNA repair mechanism. Together, these data provide valuable insights into the genetic and molecular adaptation mechanism of A. nidulans to the spacecraft environment and present many economic benefits.

### Sample Protocol
Mycelia was collected from Earth-grown (4- and 7-day) and space-grown (4- and 7-day) glucose minimum media again Omnitrays for all strains (FGSC A4, LO1362, LO8158, and CW12001), frozen with liquid nitrogen, and ground using a mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted and lysed in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. About 200 µg proteins from each sample were TCA precipitated, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin/LysC. The digested peptides were quantified using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay and labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTsixplex).  The TMT6-130 label was used as either 4 day or 7 day strains’ reference that contained equal amount of peptides from each of the 8 strain. The TMT6-131 label was used as a total mixture reference that contained equal amount of peptides from each of the 16 strains. All six labeled-peptide mixtures were combined into a single tube and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. The resulting fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph, a 75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trapping column, and a 75 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, and an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT searching engines against an Aspergillus nidulans FGSC A4 database containing 10,525 protein sequences (NCBI).

### Publication Abstract
The first global genomic, proteomic, and secondary metabolomic characterization of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans following growth onboard the International Space Station (ISS) is reported. The investigation included the A. nidulans wild-type and three mutant strains, two of which were genetically engineered to enhance secondary metabolite production. Whole genome sequencing revealed that ISS conditions altered the A. nidulans genome in specific regions. In strain CW12001, which features overexpression of the secondary metabolite global regulator laeA, ISS conditions induced the loss of the laeA stop codon. Differential expression of proteins involved in stress response, carbohydrate metabolic processes, and secondary metabolite biosynthesis was also observed. ISS conditions significantly decreased prenyl xanthone production in the wild-type strain and increased asperthecin production in LO1362 and CW12001, which are deficient in a major DNA repair mechanism. These data provide valuable insights into the adaptation mechanism of A. nidulans to spacecraft environments.

### Keywords
International space station, Aspergillus nidulans, Omics

### Affiliations
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
City of Hope

### Submitter
Abby Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope


