### Accession
PXD047199

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus mutants resistant to the feed-additive monensin show increased virulence and altered purine metabolism

### Description
Ionophores are antibacterial compounds that affect bacterial growth by changing intracellular concentrations of the essential cations, sodium and potassium. They are extensively used in animal husbandry to increase productivity and reduce infectious diseases. Given their widespread usage, it is important to determine the potential negative consequences of ionophore use on human and animal health. In this study, we demonstrate that exposure to the ionophore monensin can select for resistant mutants in the human and animal pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, with a majority of the resistant mutants showing increased growth rates in vitro and/or in mice. Whole-genome sequencing and proteomics analysis of the resistant mutants show that the resistance phenotype is associated with de-repression of de novo purine synthesis, which could be achieved through mutations in different transcriptional regulators including mutations in the gene purR, the repressor of the purine de novo synthesis pathway. This study shows that mutants with reduced susceptibility to the ionophore monensin can be readily selected and highlights an unexplored link between ionophore resistance, purine metabolism and fitness in pathogenic bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysis The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Fluka, Sigma-Aldrich) and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) using the FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH). After 5 lysis cycles of 40 s each at the speed setting 6.5, the vials were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min, the supernatant was removed, the beads were washed with the lysis buffer and centrifuged at maximum speed again. The protein extracts were combined, and protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards.  Protein Digestion and Labeling Aliquots containing 30 μg of each sample were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method ((Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred on 10 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, USA), washed with 8M urea solution and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with Pierce MS-grade trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio 1:100, Thermo Scientific) for 3h, then another portion of trypsin was added, and the digestion was performed overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation, labelled using TMT or TMTpro isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeled samples were mixed and sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The combined labeled sample was fractionated via basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the Waters XBridge BEH C18 column (3.0x150 mm, 3.5µm, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA). Peptides were eluted during a gradient with increasing acetonitrile concentration using solvent A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.00), and solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.00). fractions were collected at the flowrate of 0.4 ml/min. The initial fractions were concatenated into 10 pooled fractions, dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis Each bRP-LC fraction was analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion or Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on the Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm X 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on the in-house packed C18 analytical column (75 μm X 30 cm, particle size 3 μm) using a gradient from 5% B to 100% over 80 min with solvent A as 0.2% formic acid and solvent B as 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 120,000 resolution, the most intense precursor ions were selected (‘top speed’ setting with a duty cycle of 3s), fragmented using CID at collision energy setting of 35 or 30, spectra and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and the isolation window of 0.7 Da. Charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s with 10 ppm tolerance. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50,000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at a collision energy of 65% for TMT and 55% for TMTpro using the synchronous precursor selection of the 10 most abundant MS/MS fragments.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Quantification  The bRP-LC data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Swissprot database for S. aureus (September 2020 or February 2022, 2961 entries). Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results, target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra within 3 ppm mass tolerance. The resulting ratios were normalized in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S. aureus, Monensin, Virulence, Ionophore resistance, Purine metabolism

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom Wallem
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg


