### Accession
PXD014916

### Title
Proteomic responses of Candida glabrata to acetate as the sole carbon source

### Description
The responses of Candida glabrata grown in acetate-containing growth medium was investigated by label-free quantitative proteomic analysis using the liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from Candida glabrata cells grown in acetate-containing growth medium. Subsequently, proteins were quantified and subjected to in-solution digestion. A nano-flow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) instrument (EASY-nLC 1200 System, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a Nanospray Flex ion source was used for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data qcquisition was executed with the Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) using the integrated SEQUEST search engine against the Candida UniProt protein database. All peptide spectrums  were further validated with Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Alternative carbon sources, Candida glabrata, Acetate, Glucose

### Affiliations
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

### Submitter
Leslie Than

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Thian Lung Than
Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.


