### Accession
PXD035454

### Title
Mapping the protein interaction network of adaptor protein complex in Arabidopsis identifies P34 as a common stability regulator

### Description
Adaptor protein (AP) complexes are evolutionarily conserved vesicle transport regulators that recruit coat proteins, membrane cargos and coated vesicle accessory proteins. Since in plants endocytic and post-Golgi trafficking intersect at the trans-Golgi network, unique mechanisms for sorting cargos of overlapping vesicular routes are anticipated. The plant AP complexes are part of the sorting machinery, but despite some functional information, their cargoes, accessory proteins, and regulation remain largely unknown. Here, by means of various proteomics approaches, we generated the overall interactome of the five AP and the TPLATE complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana. The interactome converged on a number of hub proteins, including the thus far unknown adaptin binding-like protein, designated P34. P34 interacted with the clathrin-associated AP complexes, controlled their stability and, subsequently, influenced clathrin-mediated endocytosis and various post-Golgi trafficking routes. Altogether, the AP interactome network offers substantial resources for further discoveries of unknown endomembrane trafficking regulators in plant cells.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of protein complexes by GSrhino-based affinity purification Total protein extracts from transgenic cell cultures were prepared in extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 15 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM p-nitrophenyl phospate, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1% NP 40, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μM E64, EDTA-free Ultra Complete tablet (Roche), 5% ethylene glycol). Single step GSrhino-based affinity purification experiments were performed in triplicate, as reported in Van Leene, J. et al., 2019. Briefly, protein complexes were trapped through the Protein G moiety of the GSrhino tag by incubating 25 mg total protein extract for 45 min with 50 µL magnetic IgG bead suspension. Beads were washed three times with 500 µL extraction buffer, once with 500 µL extraction buffer without detergent, and once with 800 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). The wash buffer was removed and beads were incubated in 50 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) for 4h at 37°C. Next, the digest was separated from the beads and overnight incubated with 0.5 µg Trypsin/Lys C at 37°C. Finally, the digest was centrifuged at 20800 rcf for 5 min, and supernatant was dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. For purifications with digitonin, NP40 in the extraction buffer was replaced by 1% (v/v) digitonin during extraction and binding, or by 0.2% (v/v) digitonin for washing. TAP experiments (double step purifications using the GSrhino tag) were performed using 100 mg total protein input as by Van Leene, J. et al., 2015. Proximity labelling with TurboID The proximity labelling experiments were performed as described for cell cultures by Arora, D. et al., 2020, using denaturing extraction buffer (100 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 2% (w/v) SDS, 8 M urea) and sampling both unbiotinylated (E1) as well as biotinylated eluates (E2). For proximity biotinylation experiments, baits were combined C-terminally with TurboID and a 65-amino-acid linker sequence in between. Arabidopsis cells were transformed and biotinylated proteins were purified and identified as described in Arora, D. et al., 2020, by growing the cell cultures at 28°C, incubating them for 24 h with 50 µM exogenous biotin, extracting the proteins under very harsh conditions (100 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 2% [w/v] SDS and 8 M Urea) and a two-step elution.

### Data Protocol
Experiments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap VELOS or Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously previously reported in Van Leene, J. et al., 2019. Two and three replicates were performed for TAP and single-step AP, respectively. After each set of two TAP or three AP purifications, the identified protein list was filtered versus a list of non-specific proteins, assembled from a large dataset of TAP-MS or AP-MS experiments as previously described. All proteins appearing with 3 or more bait groups in the large dataset are included in a list of non-specific proteins. For each TAP-MS set of two experiments to be analysed, the background is marked in the list of the co-purified proteins. To prevent true interactors being filtered out because of their presence in the list of non-specific proteins, the NSAF ratio = the average normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) of the identified proteins in the bait pull downs divided by the corresponding average NSAF in a large control set of pull downs is calculated. Proteins identified with at least two peptides in at least two experiments, which are not present in the background list, or show high (at least 20-fold) enrichment versus the large dataset of TAP experiments, are retained. Identifications showing no high enrichment versus the large dataset are removed, unless they are present in one of the other TAP-MS experiments sets. For each AP-MS set of three experiments to be analysed, the same approach was followed, additionally a ttest was performed. Identifications showing high (NSAF ratio ≥ 10) and significant (-log(p-value) ≥ 10) enrichment versus the control large AP-MS dataset were retained. The TurboID data was filtered by comparison vs a TurboID control dataset build from experiments performed under the same conditions, identifications with enrichment score ≥ 20 were considered enriched. (Enrichment score (ES) = NSAF ratio x -log(p-value))

### Publication Abstract
Adaptor protein (AP) complexes are evolutionarily conserved vesicle transport regulators that recruit coat proteins, membrane cargoes and coated vesicle accessory proteins. As in plants endocytic and post-Golgi trafficking intersect at the trans-Golgi network, unique mechanisms for sorting cargoes of overlapping vesicular routes are anticipated. The plant AP complexes are part of the sorting machinery, but despite some functional information, their cargoes, accessory proteins and regulation remain largely unknown. Here, by means of various proteomics approaches, we generated the overall interactome of the five AP and the TPLATE complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana. The interactome converged on a number of hub proteins, including the thus far unknown adaptin binding-like protein, designated P34. P34 interacted with the clathrin-associated AP complexes, controlled their stability and, subsequently, influenced clathrin-mediated endocytosis and various post-Golgi trafficking routes. Altogether, the AP interactome network offers substantial resources for further discoveries of unknown endomembrane trafficking regulators in plant cells.

### Keywords
Tap, Ap-ms, Adaptor complex, Arabidopsis, Interaction network, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Eugenia Russinova
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


