### Accession
PXD037935

### Title
Disruption of mitochondrial dynamics triggers muscle inflammation through interorganellar contacts and mtDNA mislocation

### Description
Some forms of mitochondrial dysfunction induce sterile inflammation through mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) recognition by intracellular DNA sensors. However, the involvement of mitochondrial dynamics mitigating such processes and their impact on muscle fitness remain unaddressed. Here we report that opposite mitochondrial morphologies induce distinct inflammatory signatures, caused by differential activation of DNA sensors TLR9 or cGAS. In the context of mitochondrial fragmentation, we demonstrate that mitochondria-endosome contacts mediated by the endosomal protein Rab5C are required in TLR9 activation in cells. Skeletal muscle mitochondrial fragmentation promotes TLR9-dependent inflammation, muscle atrophy, reduced physical performance and enhanced IL6 response to exercise, which improved upon chronic anti-inflammatory treatment. Taken together, our data demonstrate that mitochondrial dynamics is key in preventing sterile inflammatory responses, which precede the development of muscle atrophy and impaired physical performance. Thus, we propose the targeting of mitochondrial dynamics as an approach to treating disorders characterized by chronic inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were delivered as comassie polyacrylamide gel bands already cut (one band per sample). The bands were cut in smaller pieces and digested with Trypsin, following standard protocols (Nature Protocols 1, 2856-2860, 2007). Briefly, stained electrophoretic protein bands were reduced with DTT 10mM for 45min at 56ºC and alkylated for 30 min in the dark with IAA 50 mM. Then, in-gel digestion was performed with trypsin (0.1 µg/µL) in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 37ºC overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid. Peptides were extracted with 100 % acetonitrile and completely evaporated. Samples were reconstituted in 20 µL of 3% Acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% formic acid aqueous solution for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For the quantitative analysis, contaminant identifications were removed and unique peptide spectrum matches of protein groups identified with Sequest HT and Andromeda were analyzed with SAINTexpress-spc v3.11 [Teo, G. et al. J Proteomics, 2013]. SAINTexpress compares the prey control spectral counts with the prey test spectral counts for all available replicates. For each available replicate, we took as prey count the maximum count result between PD and MQ. Once obtained this combined dataset, we ran the SAINTexpress algorithm. High confidence interactors were defined as those with Bayesian false discovery rate BFDR ≤ 0.02.

### Publication Abstract
Some forms of mitochondrial dysfunction induce sterile inflammation through mitochondrial DNA recognition by intracellular DNA sensors. However, the involvement of mitochondrial dynamics in mitigating such processes and their impact on muscle fitness remain unaddressed. Here we report that opposite mitochondrial morphologies induce distinct inflammatory signatures, caused by differential activation of DNA sensors TLR9 or cGAS. In the context of mitochondrial fragmentation, we demonstrate that mitochondria-endosome contacts mediated by the endosomal protein Rab5C are required in TLR9 activation in cells. Skeletal muscle mitochondrial fragmentation promotes TLR9-dependent inflammation, muscle atrophy, reduced physical performance and enhanced IL6 response to exercise, which improved upon chronic anti-inflammatory treatment. Taken together, our data demonstrate that mitochondrial dynamics is key in preventing sterile inflammatory responses, which precede the development of muscle atrophy and impaired physical performance. Thus, we propose the targeting of mitochondrial dynamics as an approach to treating disorders characterized by chronic inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Keywords
Atrophy, Mtdna, Mitochondrial dynamics, Inflammation, Muscle, Dna sensors, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Core Facility (MSPCF)
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST)
C/ Baldiri Reixac, 10-12
08028 Barcelona - Spain
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Baldiri i Reixac 10, Barcelona 08028, Spain. Departament de Bioquímica i Biomedicina Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM) Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.

### Submitter
Marta Vilaseca

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Zorzano
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Baldiri i Reixac 10, Barcelona 08028, Spain. Departament de Bioquímica i Biomedicina Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM) Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.


