### Accession
PXD041561

### Title
Proteome screening of Bacillus cereus derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from Gram-positive bacteria have gained considerable importance as a novel transport system of virulence factors in host-pathogen interactions. Bacillus cereus is a Gram-positive human pathogen, causing gastrointestinal toxemia as well as local and systemic infections. The pathogenicity of the B. cereus has been linked to a collection of virulence factors and exotoxins. Nevertheless, the exact mechanism of virulence factor secretion and delivery to target cells is poorly understood. Here, we investigate the production and characterization of enterotoxin-associated EVs from the enteropathogenic B. cereus strain NVH0075-95 by using a proteomics approach and studied their interaction with human host cells in vitro. Proteomic analysis of B. cereus EVs revealed virulence-associated factors, such as sphingomyelinase, phospholipase C, and the three-component enterotoxin Nhe. The detection of Nhe subunits was confirmed by immunoblotting, showing that the low abundant subunit NheC was exclusively detected in EVs as compared to vesicle-free supernatant. Fusion of B. cereus EVs with the plasma membrane of intestinal epithelial Caco2 cells represent entry routes for delivery of Nhe components to host cells, which was assessed by confocal microscopy. B. cereus EVs also elicit an inflammatory response in human monocytes and contribute to erythrocyte lysis via a cooperative interaction of enterotoxin Nhe and sphingomyelinase. Our results provide insights into the interaction of EVs from B. cereus with human host cells and add a new layer of complexity to our understanding of multicomponent enterotoxin assembly, offering new opportunities to decipher molecular processes involved in disease development.

### Sample Protocol
30 µg of protein samples were reduced with 200 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, alkylated with 500 mM IAA at 37°C for 30 min, washed twice with 50 mM TRIS, followed by an overnight digestion using Trypsin/LysC Mix in a ratio of 1:25 (Protease: Protein). The digested peptides were recovered with 50 mM TRIS, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted and cleaned up using C18 spin columns and finally redissolved in 0.1%TFA. Peptides were analysedwith a high-resolution Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano-HPLCUltimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, United States).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer software with peptide and fragment accuracy of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Protein search was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software 2.3.0.523 against the UniProt database for B. cereus (taxonomy 1396, accessed on 11.5.2022) and a common contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/;accessed on 11.5.2022). Proteins were identified on the basis of at least two peptides and strict false discovery rate targets of 0.01 (1%) threshold in all nodes in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The overlap of protein identities in the biological replicates was used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus cereus, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Finland
Functional Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Tanja Buchacher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Monika Ehling-Schulz
Functional Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria


