### Accession
PXD009040

### Title
A SUMO-mediated protective response to DNA-protein crosslinks

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are highly cytotoxic lesions that obstruct essential DNA transactions and whose resolution is critical for cell and organismal fitness. However, unlike the repair pathways for most types of DNA damage, the mechanisms by which cells respond to and overcome DPCs remain poorly understood. Recent studies unveiled a dedicated DPC repair pathway in higher eukaryotes involving the SprT-type metalloprotease SPRTN/DVC1, which proteolytically processes DPCs during DNA replication in a ubiquitin-controlled manner. Here, we show that aldehyde-generated DPCs elicit a potent and highly dynamic, cell cycle-independent SUMOylation response impacting numerous chromatin-associated human proteins. We identify an uncharacterized SprT metalloprotease, ACRC, which unlike SPRTN is targeted to DPCs in a SUMO-dependent manner. Moreover, we establish important physiological roles of the C. elegans ACRC orthologue GCNA-1 and SUMO-mediated signaling in promoting organismal survival upon DPC formation. Finally, we demonstrate that like aldehydes, defined enzymatic DNMT1 DPCs trigger a robust SUMO response targeting the crosslinked proteins and associated factors to promote efficient lesion processing and cellular fitness. Collectively, our findings reveal an evolutionarily conserved general role of SUMO-mediated signaling in facilitating responses to DPCs in metazoans.

### Sample Protocol
For experiment 1 (referred to as “FA”), HeLa cells stably expressing His10-SUMO2 were either mock treated, or treated with 600 μM formaldehyde (FA) and then either lysed directly or allowed to recover for one hour. Parental HeLa cells not expressing His10-SUMO2 were used as a control. For experiment 2 (referred to as “AZA"), HeLa cells stably expressing His10-SUMO2 were either treated with control siRNA or DNMT1-targeted siRNA, and additionally either treated with 10 μM 5-Aza-2´-deoxycytidine (AZA) or mock treated. Parental HeLa cells not expressing His10-SUMO2 were used as a control. All experiments were carried out in biological cell culture quadruplicate (n=4). For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS and lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, and SUMOylation proteins were subsequently enriched using Ni-NTA purification. SUMOylated proteins were eluted using high concentration imidazole in 8 M urea, reduced and alkylated, digested with Lys-C, diluted to 2 M urea, and digested with trypsin. Peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 StageTips.  Samples were analyzed on 15 cm long analytical columns, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, and packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). The analytical column was heated to 40 °C, and elution of peptides from the column was achieved by application of gradients with stationary phase Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and increasing amounts of mobile phase Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The primary gradient ranged from 5% buffer B to 30% buffer B over 120 minutes, followed by a tail-end increase to 50% buffer B over 20 minutes to ensure full peptide elution, followed by a washing block of 20 minutes. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo), with the ions analyzed using either a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (HF; Thermo) for the FA experiments, or a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (HFX; Thermo) for the AZA experiments. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275 °C, and S-Lens RF level to 50% (HF samples) or funnel RF level to 40% (HFX samples). Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3,000,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 100,000 charges (HF samples) or 200,000 charges (HFX samples), and precursor fragmentation was attained using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 25. Only precursors with charge state 2-6 were considered, and selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. For analysis of the FA experiments on the HF instrument, two technical replicates were measured. For the first replicate, MS/MS settings included a loop count of 12, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 30,000, and an intensity threshold of 50,000. For the second replicate, loop count was set to 7, maximum injection time to 120 ms, resolution to 60,000, and intensity threshold to 120,000. For analysis of the AZA experiments on the HFX instrument, one technical replicate was performed, where MS/MS settings included a loop count of 9, a maximum injection time of 90 ms, a resolution of 45,000, and an intensity threshold of 120,000.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). RAW files corresponding to the FA and AZA experiments were analyzed separately. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the HUMAN.FASTA databases were extracted from UniProt on the 6th of January, 2016 (for FA experiments) and on the 22nd of February, 2017 (for AZA experiments). The exact FASTA files are included with the corresponding MaxQuant output files. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as potential variable modifications (default), with a maximum allowance of 3 variable modifications per peptide. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled. Second peptide search was enabled (default), and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 2 minutes and an alignment time window of 40 minutes. Data was filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at both the peptide-spectrum match and the protein assignment levels.  Processing of the text file output by MaxQuant was entirely performed using the freely available Perseus software. Reverse-database hits and potential contaminant proteins were removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed for further analyses. Proteins not detected in 4 out of 4 biological replicates in at least one experimental condition were removed. Scatter plot analysis, principal component analysis, Z-scoring and subsequent generation of heatmaps, and two-sample testing for the generation of volcano plots, were all carried out in Perseus using default settings. For determination of whether a protein was a SUMO target, all His10-SUMO-enriched samples were individually tested versus the parental control using two sample testing and filtered to achieve a permutated-based FDR of <1% at an s0 setting of 1.5. Potential hits were moreover filtered to have at least a ratio of 1.5 over the parental control in at least one condition, in addition to having set the s0 to 1.5. For assessing differences between the differentially treated SUMO samples, non-SUMO target proteins were removed, and all remaining proteins were investigated using two sample testing and filtered to achieve a permutated-based FDR of <5% at an s0 setting of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are highly cytotoxic lesions that obstruct essential DNA transactions and whose resolution is critical for cell and organismal fitness. However, the mechanisms by which cells respond to and overcome DPCs remain incompletely understood. Recent studies unveiled a dedicated DPC repair pathway in higher eukaryotes involving the SprT-type metalloprotease SPRTN/DVC1, which proteolytically processes DPCs during DNA replication in a ubiquitin-regulated manner. Here, we show that chemically induced and defined enzymatic DPCs trigger potent chromatin SUMOylation responses targeting the crosslinked proteins and associated factors. Consequently, inhibiting SUMOylation compromises DPC clearance and cellular fitness. We demonstrate that ACRC/GCNA family SprT proteases interact with SUMO and establish important physiological roles of <i>Caenorhabditis&#xa0;elegans</i> GCNA-1 and SUMOylation in promoting germ cell and embryonic survival upon DPC formation. Our findings provide first global insights into signaling responses to DPCs and reveal an evolutionarily conserved function of SUMOylation in facilitating responses to these lesions in metazoans that may complement replication-coupled DPC resolution processes.

### Keywords
Human, Dnmt1, Sumo, Q exactive hf-x, Q exactive hf, Dna repair, Dna damage, Dna-protein crosslink, Ubquitin

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


