### Accession
PXD014758

### Title
Cytosolic and plasma membrane proteome analysis of rice leaves in response to MSP1 treatment

### Description
MSP1 is a Magnaporthe oryzae secreted protein that elicits defense responses in rice. However, the molecular mechanism of MSP1 action is largely elusive. Here, we employed a TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of cytoplasmic as well as plasma membrane proteins to decipher the MSP1 induced signalling in rice. This approach led to the identification of 6691 proteins of which 3049 were identified in the plasma membrane (PM) while 3642 were identified in the cytoplasmic fraction. A parallel phosphoproteome analysis led to the identification of 1906 phosphopeptides and integration of proteome and phosphoproteome data showed activation of proteins related to the proteolysis, jasmonic acid biosynthesis, redox metabolism and MAP kinase signaling pathways in response to MSP1 treatment. Further, MSP1 induced phosphorylation of some of the key proteins including RBOHB, MEKK1, MPK3/6, CDPK and CaM suggest activation of PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI) in response to MSP1 treatment. In essence, our results further support the functioning of MSP1 as a PAMP and provide an overview of the MSP1 induced signaling in rice leaves.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Sterilized seeds were germinated on moist tissue paper at 28°C in the dark and were transferred to sterilized soil in a growth chamber (70% humidity, 25°C; a light/dark cycle of 16/8 hours. Four-week-old rice leaves were sprayed with 0.01% Tween-20 as control or 5 μM purified recombinant MSP1-His protein in 0.01% Tween-20 and samples were harvested 24 hours after treatment.  Protein Isolation PM proteins were isolated from the rice leaves using a two-phase portioning method with slight modifications. In brief, approximately 40 g of leaves from each sample were powdered using liquid nitrogen and homogenized in the extraction buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 500 mM sucrose, 10% glycerol (w/v), 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM EGTA, 0.6% PVP, 10 mM ascorbic acid and protease inhibitor cocktail. Homogenate was filtered through nylon cloth and centrifuged at 26000g for 25 min at 4 °C. The supernatant thus obtained was successively filtered through 63- and 34- μm filters and microsomes were pelleted down by ultracentrifugation at 84000g for 25 min at °C. The supernatant thus obtained was used as the cytosolic fraction and pellet containing the microsomal proteins was dissolved in 9 mL of upper phase solution containing 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.8, 330 mM sucrose and 2 mM DTT followed by sonication. After complete solubilization of pellet, 18 mL of lower phase solution containing 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.8, 5 mM KCl, 300 mM sucrose, 6.4% Dextran T-500 and 6.4% PEG-3350 was added, vortexed well and incubated on ice for 5 min. phase separation was carried out by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 min. Upper phase containing PM proteins were collected and the lower phase was back extracted to maximize the yield. Finally, both the upper phases were collected, diluted five-times using deionized water and incubated on ice for 5 min. Finally, the PM proteins were precipitated 84000g for 10 min at 4°C.  In-solution trypsin digestion, peptide labeling, and fractionation Trypsin digestion was carried out using FASP method. For TMT-labelling, 40 μg of peptides from each sample labeled with 170 μg of TMT reagents dissolved in anhydrous ACN using a TMT 10-plex kit with each sample labeled in four replicates and two pooling samples (prepared for normalization between runs by combining 20 μg of the peptide from each individual sample). Prior to incubation of the peptides with TMT reagents, additional ACN was added to a final concentration of 30% (v/v). After incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Finally, all the labeled peptides from different samples and pooled references were combined together and lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 2% ACN and desalted using Oasis® HLB 1cc (360mg) solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (Waters, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried down, dissolved again in 15 mM ammonium formate containing 2% ACN and fractionated into 12 fractions using an in-house developed stage tip containing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) and POROSTM 20 R2 reversed-phase resin (Thermo Scientific, USA). Q-Exactive MS analysis Lyophilized peptides were dissolved again in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 minutes, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 minutes, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 minutes. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer. Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1650 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3 x 106 and the isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 m/z. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events (resolution of 35,000), measured in a data-dependent mode for the 15 most abundant peaks (Top15 method), in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 32 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
4.6 LC-MS/MS data analysis for proteomic comparisons The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30) [45]. MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the rice protein database (88, 647 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two-missed cleavages allowed [46]. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while TMT-labeled N-term, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length of six amino acids was specified and “match between runs” (MBR) was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments [11].

### Publication Abstract
MSP1 is a <i>Magnaporthe oryzae</i> secreted protein that elicits defense responses in rice. However, the molecular mechanism of MSP1 action is largely elusive. Moreover, it is yet to be established whether MSP1 functions as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) or an effector. Here, we employed a TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of cytosolic as well as plasma membrane proteins to decipher the MSP1 induced signaling in rice. This approach led to the identification of 6691 proteins, of which 3049 were identified in the plasma membrane (PM), while 3642 were identified in the cytosolic fraction. A parallel phosphoproteome analysis led to the identification of 1906 phosphopeptides, while the integration of proteome and phosphoproteome data showed activation of proteins related to the proteolysis, jasmonic acid biosynthesis, redox metabolism, and MAP kinase signaling pathways in response to MSP1 treatment. Further, MSP1 induced phosphorylation of some of the key proteins including respiratory burst oxidase homologue-D (RBOHD), mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase-1 (MEKK1), mitogen-activated protein kinase-3/6 (MPK3/6), calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) and calmodulin (CaM) suggest activation of PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI) in response to MSP1 treatment. In essence, our results further support the functioning of MSP1 as a PAMP and provide an overview of the MSP1 induced signaling in rice leaves.

### Keywords
Plant-pathogen interaction, Pamp, Msp1, Plasma membrane, Tmt, Rice

### Affiliations
Pusan National University, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Pusan National University, South Korea


