### Accession
PXD024509

### Title
Metaproteomics reveals functional changes in the fecal microbiota of rats under time-restricted feeding

### Description
Diet is a key factor influencing gut microbiota (GM) composition and functions, which in turn affect host health. Among dietary regimens, time-restricted (TR) feeding has been associated to numerous health benefits. To date, little is known about the modulation of GM protein functions by TR feeding. Here, we analyzed the effects of TR feeding on GM protein expression in a rat model through a metaproteomic approach. We observed that TR feeding has a relevant impact on GM functions, especially on several biological activities exerted by members of the genus Lactobacillus, including proteolysis and metabolism of galactose-containing glycans.

### Sample Protocol
Sixteen fecal samples, collected from rats belonging to AL and TR groups, were subjected to bead-beating and heating/freezing steps after resuspension in an SDS-based, reducing extraction buffer. Protein extracts were cleaned up, alkylated and trypsin digested according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, with minor modifications. Liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operating with an EASY-spray source, interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were run in a randomized order. Peptide mixtures (4 μg per run) were loaded, concentrated, and desalted on a trapping pre-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 2 cm nanoViper, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using 0.2% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. The peptide separation was performed with a C18 EASY-spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 35°C with a flow rate of 250 nL/min for 247 min, using the following two-step gradient of eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% ACN) in eluent A (0.2% formic acid in 5% ACN): 2.5–37.5% for 242 min and 37.5–99% for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode, where a full scan spectrum (from 375 to 2,000 m/z) is followed by MS/MS spectra, under direct control of the Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1). The instrument operated in positive mode. The temperature of ion transfer capillary and the spray voltage were set to 250°C and 1.85 kV, respectively. Full scans and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolutions of 60,000 and 7,500 at 400 m/z, respectively. The automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 ions, and the lock mass option enabled on a protonated polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion as internal recalibration for accurate mass measurements. Peptide ions were selected as the 10 most intense peaks of the previous scan; the signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts, and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Higher-energy collisional dissociation was used as the fragmentation method, by applying a 35% value for normalized collision energy, an isolation width of m/z 3.0, a Q-value of 0.25, and an activation time of 0.1 ms. Nitrogen was used as the collision gas.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 2.4.1.15; Thermo Fisher Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%). Search parameters were set as follows: precursor mass threshold 350–5,000 Da; minimum peak count 6; signal-to-noise threshold 2; enzyme trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites 2; peptide length range 5–50 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da; dynamic modification methionine oxidation; static modification cysteine carbamidomethylation. Quantification was carried out using the integrated peak area of the most abundant peak at the apex of the chromatographic profile subjected to a normalization step, based on the total peptide intensity of the samples. The identification node was built on a combination of databases. Two microbial sequence databases were used: (i) a collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from rat fecal samples (13,163,507 sequences; file name: DB1.fasta) and processed according to previous reports; (ii) a publicly available rat metagenomic dataset (ftp://ftp.cngb.org/pub/SciRAID/Microbiome/rat/GeneCatalog/rat_geneset.pep.gz; 5,130,167 sequences; file name: DB2.fasta). Moreover, two supplementary databases, containing host (reference proteome for Rattus norvegicus; https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002494 release 2021_01; 29,936 sequences; file name: DB3.fasta) and food (reference proteome for Glycine max; https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000008827 release 2020_12; 74,863 sequences; file name: DB4.fasta) protein sequences, were employed. The file named PeptideGroups.txt was used as input for statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Time-restricted feeding, Fasting, Diet, Metaproteomics, Mucin degradation, Rodent, Galactose metabolism, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche Srl, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Antonio Palomba

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Pagnozzi
Porto Conte Ricerche Srl, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Alghero, Italy


