### Accession
PXD030815

### Title
yeats cells AP-MS for Jhd2 and Tpk2 relative to article Phosphorylation of Jhd2 by the Ras-cAMP- PKA pathway regulates histone modifications and autophagy

### Description
This work uncovers a novel and biologically significant  mechanism that directly connects nutrient availability to histone modifications and gene  transcription. We report that glycolysis promotes histone H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) by  activating Tpk2, a catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKA) via the Ras-cyclic AMP  (cAMP) pathway. Glucose-activated PKA (Tpk2) inhibits Jhd2-catalyzed H3K4  demethylation by phosphorylating Jhd2 at serine 321 and serine 340. In addition, Tpk2- catalyzed Jhd2 phosphorylation promotes H3K14ac by preventing the binding of Rpd3 at  chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains with Jhd2-TAP or Jhd2-FLAG tagged was harvested from 2 liters cultures cultured in rich media overnight to an optical density at 600 (OD600) of 1.0 ,  washed and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cell pellets were ground with glass beads by using a Biospec bead beater [30 sec ON, 90 sec OFF]  in cold room for ca. 45 min in TAP buffer (40 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, 350mM NaCl, 1mM EGTA, 10% Glycerol, 0.1% Tween-20, 50mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4),  The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at at 45000 rpm at 4ºC for 90 min and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) or IgG  beads at 4ºC for 4h.

### Data Protocol
The beads were washed extensively in TAP buffer for on-bead trypsin digestion. Briefly, immunoprecipitated protein was disulphide-reduced by adding  DTT to final concentration of 25mM and reacted in an incubator shaker at 37℃ for 40min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final  concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Immunoprecipitated protein was digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin  (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme : substrate) ratio at 37℃ and the supernatant peptides ware then desalted using C18 columns (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized.  The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000  LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to QEHFX Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile  with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z,  with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 106. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision  energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 105. Determination of phosphorylation sites using mass spectrometry refers to  previous research[1]. The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot. org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance  was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set for methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine . Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages and a false-detection rate of 1% using the percolator validator algorithms were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast jhd2

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China
hubei university

### Submitter
Yu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr yu qi
School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China


