### Accession
PXD020664

### Title
Living the sweet life: how Liquorilactobacillus hordei TMW 1.1822 changes its behavior in the presence of sucrose in comparison to glucose

### Description
Liquorilactobacillus (L.) hordei (formerly Lactobacillus hordei) is one of the dominating lactic acid bacteria within the water kefir consortium, being highly adapted to survive in this environment, while producing high molecular weight dextrans from sucrose. In this work, we extensively studied the physiological response of L. hordei TMW 1.1822 to sucrose compared to glucose, applying label-free, quantitative proteomics of cell lysates and exoproteomes. This revealed the differential expression of 53 proteins within cellular proteomes, mostly associated with carbohydrate uptake and metabolism. Supported by growth experiments, this suggests L. hordei TMW 1.1822 to favor fructose over other sugars. The dextransucrase was expressed irrespective of the present carbon source, while it was significantly more released in the presence of sucrose (log2FC = 3.09), being among the most abundant proteins within exoproteomes of sucrose-treated cells. Still, L. hordei TMW 1.1822 expressed other sucrose active enzymes, predictively competing with the dextransucrase reaction. While osmolysis appeared to be unlikely, sucrose led to an increased release of a multitude of cytoplasmic proteins, suggesting that biofilm formation in L. hordei is not only composed of a polysaccharide matrix, but also of proteinaceous nature. Therefore, our study highlights the intrinsic adaptation of water kefir-borne L. hordei to sucrose-rich habitats and provides fundamental knowledge for the use as starter culture in plant-based food fermentations with in situ dextran formation.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the proteomic response to sucrose intracellularly and extracellularly, 5 x 15 ml precultures (five biological replicates) of L. hordei TMW 1.1822 were prepared in MRS medium as described above (section 4.1) and used to inoculate 5x 50 ml cultures MRS (25 g/l glucose) with a final OD600 of 0.1. The cultures were grown to mid-exponential growth phase (~ OD 2.0, determined in preliminary experiments), which had given good results in previous experiments. 15 ml of each biological replicate were distributed to two 15 ml reaction vessels, pelletized (3000 xg, 4°C, 5 min) and washed once with fresh MRS medium. After a second centrifugation step, cell pellets were resuspended in 15 ml of medium supplemented with either glucose or sucrose (25 g/l each). After incubation for 2 h at 30 °C, a 100 µl sample was taken for determination of viable cell counts and cultures were subsequently centrifuged (3000 xg, 4 °C, 5 min). Supernatants were collected and frozen at – 20 °C for subsequent experiments and exoproteome analysis, while cells were washed twice with 10 ml Ringer´s solution (4 °C) and following centrifugation. Finally, cell pellets were immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80 °C for subsequent proteomic analysis.  Cellular lysate samples: Sample preparation and measurements of cellular lysate samples were done as described by Prechtl et al..  Cell pellets were resuspended in 900 µl lysis buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM EDTA disodium salt, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in water, pH 8.0)  Subsequently, cells were disrupted mechanically using 400 mg glass beads (G8772, 424 – 600 µm, Sigma, Germany). 100 µg of protein extract of each sample were used for in-solution digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 °C, 300 rpm, 30 min), carbamidomethylated (55 mM chloroacetamine, 30 min, RT, in the dark) and trypsinized (trypsin to protein ration 1:50). Digested protein samples were desalted, dried in a SpeedVac and re-dissolved in an aqueous solution of acetonitrile (2 %) and formic acid (0.1 %) at a final concentration of 1 µg/µl.  Exoproteome samples: Exoproteomes were prepared as described by Heinze et al.. Briefly, 30 µl of each supernatant sample and un-inoculated MRS medium (negative control) were mixed with LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), reduced with 25 mM DTT, heated for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamine. Samples were applied on a 4 – 12 % NuPAGE gel (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and run for about 1 cm to concentrate all proteins. In-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures described by Shevchenko et al.. The obtained peptides were dried and re-dissolved as stated above.  Nano-flow LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. For each analysis, 0.1 µg of cellular peptides or 0.5 µg of exoproteome peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v).   The Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. After peptide fragmentation using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD), MS2 spectra (200-2000 m/z) of up to 20 precursor peptides were acquired at a resolution of 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e4 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 22 ms. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z and normalized collision energy to 30%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 20 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm). Peptide precursors that were singly-charged, unassigned or with charge states >6+ were excluded for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against all protein sequences predicted for the genome of L. hordei TMW 1.1822 (GenBank CP018176 – CP018179) supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. To compare relative protein abundances between samples, label free quantification (LFQ) was performed. Additionally, also intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was enabled, which provides an estimate of the absolute protein abundance and thereby a proportional quantification unit for the abundances of different proteins with one sample.  MaxQuant output files were further processed and statistically analyzed using Perseus software (v. 1.6.14.0). Only proteins that were identified in four out of five biological replicates in at least one group (glucose or sucrose) were considered. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.2; down shift: 1.8). The obtained log2-transformed LFQ intensities were used for a Student´s T-test analysis with a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and S0 of 0.1. Absolute protein abundancies at a certain condition were estimated using the averaged log10-transformed iBAQ intensities that were ranked descending for each group. Additionally, iBAQ intensities of lysates and exoproteomes were compared to prioritize extracellular proteins that ended up in the medium due to some form of active biological process rather than cell death or cell lysis. Therefore, z-scores of log10-transformed iBAQ intensities were calculated in Perseus software using the average and standard deviation over all iBAQ intensities within each group (matrix access: column). The obtained z-scores were statistically analyzed by Student´s T-test analysis with a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and S0 of 0.1. Thereby, normalized iBAQ intensities of exoproteomes and lysates of each condition (glucose or sucrose) were compared with each other.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Liquorilactobacillus</i> (<i>L.</i>) <i>hordei</i> (formerly <i>Lactobacillus hordei</i>) is one of the dominating lactic acid bacteria within the water kefir consortium, being highly adapted to survive in this environment, while producing high molecular weight dextrans from sucrose. In this work, we extensively studied the physiological response of <i>L. hordei</i> TMW 1.1822 to sucrose compared to glucose, applying label-free, quantitative proteomics of cell lysates and exoproteomes. This revealed the differential expression of 53 proteins within cellular proteomes, mostly associated with carbohydrate uptake and metabolism. Supported by growth experiments, this suggests that <i>L. hordei</i> TMW 1.1822 favors fructose over other sugars. The dextransucrase was expressed irrespectively of the present carbon source, while it was significantly more released in the presence of sucrose (log<sub>2</sub>FC = 3.09), being among the most abundant proteins within exoproteomes of sucrose-treated cells. Still, <i>L. hordei</i> TMW 1.1822 expressed other sucrose active enzymes, predictively competing with the dextransucrase reaction. While osmolysis appeared to be unlikely, sucrose led to increased release of a multitude of cytoplasmic proteins, suggesting that biofilm formation in <i>L. hordei</i> is not only composed of a polysaccharide matrix but is also of proteinaceous nature. Therefore, our study highlights the intrinsic adaptation of water kefir-borne <i>L. hordei</i> to sucrose-rich habitats and provides fundamental knowledge for its use as a starter culture in plant-based food fermentations with in situ dextran formation.

### Keywords
Dextransucrase, Lactobacillus hordei, Liquorilactobacillus hordei, Sucrose, Water kefir, Exoproteome, Proteomics, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


