### Accession
PXD031682

### Title
The Achromobacter xylosoxidans type VI secretion system 2 (T6SS): from clinical to molecular evidences of its 3 implication in cystic fibrosis

### Description
Bacteria of the genus Achromobacter are environmental germs, with an unknown reservoir, which can become opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised patients, and be responsible for bacteremia, meningitis, pneumonia and peritonitis. Achromobacter xylosoxidans is an emerging pathogenic bacterium frequently isolated in the context of cystic  fibrosis (CF). Recent studies show that A. xylosoxidans is involved in the degradation of the respiratory function of CF patients. The respiratory ecosystem of CF patients is colonized by bacterial species that constantly fight for space and access to nutrients. In particular, these  bacteria use an antagonism system, a type VI secretion nanomachine (T6SS), which represents  a virulence factor in many pathogenic bacteria. This study aimed to investigate the prevalence  of the T6SS genes in Achromobacter xylosoxidans isolated in cystic fibrosis patient. We also  evaluated clinical and molecular characteristics of T6SS-positive A. xylosoxidans strains. We  have shown that A. xylosoxidans possesses a T6SS-encoded gene cluster and that some  environmental and clinical isolates assemble a functional T6SS nanomachine. The A. xylosoxidans T6SS is used to target competitor bacteria, including other CF-specific pathogens. We gathered some evidences pointing toward a role of T6SS in CF-lung colonization: i, CF mimicking conditions trigger the activation of A. xylosoxidans T6SS; ii, we detected Hcp in the sputum of CF patient and iii, the T6SS helps internalization of A. xylosoxidans in lung epithelial cells. Our study highlights a new clinical determinant of the virulence of A. xylosoxidans as well as new diagnostic and therapeutic options in cystic fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Excised SDS-PAGE gel bands (duplicates) containing the proteins Hcp purified from Achromobacter xylosoxidans A8, Ax4, and Ax6 strains were digested as previously described in Avilan et al. (2021, New Phytologist 230, 1517–1532). Supernatants (2.5 mL with 4.2 to 5.9 OD600 units) collected from Achromobacter xylosoxidans Ax4 strain grown in a rich medium (LB, the control condition in biological triplicates) or in a CF-mimicking condition (synthetic CF sputum medium, the chemically defined Vogel-Bonner, VB, in biological triplicates), were TCA-precipitated and prepared for quantitative proteomic analysis (Table 2 & Figure S5) by using the S-trap method according to the manufacturer’s  procedure (ProtiFi). After in-gel or S-trap  trypsin digestion, LC-MSMS analyses were performed  by injections on an Ultimate 3000 liquid  chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) (250 ng of tryptic peptides injected per sample, for the quantitative proteomics) as previously described in Avilan et al. (2021, New Phytologist 230, 1517–1532).

### Data Protocol
For qualitative proteomics (Table S2 in this paper) : Raw Spectra (file names : purified from A8 strain (054_ED_ref, 035_ED_B), purified from Ax4 strain (054_ED_Ax4, 035_ED_E), and purified from Ax6 strain (054_ED_Ax6, 035_ED_G) were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher, version 2.4.1.15) using the Sequest HT algorithm with the databases extracted from Uniprot : Achromobacter xylosoxidans strain A8 (UP000006876 last modified 2020-07-24; 6798 entries) and Alcaligenes xylosoxidans  xylosoxidans (UP000040179 last modified 2021-03-23; 6138 entries). Proteins were identified and filtered by a minimum number of Peptide Spectral Match of 2. The following parameters were selected: enzyme used : trypsin (2 missed cleavages); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (Cys); one variable modification: oxidation (Met); mass values specific for monoisotopic; precursor mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da. The best results (raw files starting with mention 054_ED_,here above) were reported in this paper.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial competition, T6ss, Virulence factor, Proteomics, Cystic fibrosis, Bacterial secretion system, Clinical microbiology

### Affiliations
CNRS
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, FR3479, Proteomics facility of IMM, Marseille Protéomique

### Submitter
Regine Lebrun

### Lab Head
Dr Régine Lebrun
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, FR3479, Proteomics facility of IMM, Marseille Protéomique


