### Accession
PXD021026

### Title
Proteomics characterisation of the L929 cell supernatant and its role in BMDM differentiation

### Description
Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) are a key model system for studying macrophage biology in vitro. Commonly used methods to differentiate macrophages from bone marrow are treatment with either recombinant M-CSF or the supernatant of L929 cells, which secrete M-CSF. However, little is known about the composition of L929 conditioned media (CM) and how it affects BMDM phenotype. Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterise the kinetics of protein secretion from L929 cells over a two-week period. While M-CSF is very abundant in L929 CM, we identified several other immune-regulatory proteins at surprisingly high abundance. L929 CM induced a slightly pre-activated phenotype and the expression of a number of known innate immune proteins in macrophages. This resource will be valuable to all researchers using L929 CM for the differentiation of BMDMs.

### Sample Protocol
For L929 secretome analysis, cells were cultured in six well plates and Opti-MEM media was added to each well for a maximum of 3 h before harvesting of supernatants. Proteins in the supernatant were precipitated using chloroform methanol and precipitates were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB pH 8. In solution digestion was performed on the secretome samples after reduction (TCEP) and alkylation (IAA). Samples were diluted to 1 M urea using 50 mM TEAB and digested overnight at 37°C by adding trypsin (1:50, w/w) (Pierce). Peptides were acidified, desalted, and concentrated using C18 SPE Macro Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus), followed by drying under vacuum. Peptide samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected to an Orbitrap QE HF mass spectrometer. Samples were injected on a C18 PepMap trapping column (2 cm x 100 µm ID, PepMap C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A contained 0.1% FA and Buffer B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 1-35% Buffer B over 100 minutes followed by a step from 35-90% ACN, 0.1% FA in 0.5 min at 300 nL/min and held at 90% for 4 min. The gradient was then decreased to 1% Buffer B in 0.5 minutes at 300 nL/min for 10 min. The QE HF mass spectrometer operated in data dependant positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired from 400 m/z to 1,500 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with a charge state of 1. For MS/MS analysis, the minimum AGC target was set to 5E3 and the Top 20 most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and 0.5 m/z offset. Precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation using a collision energy of 25%. MS/MS fragment ions were analysed in the Orbitrap mass analyser at 15,000 resolution at 200 m/z.  For analysis of differentiated BMDMs, progenitor cells were isolated from femurs and tibiae of wild type (WT) C57BL/6 mice. Cells were transferred into one of three different culture conditions: 20% L929 conditioned media, 10 ng/mL M-CSF (Invitrogen) or 10 ng/mL M-CSF + 10 ng/mL MIF (Invitrogen) and differentiated over 7 days. BMDMs cells were harvested by centrifugation and cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB. Samples were processed using S-trap spin columns (ProtiFi, USA) as recommended by the supplier. On column digestion was performed at 47°C for 2 h using trypsin (1:20) (Pierce). Peptides were eluted using 50 mM TEAB, followed by 0.2% FA, and finally 0.2% FA, 50% ACN. Peptides were then dried under vacuum. TMT labelling was performed as recommended by the supplier and fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase (HPRP) liquid chromatography on a Gemini C18 column (250 × 3 mm, 3 μm C18 110 Å pore size; Phenomenex). Forty fractions were collected and concatenated into 10 samples. TMT-labelled samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. The chromatographic setup was as described above except that samples were separated on a linear gradient over 120 min at 300 nl/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent, positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in the range of 375 m/z to 1,500 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5E3 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The Lumos was operated in “stop speed” to maintain a 3 sec fixed duty cycle. The most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.4 m/z and collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 32% and 0.25 activation Q. Detection of MS/MS fragments was acquired in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode with an AGC target of 1E4  ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Quantitative analysis of TMT-tagged peptides was performed using FTMS3 acquisition in the Orbitrap mass analyser operated at 50,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1E5 ions and maximum injection time of 105 ms. Higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD fragmentation) on MS/MS fragments was performed in one-step collision energy of 65% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield and synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) was enabled to include 10 MS/MS fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantification for the L929 secretome data set was performed using MaxQuant Version 1.6.2.6. Trypsin/P set as enzyme; stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln & Glu to pyro-Glu; maximum 8 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavage. Searches were conducted using the mouse Uniprot database plus isoforms (downloaded 19.07.2018; 25,192 sequences) plus common contaminants. Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide level and protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5. Quantification was performed using razor and unique peptides and required a minimum count of 2. “Re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. LFQ protein intensities were used for downstream analyses.  Protein identification for the TMT labelled total proteome data set was performed using MaxQuant Version 1.6.2.6 with Reporter ion MS3 selected as experiment type. Trypsin/P set as enzyme; stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln & Glu to pyro-Glu and quantitation of labels with 10 plex TMT on N‐terminal or lysine with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Two missed cleavages and a maximum of 8 modifications per peptide were set. Match between runs was enabled for this search. Searches were conducted using the mouse Uniprot database plus isoforms (downloaded 19.07.2018; 25,192 sequences) plus common contaminants. Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide level and protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5. Quantification of proteins refers to the razor and unique peptides, and required a minimum count of 2. Normalized reporter ion intensities were extracted for each of the 9 channels were used for downstream analyses.  Statistical analyses were performed in Perseus (v1.6.0.7 - v1.6.6.0)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
M-csf, L929, Proteomics, Secretome, Differentiation, Bone marrow-derived macrophages

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom


