### Accession
PXD003001

### Title
Triple SILAC exosomal quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
Exosomes are 30-100 nm sized membrane vesicles released by cells into extracellular space and mediate the intercellular communication via transfer of proteins and RNAs. To better understand the function of these microvesicles in lung carcinogenesis, we employed a Triple SILAC quantitative proteomic strategy to examine the differential protein abundance between exosomes derived from an immortalized normal bronchial epithelial cell line and two non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines harboring distinct activating mutations in the cell signaling molecules Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). We were able to quantify 727 exosomal proteins derived from the three cell lines. Proteins associated with signal transduction are enriched in NSCLC exosomes which are functionally active in regulating cell proliferation. The study is the first to investigate protein abundance differences in exosomes derived from NSCLC  cells and their normal counterparts, and reveals the role of exosomes in NSCLC cancer progression, which may have clinical implications in biomarker development for patients with NSCLC.

### Sample Protocol
For exosome isolation: conditioned media was subjected to differential ultracentrifugation, PEG precipitation, and Optiprep density gradient separation. The exosome pellet was lysed and subjected to eFASP digestion. Resulting pepties were SAX fractionated using the StageTip protocol and subjected to nano-ESI-LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated by nanoscale reversed-phase liquid chromatography using an Xtreme Simple nanoLC system (CVC/Micro-Tech).  The analytical column was prepared by packing 1.7 m 200 Å C18 resin (Prospereon Life Sciences) into a laser-pulled fused silica capillary (75 m inner diameter, 10.5 cm length, 10 m tip; Sutter Instruments) using a pressure injection cell (Next Advance).  Peptides were injected into the sample loop using an Endurance autosampler (Spark Holland) and were loaded onto the column with 95% solvent A (0.5% acetic acid in water).  A 180 min LC gradient method from 5 to 70% Solvent B (60% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) with a postsplit flow of 0.3 mL/min was used to elute the peptides into the mass spectrometer.  The LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) was equipped with a nanospray ionization source.  The spray voltage was 1.7 kV and the heated capillary temperature was 180ºC.  MS1 data were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z, and the top 10 most intense ions in each MS1 scan were selected for collision induced dissociation in the linear ion trap.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count 2, repeat duration 30 s, and exclusion duration 180 s.  Other mass spectrometry data generation parameters were as follows: collision energy 35%, ion selection threshold for MS/MS 500 counts, isolation width 3 m/z, default charge state 3, and charge state screening enabled.

### Data Protocol
MSConvert (v3.06736) was used to convert the acquired RAW files to mzML. Database searches and PSM validation were performed in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). Comet (v2014.1) was used to perform the database searches against a UniProtKB human protein database (version July, 2014; 40,826 reviewed sequences; 48,167 unreviewed sequences) with a concatenated reverse sequence decoy database. Search parameters include 50 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 1.0 Da fragment tolerance, variable modification: Methionine + 15.99492, and the following fixed modifications: Cysteine + 57.02510 (carbamidomethylation), N-term peptide + 229.1629, Lysine + 229.1629, (oxidation), and semi-tryptic peptides with up to three missed cleavages. PeptideProphet was used to validate the peptide search results from Comet and only peptide identifications with greater than 0.8 probability, with a calculated false positive rate < 1%, were kept for quantification. All peptides were used in ProteinProphet to infer proteins from the identified peptides and proteins with zero probability or zero quantified peptides were discarded. QuantiMORE (formerly IsoQuant) was employed to calculate the isobaric tag ratios for the validated peptides in each replicate. The software is available for download at the following web address:  http://www.proteomeumb.org/MZw.html. Protein ratios were computed in the R programming language (v3.1.1) from the peptide ratios generated by QuantiMORE. The protein ratio is the average of the peptide ratios assigned by ProteinProphet and weighted by the number of quantified PSMs for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Non-small cell lung cancer, Silac, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology and Diagnostics Sciences University of Maryland School of Dentistry Baltimore, MD
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Li Mao
Department of Oncology and Diagnostics Sciences University of Maryland School of Dentistry Baltimore, MD


