### Accession
PXD011667

### Title
Dirhodium (II) Complex Interferes with Iron-Transport System to Exert Antibacterial Action against Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Description
Drug resistance in bacteria is becoming a significant threat to global public health, and the development of novel and efficient antibacterial compounds is urgently needed. Recently, rhodium complexes have attracted attention as antimicrobial agents, yet their antibacterial mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we observed that the dirhodium (II) complex Rh2Ac4 inhibited Streptococcus. pneumoniae growth without significant cytotoxic side-effects on host cells in vitro. We subsequently investigated the antibacterial mechanism of Rh2Ac4 using iTRAQ-based proteomics combined with cellular and biochemical assays. Bioinformatics analysis on the proteomic alterations demonstrated that six molecular functional groups, including metal ion binding and twelve metabolic pathways, were significantly affected after treatment with Rh2Ac4. The interaction network analysis of metal ion binding proteins suggested that Rh2Ac4 decreased the protein expression levels of SPD_1652, SPD_1590 and Gap, which are associated with haem uptake/metabolism. Cellular and biochemical assays further confirmed that Rh2Ac4 could be taken up by bacteria via the PiuABCD haem-uptake system. The structurally similar Rh complex may compete with Fe-haem to decrease Fe-uptake via the PiuABCD system, disrupting iron metabolism to exert its antibacterial activity against S. pneumoniae. These data indicate that Rh2Ac4 is a promising new drug for the treatment of S. pneumoniae infections.

### Sample Protocol
The WT S. pneumoniae strain was grown to an optical density (OD600) of 0.3, and then was treated with DMSO (control group) or Rh2Ac4 (12.5 μM) for 2 h. The whole-cell proteins were extracted using SDS lysis buffer with intermittent sonication according to a previously described method, and the protein concentrations were determined via a BCA Protein Assay . For the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) experiments, 200 μg of protein from each sample was reduced with Reducing Reagent at 60 °C for 1 h. Next, the samples were alkylated with Cysteine-Blocking Reagent at room temperature for 10 min in the dark and then digested with trypsin using the FASP (filter aided sample preparation) method. The tryptic peptides were incubated with iTRAQ 8Plex reagents (AB SCIEX, USA) and dissolved in isopropanol at room temperature for 2 h. The peptides from the control group of three independent biological experiments were labelled with 114, 115 and 116, while those from Rh2Ac4–treated group were labelled with 117, 118 and 119 respectively.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified and quantified using ProteinPilot™ Software 5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA). The data files of each fraction were used to search for species of S. pneumoniae D39 against the UniProt_sprot database. The searches were run using the following parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide Labelled); Cys. Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 6600; and a Detected Protein Threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)] > 1.30 (95.0%).

### Publication Abstract
Drug resistance in bacteria is becoming a significant threat to global public health, and the development of novel and efficient antibacterial compounds is urgently needed. Recently, rhodium complexes have attracted attention as antimicrobial agents, yet their antibacterial mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we observed that the dirhodium (II) complex Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub> inhibited Streptococcus. pneumoniae growth without significant cytotoxic side-effects on host cells in vitro. We subsequently investigated the antibacterial mechanism of Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub> using iTRAQ-based proteomics combined with cellular and biochemical assays. Bioinformatics analysis on the proteomic alterations demonstrated that six molecular functional groups, including metal ion binding and twelve metabolic pathways, were significantly affected after treatment with Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub>. The interaction network analysis of metal ion binding proteins suggested that Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub> decreased the protein expression levels of SPD_1652, SPD_1590 and Gap, which are associated with haem uptake/metabolism. Cellular and biochemical assays further confirmed that Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub> could be taken up by bacteria via the PiuABCD haem-uptake system. The structurally similar Rh complex may compete with Fe-haem to decrease Fe-uptake via the PiuABCD system, disrupting iron metabolism to exert its antibacterial activity against S. pneumoniae. These data indicate that Rh<sub>2</sub>Ac<sub>4</sub> is a promising new drug for the treatment of S. pneumoniae infections.

### Keywords
Dirhodium (ii) complex, Antibacterial mechanism, Itraq, Haem-transport system piuabcd, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and  Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan UniversityHealth Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University

### Submitter
Yang Xiao-Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and  Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan UniversityHealth Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University


