### Accession
PXD028828

### Title
APC/CCdc20 dependent degradation of Clb4 is all there is to astral microtubule stabilization

### Description
Coordination between sister chromatid separation and segregation is crucial for accurate chromosome partitioning to the offspring. Key to this process is the ability of mitotic spindle microtubules to respond to different molecular signals and remodel their dynamics accordingly. Based on their function, spindle microtubules are conventionally divided into three classes: kinetochore, interpolar and astral microtubules (kMTs, iMTs and aMTs, respectively). While different mechanisms have been proposed to control kMT and iMT dynamics, aMT regulation remains elusive. We here show that aMT dynamics are tightly regulated. aMTs remain unstable up to metaphase to control spindle orientation and are stabilized at anaphase onset. Necessary and sufficient for this stabilization is the degradation of the mitotic cyclin Clb4 mediated by the Anaphase Promoting Complex in combination with its activator subunit Cdc20 (APC/CCdc20). Our results contribute to delineate a comprehensive picture of late mitotic events, where individual steps of the signalling cascade initiated by APC/CCdc20 activation and culminating in cohesin cleavage time the final stages of mitosis by sequentially modulating the dynamics of the three classes of spindle microtubules.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation followed SL-TMT protocol. Digested samples were labeled with TMT-11plex reagents (ThermoFisher, 90406, A34807) in the following order: 126 (cdc15-as1), 127n (cdc15-as1), 129n (cdc20-AID), 129c (cdc20-AID), 130n (cdc20-AID), 130c (cdc14-1 cdc5-as1), 131 (cdc14-1 cdc5-as1), 131c (cdc14-1 cdc5-as1).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were initially converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle. Database searching with SEQUEST included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, 2014). Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein-level FDR was filtered to the target 1% FDR level. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using AScore algorithm80 and filtered at 13 (95% confidence). For TMT reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered for a summed signal-to-noise of 100 across all channels. For each protein, peptide TMT values were summed to create protein quantifications. To control for differential protein loading within a TMT plex, the summed protein quantities were adjusted to be equal within the plex. Phosphorylation site quantifications were also normalized by correction factors generated in this process to account for protein loading variance. For each protein or phosphorylation site within a TMT plex, the signal-to-noise value was scaled to sum to 100 for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Astral microtubule stabilization

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


