### Accession
PXD029356

### Title
Label-free and targeted mass tandem (TMT-labelled) global proteomic analyses on mucus from the stomach, small and large intestine of a domestic and laboratory dogs

### Description
Gastrointestinal (GI) mucus is continuously secreted and lines the entire length of the GI tract. Essential for health, it keeps the noxious luminal content away from the epithelium and propels forward the digesta. The aim of our study was to characterize the composition and structures of mucus throughout the various GI segments in dog.  Mucus from the stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), and large intestine (cecum, proximal and distal colon) was collected from 5 dogs. pH and water content of GI mucus and digesta were analyzed. Composition of all GI-tract segments from a domestic and a laboratory dog was determined by label-free global proteomics. A colonic-focussed composition analysis with TMT-labelled proteomics was used on jenunal and proximal and distal colonic mucus samples from 3 laboratory and 1 domestic dog. Finally, the composition of jejunal and colonic mucus samples of 3 laboratory and 1 domestic dog was evaluated with lipidomics and metabolomics. Structural properties were investigated using cryoSEM and rheology.  The proteome was similar across the different GI segments. The highest abundant secreted gel-forming mucin in the gastric mucus was mucin 5AC, whether mucin 2 had highest abundance in the intestinal mucus. Lipid and metabolite abundance was generally higher in the jejunal mucus than the colonic mucus.  In conclusion, the mucus is a highly viscous and hydrated material. The proteins, lipids and metabolites were similar throughout the GI tract, although abundances depended on location. These data provide an important baseline for future studies on human and canine intestinal diseases and the dog model in drug absorption.

### Sample Protocol
Animals Segments from stomach and intestines of 5 euthanized dogs were collected. The dogs weighed between 20 – 39 kg, were 3 – 8 years old and either research colony, (herein called laboratory dogs, or Dlab, nlab=4), or privately owned (herein called domestic dogs, or Ddo, ndo=1).  Exclusion criteria for the domestic dogs were:  i) GI tract-related diseases, ii) invasive GI tract treatment/surgery/endoscopy/colonoscopies, or iii) vomiting or diarrhoea within the final month. Intestinal tissue from four laboratory dogs was obtained from AstraZeneca (Mölndal, Sweden), and transported by car on ice to Uppsala for mucus collection. The laboratory dogs had permanent nipple-valve stomas surgically inserted into the duodenal, or jejunal, and/or proximal colonic abdominal wall. As tissue was collected after euthanasia, and the dogs were not put down for this study, no ethical permit was necessary for the sample collection.  Sample collection Segmental tissue was removed from the intestines. Tissue samples from the stomach (about 10 x 15 cm) were sampled from the fundus. Tissue samples of the duodenum (about 15 cm) were sampled from the pylorus and onwards, of the jejunum (about 15 cm) from the middle, and from the ileum (max 8 cm) from the ileocolic valve and backwards. Tissue samples of the proximal colon (max 5 cm) were sampled from the ileocolic valve/cecum, of the distal colon (max 10 cm) cut backwards from the sigmoidal colon; the whole tissue was collected from the cecum. Proximal colon is comparative to the ascending and partly traverse colon; distal colon is comparative to the later part of the transverse and descending colon. Length and location of collected tissue was decided upon based on references. Intestines were collected within one hour of euthanasia.  Due to the COVID19 pandemic, the mucus could not be collected on site for the laboratory dogs. After excision, the tissues were thus stored in ice-cold buffer [Ringer lactate (Dlab01, pH 5-6) or Krebs Ringers (Dlab02-04, pH 7.3)] and on ice, during transport to the mucus collection location site (approximately 6h). For the domestic dog, tissue and mucus collection did not require transport and was collected directly after euthanesia. Upon removal of tissue from bulk mass, digesta were collected from the intestinal tissue by opening the segment and scooping it out. If necessary, the segment was rinsed with cold buffer (10 mM MES isotonic buffer containing 1.3 mM CaCl2, 1.0 mM MgSO4 and 137 mM NaCl, pH 6.5), by gently massaging or shaking the tissue in the buffer. The tissue was pinned down with the mucus side facing outwards. Mucus was collected by gently scraping the tissue with a metal spatula. All samples were stored on ice until further aliquoting. Samples were aliquoted within 5 hours after collection, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately thereafter, and stored at -80° C until further analysis. Patient Samples/Cell culture specifics Not applicable Sample isolation for proteomics Label-free proteomics analysis was performed on mucus from all 7 segments of one laboratory and one domestic dog. TMT-labelled proteomics was performed on jejunal (nlab=2), proximal (nlab=3, ndo=1) and distal (nlab=3, ndo=1) colonic mucus. Mucus samples were aliquoted from bulk mass within 5 hours after collection, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately thereafter, and stored at -80° C until further analysis. Samples were transported to proteomics facility stored on dry ice.  The samples collected from dog were lysed by 4 % SDS lysis buffer and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean up and digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018).  In brief, 50 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix (22 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 20 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LysC buffer (0.5 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (PNGase) to protein ratio) and incubated at 37 C for 2 hours, and then 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) at 37 C overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated at 37 C overnight followed by SP3 peptide clean up. The final peptide concentration was determined by the Bio-Rad DC Assay. An aliquot of approximately 20 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 4 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS  Q-Exactive Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 4 uL was injected from each sample. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µmx15cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6%B up to 43%B in 240 min, followed by a steep increase to 100%B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  Peptide and protein identification.  The MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator or Target Decoy PSM Validator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) against Canis familirias Uniprot (unreviewed) and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off.  We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS and 0.8 Da for CID-ITMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications; oxidation (M), and deamidation (N) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Gastrointestinal (GI) mucus is continuously secreted and lines the entire length of the GI tract. Essential for health, it keeps the noxious luminal content away from the epithelium. Our aim was to characterize the composition and structure of mucus throughout the various GI segments in dog. Mucus was collected from the stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), and large intestine (cecum, proximal and distal colon) from dogs. Composition was determined by multi-omics. Structural properties were investigated using cryoSEM and rheology. GI mucus contained 74-95% water and maintained a pH around 6.5. The proteome was similar across the different GI segments. The highest abundant secreted gel-forming mucin in the gastric mucus was mucin 5AC, whether mucin 2 had highest abundance in the intestinal mucus. Lipid and metabolite abundance was generally higher in the jejunal mucus than the colonic mucus. CryoSEM microscopy revealed smaller pore size in small intestinal mucus, which increased in the large intestine. All mucus samples showed shear-thinning behavior and characteristics of gel-like structure. In conclusion, the mucus is a highly viscous and hydrated material. These data provide an important baseline for future studies on human and canine intestinal diseases and the dog model in drug absorption.

### Keywords
Composition, Mucus, Gastrointestinal, Dog, Healthy, Canine

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Xiaofang Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden


