### Accession
PXD031553

### Title
Global proteome of Atg5flox:Slc32a1-Cre:tdTomato FACS sorted WT and KO neurons

### Description
The experiment was performed to identify phosphorylation target proteins of cAMP-dependent kinase A (PKA) in mouse brain tissue. Therefore, coimmunoprecipitation analysis was performed using a PKA phosphorylation state-specific antibody (RRXS/T). Potential PKA target proteins were determined by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. WT brains were homogenized in Co-IP buffer and supernatants were sonicated, and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined for each lysate and a total amount of 2 mg protein was provided to the PKA phosphorylation state-specific antibody (RRXS/T) or IgG coupled dynabeads overnight. Beads were washed next day and diluted in a home-made laemmli-like sample buffer. The samples were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and processed following an in-gel digestion protocol for LC-MS/MS analysis. In brief, samples were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and run for 1-2 cm. The whole running line was chopped into small pieces and transferred in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT) and alkylated (55 mM CAA). Digestion of proteins were done overnight using Trypsin (10 ng/µL 90% Trypsin) and LysC (50 mM). Peptides were extracted and purified using Stagetips. Eluted peptides were dried in vacuo, resuspended in 1% formic acid/4% acetonitrile and stored at -20°C prior MS measurement.  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 40.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 8.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome containing isoforms (UP000000589, downloaded at 26.08.2020), including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
In-vivo proteome, Neurons, Atg5 ko, Autophagy

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr N.L. Kononenko
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931


