### Accession
PXD006988

### Title
The Arabidopsis kinase YODA regulates non-canonical immune responses conferring broad-spectrum disease resistance

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) cascades play essential roles in plants and animals by transducing developmental cues and environmental signals into cellular responses. Among the latter are microbe-associated molecular patterns perceived by plant pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which trigger immunity. We found that YODA (YDA), a MAPK kinase kinase regulating several Arabidopsis developmental processes, like stomatal and embryo patterning, also modulates immune responses. Resistance to pathogens is compromised in a yda11 hypomorphic allele whereas plants expressing the constitutively active YDA (CA-YDA) protein show broad-spectrum disease resistance to necrotrophic and biotrophic fungi, bacteria and oomycetes. We found that YDA functions downstream ERECTA (ER) Receptor-Like Kinase regulating both immunity and stomatal patterning. ER/YDA-mediated immune responses act in parallel to canonical disease resistance pathways regulated by defensive phytohormones and PRRs, like FLS2 and CERK1, which are required for bacterial and fungal resistance, respectively. CA-YDA plants constitutively express defense-associated genes and exhibit altered cell wall integrity, which contribute to their broad-spectrum disease resistance. CA-YDA plants also show a strong reprogramming of their phosphoproteome, which contains protein targets that do not significantly overlap with  described plant MAPKs substrates. Our data suggest that plants might have evolutionarily co-opted the stomata development pathway regulated by ER/YDA to generate a novel immune surveillance system that is distinct from the canonical immune pathways mediated by previously described PRRs and plant defensive hormones.

### Sample Protocol
Three-week-old soil-grown plants were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. 25 g of frozen plant material were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and the subsequent protein extraction and phosphoprotein enrichment were performed as previously described (Lassowskat et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digested phosphoproteins were analyzed with an LC-MS system consisting of a nano-LC (Easy-nLC II, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a hybrid-FT-mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). MS raw data were analyzed with the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), filtered for an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 and fold change of >2.0, and searched against an A. thaliana protein database based on TAIR10 (www.arabidopsis.org) using an in-house Mascot server, as described in (Lassowskat et al., 2014). Phosphopeptides were identified with the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software, which includes the phosphoRS 2.0 algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for phosphor-site mapping. Parameters were set according to (Lassowskat et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) cascades play essential roles in plants by transducing developmental cues and environmental signals into cellular responses. Among the latter are microbe-associated molecular patterns perceived by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which trigger immunity. We found that YODA (YDA) - a MAPK kinase kinase regulating several Arabidopsis developmental processes, like stomatal patterning - also modulates immune responses. Resistance to pathogens is compromised in yda alleles, whereas plants expressing the constitutively active YDA (CA-YDA) protein show broad-spectrum resistance to fungi, bacteria, and oomycetes with different colonization modes. YDA functions in the same pathway as ERECTA (ER) Receptor-Like Kinase, regulating both immunity and stomatal patterning. ER-YDA-mediated immune responses act in parallel to canonical disease resistance pathways regulated by phytohormones and PRRs. CA-YDA plants exhibit altered cell-wall integrity and constitutively express defense-associated genes, including some encoding putative small secreted peptides and PRRs whose impairment resulted in enhanced susceptibility phenotypes. CA-YDA plants show strong reprogramming of their phosphoproteome, which contains protein targets distinct from described MAPKs substrates. Our results suggest that, in addition to stomata development, the ER-YDA pathway regulates an immune surveillance system conferring broad-spectrum disease resistance that is distinct from the canonical pathways mediated by described PRRs and defense hormones.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Resistance, Phosphorylation, Leaf

### Affiliations
WWU Münster
Leibniz-Institut für Pflanzenbiochemie Weinberg 3 06120 Halle (Saale)

### Submitter
Ines Lassowskat

### Lab Head
Dr Dierk Scheel
Leibniz-Institut für Pflanzenbiochemie Weinberg 3 06120 Halle (Saale)


