### Accession
PXD033939

### Title
Lysine long-chain fatty acylation regulates the TEAD transcription factor

### Description
TEAD transcription factors are responsible for the transcriptional output of Hippo signalling1,2. TEAD activity is primarily regulated by phosphorylation of its coactivators YAP and TAZ3,4. In addition, cysteine palmitoylation has recently been shown to regulate TEAD activity5,6. Here, we report lysine long-chain fatty acylation as a novel posttranslational modification of TEADs. Lysine fatty acylation occurs spontaneously via intramolecular transfer of acyl groups from the proximal acylated cysteine residue. Lysine fatty acylation, like cysteine palmitoylation, contributes to the transcriptional activity of TEADs by enhancing the interaction with YAP and TAZ, but it is more stable than cysteine acylation, suggesting that the lysine fatty-acylated TEAD acts as a “stable active form”. Significantly, lysine fatty acylation of TEAD increased upon Hippo signalling activation, despite a decrease in cysteine acylation. Our results provide new insight into the role of fatty acyl modifications in the regulation of TEAD activity.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were lysed with an SDS sample buffer and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was electrophoresed to a 12% polyacrylamide gel. Similarly, FLAG-tagged TEAD1 expressed in HEK293T cells was also subjected to SDS-PAGE. The CBB stained bands were cut out and de-stained. The gels were reduced and alkylated with DTT and acrylamide, followed by the digestion with trypsin (tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone–treated, Worthington Biochemical Co.) at 37°C overnight. LC-MSMS analysis was carried out using a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Bartlesville, OK, USA) with a nano ESI spray column (NTCC-360, 0.075 mm internal diameter ´ 100 mm length, 3 µm, Nikkyo Technos Co.). The liquid chromatography condition was as follows: buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 100% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and the following gradient condition (HepG2 cells: 0-60 min: linear from 0 to 15% B, 60-120 min: linear from 15-35% B, 120-125 min: linear from 35 to 90% B, and FLAG-tagged TEAD1: 30 min: linear from 0 to 99% B). The mass spectrometer was operated using the data-dependent Top 10 method in a positive mode.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed with MASCOT search engine Version 2.8 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Bartlesville, OK, USA). Database search was carried out under the following parameter; in-house database, enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, none; variable modifications, Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Propionamide (C), Myristoyl (C, K), Palmitoyl (C, K); mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance, 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ±30 mmu; maximum missed cleavages, 3; instrument type, ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tead acylation

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


