### Accession
PXD049232

### Title
Structural characterization of the oligomerization of full-length Hantaan virus polymerase into symmetric dimers and hexamers

### Description
Hantaan virus is a dangerous human pathogen whose segmented negative-stranded RNA genome is replicated and transcribed by a virally-encoded multi-functional polymerase. To describe the complete cryo-electron microscopy structure of Hantaan virus polymerase in several oligomeric forms, a full-length wild-type (WT) HTNV-L construct comprising an N-terminal his-tag was expressed in Hi5 insect cells and subsequently purified. Through a combination of size-exclusion chromatography and mass photometry analysis, the presence of distinct HTNV-L oligomers was observed.  In buffers containing 250mM NaCl, several species were automatically detected including monomers (53%), dimers (17%), higher molecular weight oligomers up to hexamers (2%) and an unidentified 150kDa protein (18%). To characterize the proteins present in the 150kDa band, a bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analysis was performed. For this, proteins present in the 150 kDa band were in-gel digested with trypsin before analysis by nano liquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS. Obtained result revealed that the most abundant protein in this band was HTNV-L. The identified peptides were covering the entire HTNV-L sequence, suggesting that the 150kDa band may contain different cleaved forms of HTNV-L co-migrating in this particular SDS-PAGE gel band.

### Sample Protocol
The full-length HTNV-L gene (strain 76-118/Korean haemorrhagic fever, GenBank: X55901.1 UniProt: P23456) flanked in 5′ by a sequence coding an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag was cloned in a pFastBac vector between NdeI and NotI restriction sites. The expressing baculovirus was prepared using the Bac-to-Bac method (Invitrogen)31. Trichoplusia ni High 5 cells were infected at 0.7x106 cells/mL with 0.1 % v/v of baculovirus and harvested 120 h after infection. Culture medium was centrifuged at 1 000 g for 15 min. The cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (30 mM HEPES pH8, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Imidazole, 2 mM TCEP and 5 % glycerol) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor complex (Roche) and ribonuclease A (Roche). The lysate was sonicated during 3 min 30 s (10 s ON, 20 s OFF and 40 % intensity) and centrifuged during 45 min at 20 000 g and 4 °C. The supernatant was filtered at 0.8 µm and used for purification by nickel ion affinity chromatography (GE Healthcare). A washing step in the lysis buffer supplemented with 30 mM imidazole was followed by the elution in lysis buffer supplemented with 500 mM imidazole. HTNV-L fractions were slowly diluted by two at 4°C using the heparin buffer (30 mM HEPES pH8, 300 mM NaCl and 5 mM TCEP), loaded on a 1 ml heparin column (GE Healthcare) and eluted in the heparin buffer supplemented with 500 mM NaCl. After separation by SDS-PAGE (6% polyacrylamide), proteins were stained with Coomassie blue. Bands of interest were cut out and contained proteins digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 35 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Aurora Generation 3, 1.7 µm, IonOpticks). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur version 4.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Trichoplusia ni taxonomy, May 2023 version), a homemade database containing the sequence of HTNV-L, and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (version 2.2) was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% , and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group). Proline was then used to perform a MS1-based label-free quantification of the identified protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polymerase, Hantaan virus, Nanolc-ms/ms, Structure

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


