### Accession
PXD009598

### Title
Characterization of Two Unknown Proteins in the Human Testis

### Description
This project aims at deciphering the human testis proteome and to discover and characterizedunknown proteins in order to better understand the male reproductive physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from human testis were extracted and digested with tryspin before LC-MS-MS analysis in data-dependant acquisition mode using a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot 5.0 (AB Sciex) software was used to perform automatic mass recalibration of MS and MS/MS spectra and to export the recalibrated peak lists as mgf files. The Mascot server v2.2.07 (http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to Uniprot Homo Sapiens reference proteome database (UP000005640, release 2016_07, 92578 protein sequences which contains canonical and variant isoforms). Peptide and MS/MS tolerances were set at 0,05 Da and 0.1 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine. Mascot dat files obtained from each query were then imported in the Proline Studio 1.3 software used for the validation of identification results (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Each search results were thus validated with a peptide rank of 1, a minimal peptide length of 9 amino acids, a FDR of 1% on mascot e-value at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and a FDR of 1% at the protein level. All validated Mascot search results obtained from each analyzed fraction were merged and a protein inference list was created. Proteins identified with exactly the same set of peptides or with a subset of the same peptides were grouped in a protein set. This protein set was represented by a typical protein corresponding to the protein identified with the best score or, in case of same set proteins, with the SwissProt accession if applicable.

### Publication Abstract
For the C-HPP consortium, dark proteins include not only uPE1, but also missing proteins (MPs, PE2-4), smORFs, proteins from lncRNAs, and products from uncharacterized transcripts. Here, we investigated the expression of dark proteins in the human testis by combining public mRNA and protein expression data for several tissues and performing LC-MS/MS analysis of testis protein extracts. Most uncharacterized proteins are highly expressed in the testis. Thirty could be identified in our data set, of which two were selected for further analyses: (1) A0AOU1RQG5, a putative cancer/testis antigen specifically expressed in the testis, where it accumulates in the cytoplasm of elongated spermatids; and (2) PNMA6E, which is enriched in the testis, where it is found in the germ cell nuclei during most stages of spermatogenesis. Both proteins are coded on Chromosome X. Finally, we studied the expression of other dark proteins, uPE1 and MPs, in a series of human tissues. Most were highly expressed in the testis at both the mRNA and protein levels. The testis appears to be a relevant organ to study the dark proteome, which may have a function related to spermatogenesis and germ cell differentiation. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the data set identifier PXD009598.

### Keywords
Testis, Dark proteins, Unknown proteins

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset – UMR_S 1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset – UMR_S 1085


