### Accession
PXD013588

### Title
Protein S-sulfenylation Arabidopsis - AtMAPK4

### Description
Study the oxidation-sensitivity of recombinant AtMAPK4 by treatment with 0 mM hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (sample '_01'), 1 mM (sample '_02'), and 10 mM (sample '_03'). Each sample subdivided for trypsin and chymotrypsin digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Purified AtMAPK4 proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT incubation at room temperature for 1 h. The excess DTT was removed with Bio-Spin size exclusion columns (Bio-Rad). Reduced AtMAPK4 proteins (20 µM) were incubated with 2 mM dimedone and incubated with 1 mM and 10 mM H2O2 at room temperature for 1 h for oxidation. The excess H2O2 and dimedone were removed with the Bio-Spin size exclusion columns. The reaction was stopped by incubation with 4 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) in the dark at room temperature for 10 min, blocking the free thiols of AtMAPK4. Protein samples were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). S-sulfenylation was visualized by Western blots with an anti-cysteine sulfenic acid antibody (Merck Millipore).

### Data Protocol
The bands were excised after staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) and digested with in-gel trypsin. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm,Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-36% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 36 min, 40%-99% solvent B for 10 min and holding at 99% for the last 5 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLN nanoHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Fusion Lumos coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 35; ion fragments were detected in the Iontrap A data-dependent procedure of MS/MS scans was applied for the top precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5.0E3 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The total cycle time was set to 4 seconds. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 35ms. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. The resulting MS/MS data was processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 against a custom database containing the AtMAPK4 sequence. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 3 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met; NEM, sulfenic dimedone and sulfinic on Cys; phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr; were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using a fixed value PSM validator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Phosphorylation sites were assigned by ptmRS node 2.0 and manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) is an important messenger molecule for diverse cellular processes. H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> oxidizes proteinaceous cysteinyl thiols to sulfenic acid, also known as S-sulfenylation, thereby affecting the protein conformation and functionality. Although many proteins have been identified as S-sulfenylation targets in plants, site-specific mapping and quantification remain largely unexplored. By means of a peptide-centric chemoproteomics approach, we mapped 1,537 S-sulfenylated sites on more than 1,000 proteins in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cells. Proteins involved in RNA homeostasis and metabolism were identified as hotspots for S-sulfenylation. Moreover, S-sulfenylation frequently occurred on cysteines located at catalytic sites of enzymes or on cysteines involved in metal binding, hinting at a direct mode of action for redox regulation. Comparison of human and <i>Arabidopsis</i> S-sulfenylation datasets provided 155 conserved S-sulfenylated cysteines, including Cys181 of the <i>Arabidopsis</i> MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE4 (AtMAPK4) that corresponds to Cys161 in the human MAPK1, which has been identified previously as being S-sulfenylated. We show that, by replacing Cys181 of recombinant AtMAPK4 by a redox-insensitive serine residue, the kinase activity decreased, indicating the importance of this noncatalytic cysteine for the kinase mechanism. Altogether, we quantitatively mapped the S-sulfenylated cysteines in <i>Arabidopsis</i> cells under H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> stress and thereby generated a comprehensive view on the S-sulfenylation landscape that will facilitate downstream plant redox studies.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cysteine oxidation, S-sulfenylation, Atmapk4, Mitogen-activated protein kinase, Mpk4

### Affiliations
VIB-VUB Center for Structural Biology, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Joris Messens
VIB-VUB Center for Structural Biology, 1050 Brussels, Belgium


