### Accession
PXD034078

### Title
Design of a gene signature to assess the proinflammatory and the profibrotic polarization of murine fibroblasts

### Description
We provide an original multi-stage approach identifying a gene signature to assess the fibroblast polarization. Prototypic polarizations (inflammatory/fibrotic) were induced by seeded mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with TNFα or TGFß1, respectively. The transcriptomic and proteomic profiles were obtained by RNA microarray and LC/MS-MS. Gene Ontology and pathways analysis were performed among the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs). Balb/c mice underwent daily intradermal injections of HOCl (or PBS) as an experimental murine model of inflammation-mediated fibrosis in a time-dependent manner. As results, 1,456 and 2,215 DEGs, and 289 and 233 DEPs were respectively found in MEFs in response to TNFα or TGFß1, respectively. Among the most significant pathways, we combined 26 representative genes to encompass the proinflammatory and profibrotic polarizations of fibroblasts. Based on principal component analysis, this signature deciphered baseline state, proinflammatory polarization, and profibrotic polarization as accurately as did RNA microarray and LC/MS-MS. Then, we assessed the gene signature on dermal fibroblasts isolated from the experimental murine model. We observed a proinflammatory polarization at day 7, and a mixture of a proinflammatory and profibrotic polarizations at day 42 in line with histological findings. Our approach provides a small-size and convenient gene signature to assess murine fibroblast polarization.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were purchased from American Type Culture Collection and were used between 8th and 15th passages.  MEFs were cultured in DMEM Glutamax supplemented with fetal calf serum, penicillin, and streptomycin. MEFs alone or stimulated were seeded in 12-well plates for 24 or 72 hours. For MEFs stimulation, cells were incubated either with 5 ng/ml of recombinant TGFβ1 or with 10 ng/ml of recombinant TNFα.  Six-week-old female BALB/c mice were used in all experiments. Animals were housed in a specific pathogen-free facility, within autoclaved ventilated cages with sterile food and water ad libitum, under constant room temperature and with 12-h day–night cycles. This study was carried out in accordance with the local and national guidelines The protocol was approved by the Regional Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation. Experimental model was induced by daily intradermal injections of 300μl of an HOCl-generating solution into the shaved backs of mice, using a 27-gauge needle and a 1-ml syringe, as previously described. The HOCl-generating solution was extemporaneously prepared by adding NaClO solution to a 100 mM KH2PO4 solution. The NaClO amount was determined by measuring the optical density of the solution at 280 nm, and then adjusted to obtain an OD between 0.7 and 0.9. Control mice received injections of 300μl of sterilized phosphate-buffered saline Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation under deep CO2 anesthesia at either day 7 or day 42 after the first injection. Skin samples were collected at the time of euthanasia near the injection site. To isolate dMPFs, the skin was harvested, minced into small pieces, and incubated in PBS containing dispase II overnight at 4°C. After removing epidermis, the dermis was incubated in 1X PBS containing collagenase IV for 1 hour. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation, washed twice, and grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS. Cells were used at the second passage. Skin samples embedded in paraffin were sliced into serial 4-μm sections. Dermal thickness at the injection site was assessed by performing a hematoxylin eosin staining and measuring the distance between the epidermal–dermal junction and the dermal–subcutaneous fat junction at a 20-fold magnification using the ImageJ morphometic software. Twenty random measurements per section were performed by two blinded investigators and averaged for each section.  Collagen deposition in the skin was evaluated using Picrosirius red staining. The color was prepared by a 5-minute bath of hematoxylin diluted 1/3 in water. A 60 min bath of Picrosirius Red, which specifically dyes collagen fibers, was then carried out, obtained by mixing Direct red 80 diluted to 1% in saturated picric acid. The sections were mounted between slide and coverslips and acquired under an automated microscope as described above, then analyzed using the Web Image J software. A semi-quantitative analysis of the collagen deposition was performed using a method of Color deconvolution and the area occupied by collagen was quantified After collection, the skin biopsies were digested with type II dispase and type IV collagenase for 2h30 at 37°C. The suspension was then centrifuged at 300g for 10 minutes. Cell counting was performed by flow cytometry using calibrated beads. 50 μL of cell suspension were incubated with 2 μL of anti-murine Fc receptor antibody for 5 minutes at 4°C. They were then incubated with 5 μL of CD45-APC for 20 minutes at 4°C. The samples were then incubated with 2.5 µL of propidium iodide for 5 minutes at 4°C. Data were analyzed using Kaluza  Total RNA yield and quality were assessed on the Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer. One color whole Mouse 60-mer oligonucleotides 8x60k microarrays were used to analyze gene expression. cRNA labelling, hybridization and detection were carried out according to supplier’s instructions. For each microarray, Cyanine 3-labeled cRNA were synthesized with the low input QuickAmp labeling kit from 50 ng of total RNA. RNA Spike-In were added to all tubes and used as positive controls of labelling and amplification steps. The labelled cRNA were purified and 600 ng of each cRNA were then hybridized and washed following manufacturer’s instructions. Microarrays were scanned on an Agilent G2505C scanner and data extracted using Agilent Feature Extraction Software© Microarray data have been submitted to the GEO database under the accession number GSE191223. Samples were prepared using a modified eFASP in order to increase proteome coverage and sample recovery for quantitative proteomic experiments. LC-MS/MS protein analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer hyphenated to a U3000 RSLC Microfluidic HPLC System. Total RNA was extracted from fibroblasts by using a Nucleospin RNA kit All samples were amplified in duplicate. Analysis of relative gene expression data was performed using the 2−ΔΔCt methods, where ΔCt was the difference in crossing points between housekeeping gene and gene tested.

### Data Protocol
Ontology Annotation and Canonical Pathway Enrichment To analyze Gene Oncology (GO), REACTOM, and KEGG pathways, we subjected differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (or proteins, DEPs) with cut-off q-value at <0.05 to the online tool Metascape (http://metascape.org/gp/index.html#/main/step1) (34). All significant enriched terms (p-value <0.05) were hierarchically clustering into a tree based on Kappa-statistical similarities (threshold >0.3) among their gene membership. The clusters identified have been named according to the membership. Among the terms within each cluster, some of them (q-value <0.05) were selected for charting. Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) (http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen, Inc) were used to identify candidate genes in selected gene set.  Statistical Analysis Values were reported as median ±interquartile range or mean ±SD according to the normality of distribution checked graphically and using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Comparisons were performed using Student t test for gaussian continuous variables and using Mann Whitney U test for non-gaussian continuous variables. Correlation was performed using Spearman correlation. A p-value of <0.05 was significant. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS (version 22. IBM Software) and Prism (version 9.0.2 GraphPad Software). Venn’s diagrams were created using Venny2.1 (BioinfoGP – Csic) (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny).  Quantification MaxQuant Analysis of raw file from LC-MS/MS eFASP digestion data was performed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30. and Andromeda search engine was used for database searching against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mouse database (Mus musculus, January 2018, Sequences: 91.097). MaxQuant also contains common contaminates proteins identified in proteomics analysis. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a main search precursor mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was selected as an enzyme and 3 missed cleavages are included. Together with variable modifications such as methionine and proline oxidation, deamidation on asparagine or glutamine and serine, threonine phosphorylation, glutamate to pyroglutamate conversion and with the fixed modification carbamidomethyl cysteine. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and the maximum number of missed cleavages to three. The match-between-runs function was used (match time window = 2 min, alignment time window = 20). The FDR was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. The proteins identified by the same sets of peptides were grouped and reported as one protein group. Proteomic data have been submitted to the PRIDE database. Bioinformatic treatment by Perseus The statistics were calculated using Perseus software (version 1.60.2. Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) (33). The MaxQuant data were filtered for reverse proteins identifications (false positives), contaminants, and proteins “only identified by site”. The label free intensities were transformed in log2 then the data were filtered with x valid values in at least one group. The missing data were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3. down shift 1.8). Significant proteins were determined using a two-sample analysis t-test and multiple sample test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR at 0.05. Normalization with Z-score was determined, and hierarchical clustering was constructed with Euclidean distance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflammation-mediated fibrosis; fibrosis; fibroblast polarization

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Fabrice Brat
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS


