### Accession
PXD031700

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation regulates epidermal growth factor receptor intracellular trafficking and signaling

### Description
Ligand-stimulated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling plays fundamental roles in normal cell physiology, such as cell growth, cell proliferation, and cell survival. Deregulation of EGFR signaling contributes to the development and progression of diseases including cancer. Despite its essential role in biology, the mechanisms by which EGFR signaling is regulated in cells are still poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that O-linked N-acetyl-glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) modification serves as an important regulator of EGFR intracellular trafficking and degradation. Mechanistically, O-GlcNAcylation of hepatocyte growth factor regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS), a key protein in EGFR intraluminal sorting pathway, inhibits HGS interaction with signal-transducing adaptor molecule (STAM), thereby impairing the formation of endosomal sorting complex required for transport-0 (ESCRT-0). Moreover, O-GlcNAcylation increases HGS ubiquitination and decreases its protein stability in cells. Consequently, HGS O-GlcNAcylation inhibits EGFR intraluminal sorting and lysosomal degradation, leading to the accumulation of EGFR and prolonged EGFR signaling in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples containing Flag-tagged HGS were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie blue R250. Gel bands were excised and de-stained with a decolorizing buffer (50% ACN and 50% 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8). After the HGS gel was completely transparent, it was chopped intensively and resuspended in 100 μL 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) containing 10 mM CaCl2. The HGS gel particles were digested by chymotrypsin (specifically cleaving peptide bonds at the C-termini of Tyr, Phe, Trp and Leu that are not adjacent to Pro) at a 1:50 ratio (wt/wt) and the mixture was incubated at 30 ℃ with shaking overnight. After digestion, the centrifuged supernatant was acidified, desalted and freeze dried for further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were trapped onto a homemade 150μm×15mm C18 precolumn and washed with 15 μL buffer A (0.1% FA) automatically by a Thermo EASY nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The bound peptides were then eluted by a homemade 15cm C18 column (ID 150 μm, 1.9 μm, 100 Å) over a 75 min gradient of 7-15% B in 11 min, 15-25% B in 37 min, 25-40% B in 20 min, ramping to 100% B at 69 min and held at 100% B for 7 min (buffer B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a constant flow rate of 600 nL/min. Raw data was analyzed by Maxquant software and manual interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceEpidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of the most important membrane receptors that transduce growth signals into cells to sustain cell growth, proliferation, and survival. EGFR signal termination is initiated by EGFR internalization, followed by trafficking through endosomes, and degradation in lysosomes. How this process is regulated is still poorly understood. Here, we show that hepatocyte growth factor regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS), a key protein in the EGFR trafficking pathway, is dynamically modified by a single sugar N-acetylglucosamine. This modification inhibits EGFR trafficking from endosomes to lysosomes, leading to the accumulation of EGFR and prolonged signaling. This study provides an important insight into diseases with aberrant growth factor signaling, such as cancer, obesity, and diabetes.

### Keywords
Membrane receptors, Endosomal sorting, O-glcnacylation, Egfr

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing)
Nation Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Zhiya Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Weijije Qin
Nation Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing


