### Accession
PXD008562

### Title
Displacement Chromatography Mode – High protein sequence coverages and identification rates for low µg-range proteomics using online 2D-LC-MS

### Description
In bottom-up proteomics, the complexity of proteomes is still a challenge. For deep proteome profiling, multi-dimensional separation strategies and large initial protein amounts are required. Here, we report on an online 2D-LC-MS/MS approach applying strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) in displacement chromatography mode (DCM) as the first dimension of separation. This method enables a comprehensive analysis of proteomes in the low µg-range (5 µg). The first detailed comparison of DCM with conventionally used gradient chromatography mode (GCM) highlights a significantly better separation efficiency with DCM. Especially for peptides with a net-charge state (NCS) of +2, which represents the majority of tryptic peptides in mammalian proteomes, DCM provides a significantly better separation. These peptides were separated over several fractions in DCM, which is not possible to achieve in GCM due to theirs low affinity towards the SCX column. The better separation in DCM results not only in a considerably higher reproducibility (Pearson’s r=0.93), but significantly increases identification rates of both peptides and proteins. For peptides with a low NCS, DCM achieved a 2.6-fold increase in identified peptides. In total, DCM provides a 1.5-fold increase in peptide identifications and a 1.7-fold increase of protein identifications. The number of identified unique peptides per protein and the protein sequence coverages were significantly higher in DCM compared to GCM providing more reliable quantitative results. The higher sequence coverage are of interest for applications such as proteogenomics, where it is important to have high protein sequence coverages to identify single amino acid variants and splice-junction peptides.

### Sample Protocol
For comparing the performance of displacement chromatography mode (DCM) and conventionally used gradient chromatography mode (GCM) in the first dimension (SCX) of an online 2D-LC-MS/MS approach, 5 µg of a commercially available tryptic HeLa peptide digest were separated by both modes and analyzed by an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion). Peptides were eluted from the SCX column by repeating injections of the displacer (DCM) or by increasing concentrations of ammonium acetate. Peptide eluted from the SCX were separated in the second dimension by reversed phase chromatography and analyzed by mass spectrometry using an ESI linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Peptide and protein identification was carried out with Andromeda against a human SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, downloaded November 10, 2016, 20,161 entries) and a contaminant database (298 entries). The searches were performed using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance was set to 8 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. For identification the following modifications were allowed: two miss cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (static modification), oxidation of methionine residues (variable modification), acetylation of protein N-terminus (variable modification). Peptides and proteins were identified with a FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified with the MaxLFQ algorithm considering only unique peptides and a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
The complexity of mammalian proteomes is a challenge in bottom-up proteomics. For a comprehensive proteome analysis, multidimensional separation strategies are necessary. Online two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) combining strong cation exchange (SCX) in the first dimension with reversed-phase (RP) chromatography in the second dimension provides a powerful approach to analyze complex proteomes. Although the combination of SCX with RP chromatography provides a good orthogonality, only a moderate separation is achieved in the first dimension for peptides with two (+2) or three (+3) positive charges. The aim of this study was to improve the performance of online SCX-RP-MS/MS by applying displacement chromatography to the first separation dimension. Compared to gradient chromatography mode (GCM), displacement chromatography mode (DCM) was expected to improve the separation of +2-peptides and +3-peptides, thus reducing complexity and increasing ionization and detectability. The results show that DCM provided a separation of +2-peptides and +3-peptides in remarkably sharp zones with a low degree of coelution, thus providing fractions with significantly higher purities compared to GCM. In particular, +2-peptides were separated over several fractions, which was not possible to achieve in GCM. The better separation in DCM resulted in a higher reproducibility and significantly higher identification rates for both peptides and proteins including a 2.6-fold increase for +2-peptides. The higher number of identified peptides in DCM resulted in significantly higher protein sequence coverages and a considerably higher number of unique peptides per protein. Compared to conventionally used salt-based GCM, DCM increased the performance of online SCX-RP-MS/MS and enabled comprehensive proteome profiling in the low microgram range.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Displacement chromatography, Online 2d-lc-ms

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf.
University of Groningen

### Submitter
Marcel Kwiatkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf.


