### Accession
PXD031624

### Title
Proteomic Investigation of the Antibacterial Mechanism of Cefiderocol against Escherichia coli

### Description
DIA-based quantitative proteomics was applied to analyze the global protein alteration of E. coli  from the 0 h (control) and 2 h FDC treated groups

### Sample Protocol
DDA-and DIA-MS analyses were performed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) interfaced with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo, USA) The peptides were separated on the Omics High-resolution Series Monolithic Capillary HPLC columns (100 μM×50 cm, KYOTO MONOTCHE) with column temperature of 50°C

### Data Protocol
The DEPs were analyzed by the Cytoscape software (version 3.8.3) with various plug-ins as previously reported26. The ClueGOv2.5.7+CluePedia v1.5.8 plug-in was performed to discern pathway networks to identify core functional units. Searches were performed against GO-Biological Process (3023 terms, 7587 available unique genes), GO-Molecular Function (2591 terms, 7183 available unique genes) and KEGG database (105 pathways, 1582 available unique genes) with the evidence from all experimental codes (EXP, IDA, IPI, IGI, IEP). Herein, the p-value was set as two-sided hypergeometric tests and adjusted via Bonferroni correction, and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to investigate the antibacterial mechanism of cefiderocol (CFDC) using data-independent acquisition quantitative proteomics combined with cellular and molecular biological assays. Numerous differentially expressed proteins related to the production of NADH, reduced cofactor flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH<sub>2</sub>), NADPH and reactive oxygen species (ROS), iron-sulfur cluster binding, and iron ion homeostasis were found to be upregulated by CFDC. Furthermore, parallel reaction monitoring analysis validated these results. Meanwhile, we confirmed that the levels of NADH, ROS, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and iron ions were induced by CFDC, and the sensitivity of Escherichia coli to CFDC was inhibited by the antioxidant vitamin C, <i>N</i>-acetyl-l-cysteine, and deferoxamine. Moreover, deferoxamine also suppressed the H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> stress induced by CFDC. In addition, knockout of the NADH-quinone oxidoreductase genes (<i>nuoA</i>, <i>nuoC</i>, <i>nuoE</i>, <i>nuoF</i>, <i>nuoG</i>, <i>nuoJ</i>, <i>nuoL</i>, <i>nuoM</i>) in the respiratory chain attenuated the sensitivity of E. coli to CFDC far beyond the effects of cefepime and ceftazidime; in particular, the E. coli BW25113 &#x394;<i>nuoJ</i> strain produced 60-fold increases in MIC to CFDC compared to that of the wild-type E. coli BW25113 strain. The present study revealed that CFDC exerts its antibacterial effects by inducing ROS stress by elevating the levels of NADH and iron ions in E. coli. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> CFDC was the first FDA-approved siderophore cephalosporin antibiotic in 2019 and is known for its Trojan horse tactics and broad antimicrobial activity against Gram-negative bacteria. However, its antibacterial mechanism is not fully understood, and whether it has an impact on <i>in vivo</i> iron ion homeostasis remains unknown. To comprehensively reveal the antibacterial mechanisms of CFDC, data-independent acquisition quantitative proteomics combined with cellular and molecular biological assays were performed in this study. The findings will further facilitate our understanding of the antibacterial mechanism of CFDC and may provide a theoretical foundation for controlling CFDC resistance in the future.

### Keywords
Nadh, Iron ions, Ros

### Affiliations
Fujian argricuture and forestry university
Medical Technology School, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221004, China

### Submitter
Li Yaxing

### Lab Head
Dr Gao-Fei Du
Medical Technology School, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221004, China


