### Accession
PXD036514

### Title
Identification of substrates of LarA-activated Lon protease and Identification of Lon protease interactome

### Description
With this analysis we aim to identify proteins that are substrates of LarA-activated Lon protease in Caulobacter crescentus. We will compare samples of wild type cells either harboring an empty vector (vector control, VC) or overexpressing 3xFLAG-tagged LarA (F-LarA). Based on our previous data we hypothesize that proteins affected by LarA-overexpression which results in Lon protease activation will decrease in levels compared to the vector control sample. The aim of this analysis is the identification of the interactome of the Lon protease in Caulobacter crescentus. It is a follow-up analysis of a project in which we were looking for novel substrates of the Lon protease in Caulobacter crescentus. To narrow down the list of potential substrates we obtained through the first analysis, we have purified the protease (Lon WT) as well an inactive TRAP mutant and interacting proteins using a Twin-Strep-tag (Iba lifesciences). As a control, a cell lysate without Strep-tag containing protein was included in the purification set-up. The aim is to identify the proteins that specifically interact with the Lon protease by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 200 µl lysis buffer (please add the lysis buffer components and the protocols). The total protein amount was estimated (Micro BCA, Thermo Scientific, 23235). The samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean up and digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018). Peptides were labelled with TMTpro 16 plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, 100 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 18 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LysC buffer (0.5 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. The peptides were eluted from the mixture after placing the mixture on a magnetic rack, followed by peptide concentration measurement (Micro BCA, Thermo Scientific, 23235). 50 µg of peptides from each sample were labeled with isobaric TMT-tags. Before labelling, samples were pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.). Labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of samples. Sample clean-up was performed by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex) and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac. An aliquot of approximately 20 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 2 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system.  LC-ESI-MS/MS Q-Exactive Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 5 uL was injected from each sample. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 com long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µmx15cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6%B up to 43%B in 240 min, followed by a steep increase to 100%B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014). All searches were done against the bacteria protein subset of UniProt in the Nextflow platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMTpro 16 plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMTpro 16 plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1 % FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMTpro 16 plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 16 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lara, Caulobacter crescentus, Lon protease, Lon activity regulator

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


