### Accession
PXD025715

### Title
Characterizing the Eaf complex using HDX-MS

### Description
Map the key residues and interaction surface between Eaf3 and Eaf5/7 using HDX-MS

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions comparing Eaf3 monomer and Eaf3/5/7 trimer were conducted in a final reaction volume of 25 μL with a final protein concentration of 0.8 μM (for both monomer and trimer). Exchange was initiated by the addition of 13.5 μL D2O buffer (20mM pH 7 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 94% D2O) to 11.5 μL of protein solution, with a final %D2O of 51% (v/v). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 3s, 30s, 300s, or 3000s at 18°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. HDX reactions comparing Eaf5/7 dimer and Eaf3/5/7 trimer were conducted in a final reaction volume of 25 μL with a final protein concentration of 7.5 μM (for both monomer and dimer). Exchange was initiated by the addition of 23 μL D2O buffer (20mM pH 7 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 94% D2O) to 2 μL of protein solution, with a final %D2O of 86.8% (v/v). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 3s on ice and 3s, 30s, 300s, or 3000s at 18°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until injection onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis. Protein digestion and MS/MS data collection Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over one immobilized pepsin column at 10C (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 mL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with a C18 reverse-phase separation column (Acquity 1.7 mm particle, 100 x 1 mm 2 C18 UPLC column, Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 5-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of Eaf3, Eaf5/7, and Eaf3/5/7 using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had -10logP scores of 23.4 (monomer), 24.3 (dimer), and 20.5 (trimer). HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (51% and 86.8%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: : 5% change in exchange, 0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value &lt;0.01 using a two tailed student t- test. All compared samples were set within the same experiment. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Eaf3, Eaf5, Eaf7

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


