### Accession
PXD029312

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals the Dynamic Pathophysiology across Different Stages in a Rat Model of Severe Traumatic Brain Injury

### Description
Background: Severe Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) has become a growing health problem, causing a vast society burden worldwide. However, characteristic mechanisms between acute and subacute stages have not been systemically revealed. Methods: Sixty rats were randomly divided into sham surgery and model groups. Severe TBI model was induced by controlled cortical impact (CCI). Neurological deficits were evaluated by modified neurological severity score (mNSS). H&E staining and immunofluorescence were performed to assess the injured brain tissues. The protein expressions of hippocampus were analyzed by the tandem mass tag-based (TMT) quantitative proteomics on the third and fourteenth days. The shared and stage-specific differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were screened, and then analyzed by the gene ontology (GO), Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) and protein-protein interaction (PPI). Eventually, target proteins were further verified by Western blotting (WB). Results: The neurological deficits always exist from the acute stage to the subacute stage of severe TBI and showed a downward trend. The brain parenchyma of TBI models was dramatically impaired. A total of 375 and 139 DEPs were identified at day 3 and 14, respectively. Sixty-three DEPs were co-existed between the two stages. Both stages were mainly related to the complement and coagulation cascades pathway. Three pathways associated with gastric acid secretion, insulin secretion and thyroid hormone synthesis were only enriched in the acute phase. Comparatively, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was significantly enriched in the subacute stage. WB confirmed the reliability of the TMT quantitative proteomics results.  Conclusion: Our findings highlight the same and different pathological processes in the acute and subacute phases of severe TBI and provide potential protein biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein samples Five samples in the same group were mixed into one for detection. First, 1000 μL of working fluid (25 mM Tris·HCI pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS) was added into samples. Second, the mixture was sonicated in ice for 5 min and centrifuged at 14000 r/min for 15 min at 4℃. Finally, protein concentration was measured with a BCA protein quantification kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). TMT labeling Each sample was reduced to 100 μg supernatant and subjected to alkylation and acetone precipitation. After suspension, the sample was digested with trypsin, mixed thoroughly, centrifuged briefly, and incubated overnight at 37℃ with shaking. Next, the mixture was centrifuged at high speed for 10 min and transferred to a new ep tube. Pre-equilibrated TMT to room temperature before opening. Then, 41 uL of anhydrous acetonitrile (anhydrous ACN) was added, mixed thoroughly, and centrifuged to collect the TMT solution. Next, 20 uL of TMT solution was pipetted into the corresponding sample, mixed, and centrifuged. After a one-hour incubation at room temperature, 100 mM hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 min to stop the reaction. Polypeptide samples were Sham-a (TMT-126), CCI-a (TMT-127C), Sham-s (TMT-129C), CCI-s (TMT-130C). TMT labeling was carried out by the manufacturer's instructions (Thermal Science, USA). Sodium deoxycholate was cleaned with 2% TFA after TMT labeling. High pH reverse phase fractionation Polypeptide samples (100 ug) were carried out by High pH reverse phase fractionation (pH=10). Chromatographic column: XBridge BEH C 18 XP Column (150 × 2.1 mm, Waters). The mobile phase A was ammonium formate (AF) water solution: 10 mM, pH=10. Mobile phase B: 10 mM AF, 10% H2O, 90% ACN, pH=10. Samples were divided into 120 min gradient intervals. Gradient B: 5-28% for 78 min, 28-50% for 12 min, 50-80% for 2 min, 80% for 4 min, 80-5% for 2 min, 5% for 20 min. The polypeptide was separated into 180 parts and collected in 40 s intervals. Lastly, all samples were merged into 20 components and then were vacuum dried and stored at -80℃ before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS analysis Firstly, 1 ug of peptide was isolated and analyzed by nano UPLC (EASY-nLC1200) and Q Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). Each component was replicated three times. Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase column (100 μm, ID × 15 cm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm) in buffer A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Linear gradient: 6-28% for 70 min, 28-40% for 12 min, 40-100% for 2 min, 100% for 2 min, 100-2% for 2 min, 2% for 2 min. Next, the mass spectrometry detection was performed under positive ion mode by Q Exactive mass spectrometry (90 min/sample). Data were acquired in DDA mode (20 pieces each time). The standardized collision energy was set to 32%. The isolation window was set to 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS parameters were as follows: (1) Primary mass spectrometry: Scanning range of the parent ions was 350-1600 m/z; Resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z; The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3E6; Maximum ion injection time (Max IT) was set to 50 ms; (2) Secondary mass spectrometry: Resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z; AGC target was set to 1E5; Max IT was set to 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data processing of TMT Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0) for data search and quantitative analysis. The protein database was UNIPROT_RAT_2016_09. The false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1% at both peptide and protein levels.  Screening of Differentially Expressed Proteins The screening condition of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were as follows: unique peptides≧2; p-value < 0.05; fold change > 1.2 (up-regulation) or < 0.83 (down-regulation). Bioinformatics Analysis Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG analysis were conducted using Metascape (https://metascape.org/). P-values were calculated based on the accumulative hypergeometric distribution according to the Metascape. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using the STRING database (version 11.0) (http://www.string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomic, Tandem mass tag-based, Severe traumatic brain injury, Subacute phase, Acute phase, Characteristic mechanisms

### Affiliations
Xiangya Hospital Central South University

### Submitter
Weikang Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Wang
Xiangya Hospital Central South University


