### Accession
PXD038579

### Title
Panax japonicus C. A. Myer LC-MSMS

### Description
Ginsenosides are a class of natural product triterpene saponins and almost exclusively in the plant genus Panax which has a long history of use as dietary supplements. Pharmacological research demonstrated that ginsenosides have multiple bioactivities. Ginsenoside is produced at high levels within Panax japonicus, and we have performed Lable-free quantitaion analysis of multiple tissues from this species in order to investigate the biosynthetic genes required for producing ginsenoside.

### Sample Protocol
Plant samples were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and then transformed in SDT buffer (4% SDS，100 mM Tris-HCl，1 mM DTT，pH7.6) was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. Proteins were quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA), and qualitied by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and then the proteins were stored at −80 °C for further analysis. Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedures referred to in previous work (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18 bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and then reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The contents of peptides were determined by measuring at 280 nm with NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher) using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 for a 0.1% (g/L) solution.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse-phase trap column connected to a C18-reversed phase analytical column in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and the maximum injects time was set to 10 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and the isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software for identification and quantitation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Panax japonicus</i> C. A. Meyer is a plant of the Araliaceae family, and its rhizomes can be used as dietary supplements. It is extremely rich in bioactive components ginsenosides with benefits to human health. However, the underlying mechanisms of ginsenosides biosynthesis in <i>Panax japonicus</i> remains poorly understood. Therefore, a comprehensive analysis of the metabolites, transcriptome, and proteome was conducted to investigate ginsenoside metabolism of <i>Panax japonicus</i>. Here, three types of ginsenosides were found to exhibited tissue-specific distribution using the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry method. Next, differentially expressed gene analysis revealed that transcript levels of ginsenosides biosynthetic genes have significant differences between differential samples. In addition, correlation analysis showed that the ginsenosides content was closely related to the expression level of 29 cytochrome P450s and 92 Uridine diphosphate-glycosyltransferases. Finally, phylogenetic analysis was performed for the target proteins to conduct preliminary studies on their functions and classification. This study provides insight into the dynamic changes and biosynthetic pathway of ginsenosides and offers valuable information on the metabolic regulation of <i>Panax japonicus</i>.

### Keywords
Panax japonicus c. a. myer lc-msms

### Affiliations
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
The SATCM Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China

### Submitter
Chaokang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Rufeng Wang
The SATCM Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China


