### Accession
PXD035764

### Title
Employing non-targeted interactomics approach and subcellular fractionation to increase our understanding of the ghost proteome

### Description
Eukaryotic mRNA has long been considered monocistronic, but nowadays, alternative proteins (AltProts) challenge this tenet. The alternative or ghost proteome has largely been neglected and the involvement of AltProts in biological processes. Here, we used subcellular fractionation to increase the information about AltProts and facilitate the detection of protein-protein interactions by the identification of crosslinked peptides. In total, 112 unique AltProts were identified, and we were able to identify 220 crosslinks without peptide enrichment. Among these, 16 crosslinks between AltProts and Referenced Proteins (RefProts) were identified. We further focused on specific examples such as the interaction between IP_2292176 (AltFAM227B) and HLA-B, in which this protein could be a potential new immunopeptide, and the interactions between HIST1H4F and several AltProts which can play a role in mRNA transcription. Thanks to the study of the interactome and the localization of AltProts, we can reveal more of the importance of the ghost proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture.  Human immortalized ovarian cells (SV-40) were cultured in Prigrow I medium with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum and 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin in a humidified air incubator at 37 °C under an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Replicates of three million cells were aliquoted and washed with DPBS three times. In-Cellulo Chemical Cross-Linking. A 50 mM stock solution of disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) was prepared by dissolving 1 mg in 51.5 µL of dry DMSO. Ovarian cells were resuspended in 200 µL of DPBS. The crosslinking reaction was performed at a final concentration of 2 mM of DSSO, at 37°C and under gentle end-over-end stirring. The reaction was quenched after 1 h by adding 10 µL of 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 solution and gentle stirring for 30 min.  Protein Subcellular Fractionation and Western Bloting. In Cellulo-crosslinked cells were pelleted and the supernatant was discarded, leaving the cells as dry as possible. Thermo Scientific Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Cultured Cells was employed to separate five different protein cell compartments. Cytoplasmic, membrane, nuclear, chromatin-bound, and cytoskeletal proteins were extracted according to manufacturer’s instructions. Enzymatic Digestion. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was performed in a 50 KDa cut-off Amicon filter. The resulting fractions were transferred to the Amicon filter, concentrated by centrifugation (14,000 g x 15 min), and 100 µL of denaturing buffer (8M Urea, 100 mM Tris, HCl, pH 8.5) were added. Reduction was performed by adding 100 µL of 100 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in denaturing buffer at 56 °C for 40 min. Alkylation was done by adding 100 µL of 50 mM Iodoacetamide in denaturing buffer at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark. For sequential digestion, 40 µL of 40 ng/µL Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade were added to the filter and incubated at 37 °C overnight followed by 25 µL of 40 ng/µL Chymotrypsin, Sequencing Grade at RT and for 4 h. The resulting peptides were then acidified with 0.1%TFA and vacuum dried. NanoLC-MS Analysis Dried samples were resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA and desalted on a ZipTip with C18 resin, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were then vacuum-dried and resuspended in acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA (2:98, v/v). The peptides were separated with a nanoAcquity (Waters) chromatography equipped with a C18 precolumn (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm DP, Waters) and BEA C18 analytical column (25 cm, 75 μm ID, 1.7 μL DP, Waters) using a gradient of ACN from 5% to 30% in 2 h at 300 nL/min. A Thermo Scientiﬁc Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was used for MS acquisition. The instrument was set to acquire the ten most intense precursors in data-dependent acquisition mode, with a voltage of 2.2 kV. The survey scans were set at positive mode, with a resolving power of 70,000 at FWHM (m/z 400), a scan range of 300 to 1,600 m/z, AGC target of 3x106 and stepped NCE of 21, 24 and 30. For MS/MS, 1 microscan was obtained at 35,000 FWHM and dynamic exclusion was enabled. The instrument was set to perform MS/MS only from >+2 and <+8 charge states.

### Data Protocol
Crosslink Data Analysis. The data obtained was analyzed using the XlinkX algorithm of the Heck Lab (Utrecht, Netherland) at Proteome Discoverer V2.5 (Thermo Scientiﬁc). DSSO (158.0037 Da) was defined as the crosslinker. The protein database used was the Homo sapiens OpenProt v1.6 which contains RefProts and predicted AltProts detected in mass spectrometry experiments with at least one unique peptide leading to a total of 184,706 sequences. First, protein identification was made by Sequest HT considering the following parameters: Trypsin/LysC and Chymotrypsin as enzyme, maximum two missed cleavages, peptide Length from 6 to 150, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance as 0.02 Da. The dynamic modifications included were methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, N-terminus acetylation, DSSO amidated, hydrolyzed and Tris form. The validation was performed using Target decoy PSM validator with FDR set between 0.01 and 0.05. The XlinkX detections had the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, FTMS fragment of 20 ppm, ITMS fragment of 0.5 Da. The validation was performed with XlinkX/PD Validator set to 0.05.  A consensus workflow was then applied for the statistical arrangement. At the consensus step the peptide validation for PSM and peptides was stablished between 0.01 and 0.05 FDR. Peptide confidence set at high with a minimum peptide length of six. The minimum number of peptide sequences for a protein was selected as one. Finally, at the XlinkX consensus validator, the Crosslink Spectrum Match FDR threshold was 0.05 and the Cross-link FDR threshold of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic mRNA has long been considered monocistronic, but nowadays, alternative proteins (AltProts) challenge this tenet. The alternative or ghost proteome has largely been neglected and the involvement of AltProts in biological processes. Here, we used subcellular fractionation to increase the information about AltProts and facilitate the detection of protein-protein interactions by the identification of crosslinked peptides. In total, 112 unique AltProts were identified, and we were able to identify 220 crosslinks without peptide enrichment. Among these, 16 crosslinks between AltProts and Referenced Proteins (RefProts) were identified. We further focused on specific examples such as the interaction between IP_2292176 (AltFAM227B) and HLA-B, in which this protein could be a potential new immunopeptide, and the interactions between HIST1H4F and several AltProts which can play a role in mRNA transcription. Thanks to the study of the interactome and the localization of AltProts, we can reveal more of the importance of the ghost proteome.

### Keywords
Ghost proteome, Cross-linking, Alternative open reading frames

### Affiliations
Laboratoire PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 -Université de Lille 
Laboratoire PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille - Campus Cité Scientifique Faculté des Sciences et Technologies Département de Biologie

### Submitter
Diego Fernando Garcia del Rio

### Lab Head
Dr PR. MICHEL SALZET
Laboratoire PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille - Campus Cité Scientifique Faculté des Sciences et Technologies Département de Biologie


