### Accession
PXD005646

### Title
SILAC-based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis Unveiled the Arsenite-induced Perturbation of Multiple Pathways in Human Skin Fibroblast Cells

### Description
Humans are exposed to arsenic species through inhalation, ingestion and dermal contact, which may lead to skin, liver, and bladder cancers as well as cardiovascular and neurological diseases. The mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic and carcinogenic effects of arsenic species, however, remain incompletely understood. To exploit the mechanisms of toxicity of As(III), we employed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) together with LC-MS/MS analysis to assess quantitatively the As(III)-induced perturbation of the entire proteome of cultured human skin fibroblast cells. Shotgun proteomic analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer facilitated the quantification of more than 3800 proteins, 250 of which displayed significant alternations (> 1.5 fold) upon arsenite treatment. Targeted analysis on a triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer in the multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mode confirmed the quantification results of some select proteins. Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the arsenite-induced alteration of more than 10 biological pathways, including the Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response pathway as reflected by the up-regulation of 9 proteins in this pathway. In addition, arsenite induced changes in expression levels of a number of selenoproteins and metallothioneins. Together, the results from the present study painted a more complete picture about the biological pathways that are altered in human skin fibroblast cells upon arsenite exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture GM00637 cells, which were kindly provided by Prof. Gerd P. Pfeifer (The City of Hope), were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin in 75 cm2 culture flasks. Cells were maintained in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37C, with medium renewal of 2-3 times a week depending on cell density. For SILAC experiments, the complete light and heavy media were prepared by the addition of light or heavy lysine ([13C6, 15N2]-L-lysine) and arginine ([13C6]-L-arginine), along with dialyzed FBS, to the DMEM medium without L-lysine or L-arginine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA). The GM00637 cells were cultured in heavy DMEM medium for at least 10 days to facilitate complete incorporation of the heavy lysine and arginine. NaAsO2 treatment and sample preparation GM00637 cells, at a density of ~ 7×105 cells/mL in light or heavy DMEM medium, were treated with 5 μM NaAsO2 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 24 hr. The cells were subsequently harvested by centrifugation at 300 g at 4C for 5 min, and washed for three times with ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed with CelLyticTM M lysis buffer (Sigma) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The resulting cell lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 g at 4C for 30 min and supernatant collected. The protein concentration in the cell lysate was measured using Quick StartTM Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). In forward SILAC, the lysate of light labeled, arsenite-treated cells and that of the heavy labeled, control cells were combined at 1:1 ratio (w/w), and the labeling and arsenite treatment were reversed in the reverse SILAC experiment (Fig. 1a). SDS-PAGE separation and in-gel digestion The above equi-mass mixture of light and heavy lysates was separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE with a 4% stacking gel and stained with Coomassie blue. The gel was cut into 20 slices, and the proteins were reduced in-gel with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma), and digested at 37C overnight with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100. Following the digestion, peptides were extracted from the gels with 5% acetic acid in H2O and then with 5% acetic acid in CH3CN/H2O (1:1, v/v). The resulting peptide mixtures were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at –80°C until further analysis. LC-MS/MS for protein identification and quantification On-line LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY n-LCII HPLC system and a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo, San Jose, CA), as described previously.13 Briefly, the sample injection, enrichment, desalting, and HPLC separation were conducted automatically on a homemade trapping column (150 µm×40 mm) and a separation column (75 µm×200 mm, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin, 3 µm in particle size and 100 Å in pore size, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). The peptide mixture was loaded onto the trapping column with a solvent mixture of 0.1% formic acid in CH3CN/H2O (2:98, v/v) at a flow rate of 3.0 µL/min, and subsequently separated with a 120-min linear gradient of 2-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 220 nL/min. All tandem mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent scan mode. The full-scan mass spectra (from m/z 350 to 2000) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to a target value of 500,000. The twenty most abundant ions found in MS at a threshold above 500 counts were selected for fragmentation by low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap component of the instrument at a normalized collision energy of 35%. The same samples were also analyzed on the same instrument using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), which was performed by choosing the ten most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell, where an activation time of 0.1 ms, an isolation window of 2.5 Da, and a normalized collision energy of 40% were used.  The resolution for the HCD spectra was set to 7500 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
Data processing The above LC-MS/MS data acquired from both low-energy CID and HCD were employed for the identification and quantification of the global proteome, which were conducted using Maxquant, Version 1.2.0.18 14 against UniProt human database (with 538,585 sequence entries, release date: 2012.11.28) to which contaminants and reverse sequences were added. The maximum number of miss-cleavages for trypsin was two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The tolerances in mass accuracy for MS and MS/MS were 25 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides being discovered from LC-MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified. Proteins with significant changes in SILAC experiments were determined by a combination of ratio and ratio significance calculated by MaxQuant normalization under the assumption that the median of all log-transformed ratio is zero.14 The required false-positive discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels, and the minimal required peptide length was 6 amino acids. SILAC experiments were conducted in three biological replicates, including two forward and one reverse SILAC labelings. To establish the threshold ratios for determining the significantly changed proteins, we calculated the standard scores (z-scores) for protein ratios as described by Mann et al.14, 15 Our analysis showed that, at 95% confidence level, those proteins with expression ratios that are greater than 1.20 or less than 0.78 could be classified as significantly changed proteins. To be more stringent, we, however, only considered a protein to be significantly changed if its differential expression ratio (NaAsO2 treated/control) was greater than 1.5 or less than 0.67.

### Publication Abstract
Humans are exposed to arsenic species through inhalation, ingestion, and dermal contact, which may lead to skin, liver, and bladder cancers as well as cardiovascular and neurological diseases. The mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic and carcinogenic effects of arsenic species, however, remain incompletely understood. To exploit the mechanisms of toxicity of As(III), we employed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) together with LC/MS/MS analysis to quantitatively assess the As(III)-induced perturbation of the entire proteome of cultured human skin fibroblast cells. Shotgun proteomic analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer facilitated the quantification of 3880 proteins, 130 of which were quantified in both forward and reverse SILAC-labeling experiments and displayed significant alterations (&gt;1.5 fold) upon arsenite treatment. Targeted analysis on a triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer in multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mode confirmed the quantification results of some select proteins. Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the arsenite-induced alteration of more than 10 biological pathways, including the Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response pathway, which is represented by the upregulation of nine proteins in this pathway. In addition, arsenite induced changes in expression levels of a number of selenoproteins and metallothioneins. Together, the results from the present study painted a more complete picture regarding the biological pathways that are altered in human skin fibroblast cells upon arsenite exposure.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Quantitative proteomics, Silac, Mass spectrometry, Arsenite

### Affiliations
University of California Riverside

### Submitter
Fan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Zhang
University of California Riverside


