### Accession
PXD003736

### Title
Diverse roles of assembly factors revealed by structures of late nuclear pre-60S ribosomal particles

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a highly complex process in eukaryotes, involving temporally and spatially regulated ribosomal protein (r-protein) binding and rRNA remodeling events in the nucleolus, nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Hundreds of assembly factors (AFs), organized into sequential functional groups, facilitate and guide the maturation process into productive assembly branches in and across different cellular compartments. However, the precise mechanisms by which these AFs function are largely unknown. Here, we use cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), to characterize the structures of yeast nucleoplasmic pre-60S particles affinity-purified using the epitope-tagged AF Nog2. Our data pinpoint the locations and determine the structures of over 20 AFs, which are enriched in two areas, an arc region extending from the central protuberance (CP) to the polypeptide tunnel exit (PTE), and the domain including the internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) that separates 5.8S and 25S rRNAs. These structural data suggest that the arc-located factors might function to chaperone formation of RNA helices found in the active sites of the subunit, including helices from the CP, peptidyl-transferase center (PTC) and intersubunit bridge. In particular, two regulatory GTPases, Nog2 and Nog1, act as hub proteins to interact with multiple, distant AFs and functional rRNA elements, manifesting their critical roles in structural remodeling checkpoints and nuclear export. Moreover, our snapshots of compositionally and structurally different pre-60S intermediates provide essential mechanistic details for three major remodeling events before nuclear export: rotation of the 5S RNP, construction of the active center, and ITS2 removal. Therefore, our structures provide a framework to understand the molecular roles of diverse AFs, and potentially the atomic information therein constitutes a resource to generalize principles governing the elusive functions of nuclear RNA-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitated sample containing ~10 μg total proteins was incubated with BS3 or DSS at 1:1 (w/w) protein-to-cross-linker ratio at RT for 1 hr before the cross-linking reaction was quenched with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then precipitated with acetone, dissolved in 20 ul 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, and digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. LC-MS/MS analyses of the digested samples were carried out on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 10 cm analytical column packed with 1.8 μm, 120 Å UHPLC-XB-C18 resin (Welch Materials Inc., Shanghai, China) over a 110-min linear gradient made with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade acetonitrile) as follows: 0-3 min, 0-5% B; 3-93 min, 5%-30% B; 93-100 min, 30-80% B; 100-110 min, 80% B. The flow rate was set to 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS1 event at resolution 70,000 followed by ten HCD MS2 events at resolution 17,500. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s. Precursors with a charge state of +1, +2, or unassigned were rejected. Three analytical replicates were performed for both BS3- and DSS-cross-linked samples. An additional LC-MS/MS analysis was performed for identification of proteins in the sample.

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins in the sample, the MS data were then searched against an S. cerevisiae protein database using ProLuCID (Xu, et al., 2006). After filtering the ProLuCID search results using DTASelect2 (Tabb, et al., 2002), a database containing the sequences of 264 proteins was constructed for pLink search. Cross-linked peptides were identified using this database and the pLink software (Yang, et al., 2012), and the results were filtered by requiring FDR < 0.05, E-value < 0.0001, and spectral count ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome biogenesis is a highly complex process in eukaryotes, involving temporally and spatially regulated ribosomal protein (r-protein) binding and ribosomal RNA remodelling events in the nucleolus, nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Hundreds of assembly factors, organized into sequential functional groups, facilitate and guide the maturation process into productive assembly branches in and across different cellular compartments. However, the precise mechanisms by which these assembly factors function are largely unknown. Here we use cryo-electron microscopy to characterize the structures of yeast nucleoplasmic pre-60S particles affinity-purified using the epitope-tagged assembly factor Nog2. Our data pinpoint the locations and determine the structures of over 20 assembly factors, which are enriched in two areas: an arc region extending from the central protuberance to the polypeptide tunnel exit, and the domain including the internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) that separates 5.8S and 25S ribosomal RNAs. In particular, two regulatory GTPases, Nog2 and Nog1, act as hub proteins to interact with multiple, distant assembly factors and functional ribosomal RNA elements, manifesting their critical roles in structural remodelling checkpoints and nuclear export. Moreover, our snapshots of compositionally and structurally different pre-60S intermediates provide essential mechanistic details for three major remodelling events before nuclear export: rotation of the 5S ribonucleoprotein, construction of the active centre and ITS2 removal. The rich structural information in our structures provides a framework to dissect molecular roles of diverse assembly factors in eukaryotic ribosome assembly.

### Keywords
Pre-60s ribosome, Cryo-em, Assembly factors, Cxms

### Affiliations
National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, Beijing, China.
National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing.

### Submitter
Luyao Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Meng-Qiu Dong
National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, Beijing, China.


