### Accession
PXD007984

### Title
Composition of Arabidopsis RNA exosomes having incorporated wild type or mutated myc-tagged RRP41 proteins

### Description
RRP41 is one of the nine subunits constituting the core complex of the eukaryotic RNA exosome. Data presented here allowed a proteomic characterization of the interactome of wild type or mutated myc-tagged RRP41 proteins incorporated into the RNA exosome. Flowers from myc-tagged RRP41 expressing lines were used to affinity purify RNA exosomes, which were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Non-transgenic Arabidopsis lines of Col-0 accession were used in mock-immunoprecipitation experiments as negative controls.

### Sample Protocol
Mass-spectrometric analysis was carried out as described in Lange, H. et al. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004564 (2014). Samples were eluted from magnetic beads in Laemmli buffer, precipitated with 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol, and resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After reduction and alkylation steps with 5 mM dithiothreitol and 10mM iodoacetamide, respectively, proteins were digested overnight with trypsin 1/25 (w/w). Vacuum dried peptides were dissolved in 15 μl 0.1% formic acid (solvent A). One third of each sample was injected on a NanoLC-2DPlus system (nanoFlex ChiP module; Eksigent, ABSciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) operating in positive mode. Peptides were loaded on C18 columns (ChIP C-18 pre-column 300μm ID x 5mm ChromXP and ChIP C-18 analytical column 75μm ID x 15cm ChromXP; Eksigent) and were eluted using a 5%-40%  gradient of solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) for 60 minutes at a 300 nl/min flow rate. The TripleTOF 5600 was operated in high-sensitivity data-dependent acquisition mode with Analyst software (v1.6, ABSciex) on a 350-1250 m/z range. Up to 20 of the most intense multiply-charged ions (2+ to 5+) were selected for CID fragmentation, with a cycle time of 3.3s (TOP 20 discovery mode).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data were converted to Mascot Generic File format (mgf) and searched against a TAIR 10 database supplemented with a decoy database build from reverse sequences. Data were analyzed using Mascot algorithm version 2.2 (Matrix Science, UK) through ProteinScape 3.1 software (Bruker). Search parameters allowed N-acetylation (protein N-terminal), carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) as variable peptide modifications. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. 2 trypsin mis-cleavages were allowed. Peptide identifications obtained from Mascot were validated with a FDR < 1%. Identified proteins were assessed by the total number of fragmented spectra per protein (spectral count).

### Publication Abstract
The RNA exosome provides eukaryotic cells with an essential 3'-5' exoribonucleolytic activity, which processes or eliminates many classes of RNAs. Its nine-subunit core (Exo9) is structurally related to prokaryotic phosphorolytic exoribonucleases. Yet, yeast and animal Exo9s have lost the primordial phosphorolytic capacity and rely instead on associated hydrolytic ribonucleases for catalytic activity. Here, we demonstrate that Arabidopsis Exo9 has retained a distributive phosphorolytic activity, which contributes to rRNA maturation processes, the hallmark of exosome function. High-density mapping of 3' extremities of rRNA maturation intermediates reveals the intricate interplay between three exoribonucleolytic activities coordinated by the plant exosome. Interestingly, the analysis of RRP41 protein diversity across eukaryotes suggests that Exo9's intrinsic activity operates throughout the green lineage, and possibly in some earlier-branching non-plant eukaryotes. Our results reveal a remarkable evolutionary variation of this essential RNA degradation machine in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Rna degradation, Rrp41, Arabidopsis, Rna exosome

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du CNRS Université de Strasbourg 12 rue du Général Zimmer 67084 Strasbourg Cedex France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Gagliardi Dominique
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du CNRS Université de Strasbourg 12 rue du Général Zimmer 67084 Strasbourg Cedex France


