### Accession
PXD028272

### Title
Isolation and identification of extracellular matrix proteins from oil-based CASPERized mouse brains for matrisomal analysis

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) components present within all tissues and organs help to maintain the cytoskeletal architecture and tissue morphology. Although the ECM plays a role in cellular events and signaling pathways, it has not been well studied due its insolubility and complexity. Brain tissue has a higher cell density and weaker mechanical strength than other tissues in the human body. When removing cells using a general decellularization method to produce scaffolds and obtain ECM proteins, various problems must be considered because tissues are easily damaged. To retain the brain shape and ECM components, we performed decellularization in combination with polymerization. We immersed mouse brains in oil for polymerization and decellularization via O-CASPER (Oil-Based Clinically and Experimentally Applicable Acellular Tissue Scaffold Production for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine) and then isolated ECM components using sequential matrisome preparation reagents (SMPRs), namely, RIPA, PNGase F, and concanavalin A. Adult mouse brains were preserved with our decellularization method. Western blot and LC-MS/MS analyses revealed that ECM components, including collagen and laminin, were isolated more efficiently from decellularized adult mouse brains than from embryonic and neonatal mouse brains using SMPRs. Our method will be useful to obtain matrisomal data and perform functional studies using adult mouse brains and other tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue was collected from mice at E18.5, P1, P5, and/or 12 weeks of age. Briefly, brain tissues were incubated in a hydrogel monomer solution containing 20% acrylamide, 0.1% bis-acrylamide, 0.25% 2,2′-azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl) propane] dihydrochloride (VA-044), which is a polymerization initiator, and 0.01% sodium azide prepared in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 2 h at 4°C with gentle shaking. For O-CASPERization, hydrogel-infused brains were polymerized for 2 h at 37°C in corn oil (Merck) using the X-Clarity Polymerization system (Logos Biosystems, Korea) followed by shaking at 37°C in 4% SDS solution. After polymerization and washing with deionized water overnight at room temperature, the polymerized brains were placed in an electrophoretic tissue decellularization chamber and incubated under a current of 1.2 A at 37°C for an appropriate duration depending on their size. To isolate the ECM, brains decellularized by CASPER or O-CASPER were homogenized with 1% RIPA or 3 M urea buffer containing a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher) and then incubated at 4°C for 24 h or boiled for 2 h, respectively. After centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C, supernatants were collected and desalted with spin desalting columns (Pierce). Only desalted samples were used for subsequent experiments. RIPA lysates were supplemented with PNGase F and incubated at 37°C for 4 h. Lysates obtained using a combination of RIPA and PNGase F were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. To enrich ECM proteins, concanavalin A was pulled down using a Glycoprotein Isolation Kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples containing 1–1.5 mg of total protein were diluted 4:1 with 5× Binding/Wash Buffer stock solution and added to a column of a collection tube. After repeated centrifugation and washing, eluted samples were collected and stored for subsequent analyses. The gel was destained and bands were excised and processed. Briefly, protein bands were divided into 10 mm sections and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The tryptic digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using the Thermo Scientific Easy Nano LC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system equipped with an autosampler using an Acclaim PepMap™ 100 reversed-phase peptide trap (inner diameter, 75 μm; length, 2 cm) and a PepMap™ RSLC C18 reversed-phase analytical column (inner diameter, 75 μm; length, 15 cm; particle size, 3 μm), both of which were purchased from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse database using Proteome Discoverer Sorcerer 2.2 with the SEQUEST-based search algorithm. Comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4 Q+S.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) components present within all tissues and organs help to maintain the cytoskeletal architecture and tissue morphology. Although the ECM plays a role in cellular events and signaling pathways, it has not been well studied due its insolubility and complexity. Brain tissue has a higher cell density and weaker mechanical strength than other tissues in the body. When removing cells using a general decellularization method to produce scaffolds and obtain ECM proteins, various problems must be considered because tissues are easily damaged. To retain the brain shape and ECM components, we performed decellularization in combination with polymerization. We immersed mouse brains in oil for polymerization and decellularization via O-CASPER (Oil-based Clinically and Experimentally Applicable Acellular Tissue Scaffold Production for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine) and then isolated ECM components using sequential matrisome preparation reagents (SMPRs), namely, RIPA, PNGase F, and concanavalin A. Adult mouse brains were preserved with our decellularization method. Western blot and LC-MS/MS analyses revealed that ECM components, including collagen and laminin, were isolated efficiently from decellularized mouse brains using SMPRs. Our method will be useful to obtain matrisomal data and perform functional studies using adult mouse brains and other tissues.

### Keywords
Brain, Profiling, O-casper, Decellularization, Ecm

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Research Group of Developmental Disorders and Rare Diseases, Korea Brain Research Institute (KBRI), Daegu 41062, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sung-Jin Jeong
Research Group of Developmental Disorders and Rare Diseases, Korea Brain Research Institute (KBRI), Daegu 41062, Republic of Korea


