### Accession
PXD017415

### Title
Isobaric labeling strategy utilizing 4-plex N, N-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) tags reveals proteomic changes induced by chemotherapy-related neurotoxicity in cerebrospinal fluid of children

### Description
Using mass spectrometry for protein identification and quantification in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is at the forefront of research efforts to explore the pathophysiology biomarkers for the early diagnosis and prognosis of neurologic disorders. Here we implemented 4-plex N, N-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) isobaric labeling reagents in a longitudinal study to quantify CSF proteins from children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-cell ALL) undergoing chemotherapy. Results from this study identified differentially expressed proteins in CSF samples collected from week 5, week 10-14 and week 24-28 compared with samples before Chemo treatment. 84 proteins were significantly altered while Gene Ontology analysis revealed their involvement in various biological processes associated with neurologic disorders. Results from this study will be helpful for monitoring central nervous system (CNS)-specific proteins and developing preventive strategies for CNS injury in response to Chemo.

### Sample Protocol
For each individual, CSF was collected before and at week 5, 10-14 and 24-28 during Chemo. Equal amounts of protein were subjected to in-solution digestion, labeled with 4-plex DiLeu, respectively and combined for sample clean-up with SCX SpinTips. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and raw data was searched in Proteome Discoverer for protein identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification were conducted through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched against the Uniprot H. sapiens reviewed database (August, 2016; 20152 entries) using the Sequest HT algorithm.Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated based on q-values set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using Percolator. Quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a reporter ion integration tolerance of 20 ppm for the most confident centroid. Peptide spectral matches with all four channels present were considered valid for quantification. Reporter ion intensities summed from three technical replicates were normalized by total peptide amount. Proteins with at least one unique peptide were considered valid matches if identified in at least five biological replicates in each group to allow for quantitative comparison across different groups.

### Publication Abstract
The use of mass spectrometry for protein identification and quantification in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is at the forefront of research efforts to identify and explore biomarkers for the early diagnosis and prognosis of neurologic disorders. Here we implemented a 4-plex <i>N</i>,<i>N</i>-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) isobaric labeling strategy in a longitudinal study aiming to investigate protein dynamics in children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-cell ALL) undergoing chemotherapy. The temporal profile of CSF proteome during chemotherapy treatment at weeks 5, 10-14, and 24-28 highlighted many differentially expressed proteins, such as neural cell adhesion molecule, neuronal growth regulator 1, and secretogranin-3, all of which play important roles in neurodegenerative diseases. A total of 63 proteins were significantly altered across all of the time points investigated. The most over-represented biological processes from gene ontology analysis included platelet degranulation, complement activation, cell adhesion, fibrinolysis, neuron projection, regeneration, and regulation of neuron death. We expect that results from this and future studies will provide a means to monitor neurotoxicity and develop strategies to prevent central nervous system injury in response to chemotherapy in children.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Csf proteomics, Isobaric labeling

### Affiliations
Lingjun Li Lab, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Qinying Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Lingjun Li Lab, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


