### Accession
PXD023214

### Title
Proteomics analysis of fermentation broth under different nitrogen sources in Starmerella bombicola

### Description
S. bombicola was fermented under two different nitrogen sources (yeast extract or ammonium sulfate). The fermentation broth after 7 days’ cultivation was taken for extracellular proteins analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After the test product is reduced and alkylated, trypsin (mass ratio 1:50) is added, and it is enzymatically hydrolyzed at 37℃ for 20 hours. The enzymatic hydrolysis product was desalted and lyophilized, re-dissolved in 0.1% FA solution, and stored at -20℃ until use.

### Data Protocol
Solution A is an aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid, solution B is an aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (84% acetonitrile). After the chromatographic column is equilibrated with 95% A liquid, the sample is loaded onto the Trap column by the autosampler.

### Publication Abstract
The non-pathogenic yeast <i>Starmerella bombicola</i> CGMCC 1576 is an efficient producer of sophorolipids (SLs). The lactonic SLs are mainly produced with yeast extract, and the acidic SLs are mainly produced with ammonium sulfate. Naturally produced SLs are a mixture of various lactonic and acidic SLs. Usually, the SL mixture is not well separated technically, and the separation cost is relatively high. In order to reduce the cost of separation, four secreted aspartic protease-like proteins were identified through proteomic analysis of fermentation broth of <i>S. bombicola</i> under different nitrogen source conditions. The coding genes of the four proteins, namely, <i>sapl1</i>, <i>sapl2</i>, <i>sapl3</i>, and <i>sapl4</i>, are of high sequence similarity (above 55%) and included in a gene cluster. The expression of the four genes was significantly upregulated on (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> compared with that on yeast extract. The four genes were deleted together to generate a strain &#x394;<i>sapl</i>. The titer of SLs in &#x394;<i>sapl</i> reached 60.71 g/L after 5 days of fermentation using (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> as the nitrogen source and increased by 90% compared with the wild-type strain. The concentration of acidic SLs was 55.84 g/L, accounting for 92% of the total SLs. The yield of SLs from glucose (g/g) by &#x394;<i>sapl</i> was 0.78, much higher than that by wild-type strain (0.47). However, no increase of SLs production was observed in &#x394;<i>sapl</i> under yeast extract condition. Compared with that of the wild-type strain, the expression levels of the key genes for SLs synthesis were all upregulated to varying degrees in &#x394;<i>sapl</i> under (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> conditions, and particularly, the expression level of <i>ugta1</i> encoding UDP glucosyltransferase was upregulated by 14.3-fold. The results suggest that the <i>sapl</i> gene cluster is negatively involved in the production of SLs in the case of (NH<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> by restraining the expression of the key genes involved in SLs synthesis. The &#x394;<i>sapl</i> strain is an excellent producer of high-titer and high-yield acidic SLs.

### Keywords
Nitrogen sources, Proteomics, Starmerella bombicola

### Affiliations
Shandong University
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, China

### Submitter
Jun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Song Xin
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, China


