### Accession
PXD006713

### Title
Quantitative analysis of proteome reveals the roles of Rpd3 and Sir2 in asexual development, virulence and multiple stress responses in Beauveria bassiana.

### Description
Lysine acetylation is one of the most prevalent post-translational modifications and has since been found to regulate histone functions and affect chromatin structure and gene expression. Here, we charactered Rpd3, a histone deacetylase of Beauveria bassiana, played important roles in the deacetylation of histone H3 and H4. We unveil the role of Rpd3 in asexual development and show that a ΔRpd3 mutant strain has severe growth defects and is defective in conidiophores and blastospores development. Proteomic analyses indicated that Rpd3 functions in asexual development and virulence and multiple stress responses via broad genetic pathways in B. bassiana. Therefore, we conclude that BbRpd3 is vital for asexual development, virulence and multiple stress responses in Beauveria bassiana.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  The wild-type strain B. bassiana ARSEF 2860 (designated WT) and its Δrpd3 mutant were cultivated in SDAY. After 4 days of incubation at optimal 25ºC in a light/dark cycle of 12:12 h, hyphal cultures from the control and treatments were separately ground in liquid nitrogen, suspended in a lysis buffer [8 M urea,50 mM Tris 8.0, 1% NP 40, 1% NaDOC (sodium deoxycholate), 2mM EDTA, 5mM DTT(DL-dithiothreitol), 30 mM NAM (nicotinamide),3μm TSA(trichostatin A), 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, P8215, for use with fungal extracts), and and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Solarbio, P1260)]and sonicated three times on ice under the action of a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). After10 min centrifugation by 20,000g at 4°C, the unbroken cell and debris was discarded, and the proteins concentration in supernatant was determined with a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare Bioscience, Shanghai, China). The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 45min at 30°C, alkylated with 30 mM IAM (iodoacetamide) for 1 h at room temperature in darkness, and then precipitated with quintuple ice-cold acetone overnight. Then the precipitate was washed with acetone three times. Finally, trypsin was added to the solution at the trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first overnight digestion and of 1:100 for the second 4h digestion.  TMT Labeling and HPLC Fractionation The digestion was terminated with 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid, Sigma-Aldrich), and the resulting peptide was cleaned with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex), followed by vacuum drying. The resultant peptides (2mg per sample) were reconstituted in 120 μl 0.5 M TEAB and treated with a TMT six plex label reagent kit (Pierce). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (5mg) was thawed and reconstituted in 420μl ACN (acetonitrile). Subsequently, four reconstituted samples was mixed separately with four TMT reagent (126, 128, 129, 131), incubated for 2h at room temperature and vacuum-dried. Finally, the labeled sample was resuspended in water and mixed. In total 8 mg label peptides, 7.84 mg was fractionated into 8 fractions for acetylation enrichment. The other 160 μg was fractionated into 20 fractions for proteome analysis. Both fractionation was performed with a Waters XBridge Shield C18 RP column (Waters, Shanghai, China) in a LC20AD HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Quantitative proteome analyses by LC-MS/MS Peptides were separately dissolved in solvent A [0.1%FA(formic acid) in H2O]and then loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap 100C18 trap column (Dionex, 75μm×2cm) by Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC (Dionex) and eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (Dionex, 75μm×25cm). The gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN)increased from 2% to 10% over6 min, 10% to 20% in45 min, climbed to 80% in 2 min and then held at 80% for the last 4min,all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluted peptides were subjected to a NanoSpray Ionization (NSI) source, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. Each of intact peptides was detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected and fragmented with 28% NCE(normalized collision energy) for MS/MS analyses respectively. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A peptide data-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20(proteome) MS/MS scans to collect top N precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5E4 or 2.5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15 s dynamic exclusion at an electro spray voltage of 2.0 kV, respectively. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, and 1E5 or 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan ranged from 350 to 1500Da.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative and bioinformatic analyses of the Rpd3-reduced proteome The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the B. bassiana proteome database (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000002762) concatenated with reverse decoy database.All the other parameters were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75. The relative changes in protein abundance and Lys acetylation level were quantified as previously described. Briefly, only unique peptides were adopted for the protein quantification. Mascot (proteome) or MaxQuant (acetylome) software was used to calculate the intensity ratios of the TMT reporter ion (IRRI), which indicated the relative abundance of proteins in each sample. The reliability of the two biological repeats was analyzed by calculating the multivariate Pearson’s correlation coefficients. For each protein, the average IRRI values were calculated from the two replicates as the relative abundance in the indicated treatment. Then, Student’s t-test was applied to evaluate the significance of changes in protein abundance between the wild-type and Δrpd3 strains using the threshold of p value <0.05. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed when the fold change was above the high range (1.50) or below the low range (0.67). To evaluate the functional distribution of the differently regulated proteins, the protein annotation (threshold p value <0.05) were determinedusing diverse categories, such as GO terms, subcellular localization, Functional Catalogue, KEGG pathway, Kac motif and functional enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Rpd3 is a class I histone deacetylase that reverses lysine acetylation thus influencing cellular processes and functions. However, its role in fungal insect pathogens has not been explored yet. Here we show that Rpd3-dependent lysine modification and gene expression orchestrate growth, conidiation and virulence in Beauveria bassiana. Deletion of Rpd3 resulted in severe growth defects on various carbon/nitrogen sources, 97% reduction in conidiation capacity and drastic attenuation in virulence. These phenotypes concurred with differential expression of 1479 proteins and hyperacetylation or hypoacetylation of 2227 lysine residues on 1134 proteins. Many of these proteins fell into carbon/nitrogen metabolism and cell rescue/defence/virulence, indicating vital roles of Rpd3-dependent protein expression and lysine modification in the fungal growth and virulence. Intriguingly, lysine residues of four core histones (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) and many histone acetyltransferases were also hyper- or hypoacetylated in &#x394;rpd3, suggesting direct and indirect roles for Rpd3 in genome-wide lysine modification. However, crucial development activators were transcriptionally repressed and not found in either proteome or acetylome. Single/double-site-directed H3K9/K14 mutations for hyper/hypoacetylation exerted significant impacts on conidiation and dimorphic transition crucial for fungal virulence. Altogether, Rpd3 mediates growth, asexual development and virulence through transcriptional/translational regulation and posttranslational lysine modification in B. bassiana.

### Keywords
Beauveria bassiana, Sir2, Proteome, Rpd3, Lc-ms/ms.

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China

### Submitter
QING CAI

### Lab Head
Dr Mingguang Feng
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China


