### Accession
PXD005704

### Title
Antigen Presentation Profiling Reveals T-cell Recognition of Lymphoma Immunoglobulin Neoantigens

### Description
Cancer somatic mutations can generate neoantigens that distinguish malignant from normal cells. Such neoantigens have been implicated in response to immunotherapies including immune checkpoint blockade, yet their identification and validation remains challenging. Here we discover neoantigens in human mantle cell lymphomas using an integrated strategy for genomic and proteomic tumor antigen discovery that interrogates peptides presented within the tumor major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules. We applied this approach to systematically identify neoantigen peptides in diagnostic tumor specimens from 17 patients and several cell lines. Remarkably, the discovered neoantigenic peptides were invariably derived from the lymphoma immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy or light chain variable regions. Although we could identify MHC presentation of private germline polymorphic alleles, no mutated peptides were recovered from non-Ig somatically mutated genes. The immunoglobulin variable region somatic mutations were almost exclusively presented by MHC-II. We found T-cells specific for an immunoglobulin-derived neoantigen in the blood of a patient using MHC-II tetramers, and these T-cell clones expanded in frequency following tumor vaccination. These results demonstrate that an integrative approach combining MHC isolation, peptide identification and exome sequencing is an effective platform to uncover tumor neoantigens. Application of this strategy to human lymphoma implicates immunoglobulin neoantigens as targets for lymphoma immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-class I peptidomes were extracted from both a Raji wildtype and a Raji transduced cell line with the HLA B*35:01 allele. In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). The precleared lysate was incubated with the pan HLA-A-, B-, and C- antibody W6/32 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted on C18 based StageTips. The isolated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were queried against a Raji-cell line specific database using both SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and PEAKS DB search engines (PEAKS Studio 7) (Zhang et al., 2012). Spectra were also interpreted by de novo sequencing (PEAKS Studio 7) to improve high-confidence peptide identification. For all searches with SEQUEST the msConvert program (v3.0.45) was used to generate peak lists from the original data, and spectra were then assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST (v28.12) algorithm. For all searches with PEAKS the RAW data files were imported into PEAKS and subjected to default data refinement (deisotoping, charge deconvolution, peak centroiding). For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For SEQUEST and PEAKS DB, enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N,Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer somatic mutations can generate neoantigens that distinguish malignant from normal cells. However, the personalized identification and validation of neoantigens remains a major challenge. Here we discover neoantigens in human mantle-cell lymphomas by using an integrated genomic and proteomic strategy that interrogates tumour antigen peptides presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules. We applied this approach to systematically characterize MHC ligands from 17 patients. Remarkably, all discovered neoantigenic peptides were exclusively derived from the lymphoma immunoglobulin heavy- or light-chain variable regions. Although we identified MHC presentation of private polymorphic germline alleles, no mutated peptides were recovered from non-immunoglobulin somatically mutated genes. Somatic mutations within the immunoglobulin variable region were almost exclusively presented by MHC class II. We isolated circulating CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells specific for immunoglobulin-derived neoantigens and found these cells could mediate killing of autologous lymphoma cells. These results demonstrate that an integrative approach combining MHC isolation, peptide identification, and exome sequencing is an effective platform to uncover tumour neoantigens. Application of this strategy to human lymphoma implicates immunoglobulin neoantigens as targets for lymphoma immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Antigen presentation, Ltq orbitrap elite, Mhc class i

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA


