### Accession
PXD002291

### Title
Rice (Oryza sativa) lysine-acetylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification that plays an imporant role in the gene transcription regulation. Here, we report high quality proteome-scale data for lysine-acetylation sites and proteins in rice (Oryza sativa). A total of 1337 Kac sites in 716 Kac proteins with diverse biological functions and subcellular localizations were identified in rice seedlings.

### Sample Protocol
the whole rice seedlings were ground in liquid nitrogen followed by adding 8 M urea supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III (Calbiochem), and HDAC inhibitor (50 mM sodium butyrate, 30 mM nicotinamide, 3 uM trichostatin A). The sample was then sonicated with 12 short bursts (10s per burst) separated by 30-s cooling intervals. The preparations were centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 20,000 g to remove unbroken cells and debris. Then, the proteins were digested with trypsin and enriched with anti-acetyl-lysine agarose beads (catalog no. PTM-104, PTM Biolabs) for lysine acetylation enrichment. The Orbitrap Q Exactive coupled with EASY nLC1000 nanoUPLCsystem (ThermoScientific) was used for the identification.

### Data Protocol
The collected MS/MS data was processed by MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v. 1.4.1.2) against Uniprot__OSjaponica database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and the maximum missing cleavage was set at 3, and up to 4 modifications and 5 charges were allowed in each peptide. Mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) for protein, peptide, and modification site were all specified at 0.01. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. To get high-confident results, Lys-acetylation sites with localization probability < 0.75 or from reverse protein sequences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetyaltion

### Affiliations
PH.D student
Institute of Plant Protection

### Submitter
jun zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Wende Liu
Institute of Plant Protection


