### Accession
PXD012794

### Title
NK cell-derived GM-CSF is critical for enhancing pathological arthritis

### Description
GM-CSF is involved in immune complex (IC)-mediated arthritis. However, little is known about what is the cellular source of GM-CSF and how it is regulated during IC-mediated inflammation. Using novel GM-CSF reporter mice, we show that NK cells produce GM-CSF during an IC-mediated model of inflammatory arthritis. NK cells promoted STIA in a GM-CSF-dependent manner, as deletion of NK cells and selective removal of GM-CSF production by NK cells abrogated disease. Furthermore, we show that myeloid cell activation by GM-CSF is restrained by induction of JAK/STAT checkpoint inhibitor cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein, CIS. Myeloid cells from CIS-deficient mice had exaggerated responses to GM-CSF, and these mice develop exacerbated STIA. Our data suggest that tissue NK cells may amplify joint inflammation in arthritis via GM-CSF production and thus represent a novel target in IC-mediated pathology. Endogenous CIS provides a key brake on signaling through the GM-CSF receptor and strategies that boost its function may provide an alternative anti-inflammatory approach.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils (3 million cells per replicate, n=3 per group) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the SP3 protocol but with some modifications. On bead enzymatic digest (Trypsin/LysC) was performed for 1 hour followed by C18 stage tip clean up. Peptides were analysed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis on a Bruker Impact II QTOF coupled to a Waters MClass HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (October 2016). "Match between runs" and LFQ quantification were selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2.  Statistical analyses were performed using LFQAnalyst (https://bioinformatics.erc.monash.edu/apps/LFQ-Analyst/) whereby the LFQ intensity values were used for protein quantification. Missing values were replaced by values drawn from a normal distribution of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 for each sample (Perseus-type). Protein-wise linear models combined with empirical Bayes statistics were used for differential expression analysis using Bioconductor package Limma whereby the adjusted p-value cutoff was set at 0.05 and log2 fold change cutoff set at 1. The Benjamini-Hochberg method of FDR correction was used.

### Publication Abstract
Despite increasing recognition of the importance of GM-CSF in autoimmune disease, it remains unclear how GM-CSF is regulated at sites of tissue inflammation. Using GM-CSF fate reporter mice, we show that synovial NK cells produce GM-CSF in autoantibody-mediated inflammatory arthritis. Synovial NK cells promote a neutrophilic inflammatory cell infiltrate, and persistent arthritis, via GM-CSF production, as deletion of NK cells, or specific ablation of GM-CSF production in NK cells, abrogated disease. Synovial NK cell production of GM-CSF is IL-18-dependent. Furthermore, we show that cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) is crucial in limiting GM-CSF signaling not only during inflammatory arthritis but also in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), a murine model of multiple sclerosis. Thus, a cellular cascade of synovial macrophages, NK cells, and neutrophils mediates persistent joint inflammation via production of IL-18 and GM-CSF. Endogenous CIS provides a key brake on signaling through the GM-CSF receptor. These findings shed new light on GM-CSF biology in sterile tissue inflammation and identify several potential therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Gm-csf, Neutrophils, Nk cells, Arthritis

### Affiliations
WEHI
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, Huntington Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Souza-Fonseca-Guimaraes
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, Huntington Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia


