### Accession
PXD037434

### Title
The growth, lipid accumulation and adaptation mechanism in response to variation of temperature and nitrogen supply in psychrotrophic filamentous microalga Xanthonema hormidioides (Xanthophyceae)

### Description
Background: Microalgae are promising feedstocks for production of renewable biofuels and value-added bioproducts. Temperature and nitrogen supply are important environmental and nutritional factors affecting the growth and metabolism of microalgae, respectively. In this study, the growth and lipid accumulation of filamentous microalga Xanthonema hormidioides under different temperatures (5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 25, 27 and 30℃) and initial nitrogen concentrations (3, 9, 18 mM) were investigated, and its adaptive mechanisms of tolerance to low temperature and nitrogen stress were analysis by proteomics.  Results: The optimum temperature range for the growth of X. hormidioides was between 15℃ and 20℃, and the algal cells had slow growth rate at 5℃ and could not survive at 30℃. The maximum biomass concentration was 11.73 g L-1 under the temperature of 20℃, and the highest total lipid content was 56.63% of dry weight. Low temperature did not change the fatty acids profiles but promoted the accumulation of unsaturated fatty acids of X. hormidioides. The maximum contents of palmitoleic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid and total fatty acid were 23.64%, 2.49% and 41.14% of dry weight, respectively. Proteomics was performed under three temperature (7、15、25℃), two nitrogen concentrations (3 and 18 mM) and two cultivation times (day3 and 12). A total of 6503 proteins were identified. In the low temperature, photosynthesis related proteins were down-regulation to protect the photosynthetic apparatus. The up-regulation of key enzymes DGAT and PDAT demonstrated the accumulation of TAGs under low nitrogen treatment. The proteins related to ribosome, phosphatidylinositol signaling system, antioxidant system and cold shock proteins (CSPs) in X. hormidioides were co-up-regulate under the treatment of low temperature, which can alleviate the damages induced by temperature stress and maintain the normal growth and metabolism of algal cells. Conclusions: X. hormidioides is a psychrotolerant microalga. It is an oleaginous filamentous microalga containing hyper palmitoleic acid and a certain amount of eicosapentaenoic acid with great potential for biofuel development, as well as for applications in nutritional health products and other industries.

### Sample Protocol
Algal samples lysis and protein extraction were performed using SDT (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) method [137]. The protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA), and was then digested by trypsin according to Matthias Mann [138]. The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges, and labeled using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) according to the manufacturer’s protocol of Thermo Scientific.  Labeled peptides from different culture samples were mixed, and fractionated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMapa100) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column) via a linear gradient elution of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was operated in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data was collected using a data-dependent top 10 method to dynamically choose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation.   For protein identification and quantitation analysis, the MS raw data for each sample was performed using the MASCOT 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. Differential expression with ratio 1.2 (P-value < 0.05) was defined as upregulation, that with ratio 0.83 (P-value < 0.05) as downregulation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psychrotrophic microalgae; xanthonema hormidioides; lipids accumulation; adaptation mechanism; proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Ecology, Research Center for Hydrobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People’s Republic of China
Jinan University

### Submitter
Baoyan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Chengwu Zhang
Department of Ecology, Research Center for Hydrobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People’s Republic of China


