### Accession
PXD037758

### Title
Essential protein P116 scavenges cholesterol and other indispensable lipids for Mycoplasmas

### Description
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, responsible for approximately 30% of community-acquired human pneumonia, needs to extract lipids from the host environment for survival and proliferation. Here, we report a comprehensive structural and functional analysis of the previously uncharacterized protein P116 (MPN_213). Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy of P116 reveals a homodimer presenting a previously unseen fold, forming a huge hydrophobic cavity, which is fully accessible to solvent. Lipidomics analysis shows that P116 specifically acquires lipids such as phosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. Structures of different conformational states reveal the mechanism by which lipids are scavenged. This finding immediately suggests a way to control Mycoplasma infection by interfering with lipid uptake.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced with TCEP and cysteines alkylated with IAA (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Subsequent proteolytic digests were performed using S-TRAPs (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were further desalted and purified on Isolute C18 SPE cartridges (Biotage, Sweden) and dried in an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany). After solubilization in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ACN/water (95/5, v/v), samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a nanoElute (Bruker, Germany) system, equipped with C18 analytical column (15 cm * 75 µm, particle size: 1.9 µm (PepSep, Denmark)) coupled to a timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany). Samples were loaded directly onto the analytical column with twice the sample pick-up volume with buffer A. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at 60°C with a flow rate of 500 nl/min with the following gradient: 2 to 35% B in 17.8 min, 35 to 95% B in 0.5 min and constant 90 % B for 2.4 min with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile). Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a captive spray ion-source and analysed in DDA-PASEF mode with a cycle time of 100 ms and 4 PASEF-MS/MS events. Spectra were acquired over the mass range from 100-1700 m/z and a mobility window from 0.85-1.3 Vs/cm2

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in FragPipe 18 using MSFragger 3.5 for database searches (Kong et al, 2017). Raw files were recalibrated, search parameters automatically optimized and searched against the combined Uniprot reference proteomes for M. pneumoniae, E. coli and Bos taurus (UP000000808,  UP000000625, UP000162055; obtained 2022-06-23). The database search space was restricted to tryptic peptides with a length of 7-50 amino acids, allowing for up to two missed cleavages and with a minimum of one unique peptide per protein group. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Percolator was used to estimate the number of false positive identifications and the results were filtered for a strict target false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, responsible for approximately 30% of community-acquired human pneumonia, needs to extract lipids from the host environment for survival and proliferation. Here, we report a comprehensive structural and functional analysis of the previously uncharacterized protein P116 (MPN_213). Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy of P116 reveals a homodimer presenting a previously unseen fold, forming a huge hydrophobic cavity, which is fully accessible to solvent. Lipidomics analysis shows that P116 specifically extracts lipids such as phosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin and cholesterol. Structures of different conformational states reveal the mechanism by which lipids are extracted. This finding immediately suggests a way to control Mycoplasma infection by interfering with lipid uptake.

### Keywords
P116, Mycoplasma, Timstof

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Biohysics, Frankfurt, Germany Proteomics, Max Planck Institute Brain Research, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian D. Langer
Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Biohysics, Frankfurt, Germany Proteomics, Max Planck Institute Brain Research, Frankfurt, Germany


