### Accession
PXD032314

### Title
Three Diverse Granule Preparation Methods for Proteomic Analysis of Mature Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Starch Grain

### Description
Starch is the primary form of reserve carbohydrate storage in plants. Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a monocot whose reserve starch is organized into compounded structures within the amyloplast, rather than a simple starch grain (SG). The mechanism governing the assembly of the compound SG from polyhedral granules in apposition, however, remains unknown. To further characterize the proteome associated with these compounded structures, three distinct methods of starch granule preparation (dispersion, microsieve, and flotation) were performed. Phase separation of peptides (aqueous trypsin-shaving and isopropanol solubilization of residual peptides) isolated starch granule-associated proteins (SGAPs) from the distal proteome of the amyloplast and the proximal ‘amylome’ (the amyloplastic proteome), respectively. These two rice starch-associated peptide samples were analyzed using nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-HPLC-MS/MS). Known and novel proteins as well as septum-like structure (SLS) proteins in the mature rice SG were found. Data mining and gene ontology software were used to categorize these putative plastoskeletal components as a variety of structural elements, including actins, tubulins, tubulin-like proteins, and cementitious elements like reticulata related-like (RER) proteins, tegument proteins, and lectins. Delineating the plastoskeletal proteome begins by understanding how each starch granule isolation procedure affects observed cytoplasmic and plastid proteins. The three methods described herein show how the technique used to isolate SG’s differentially impacts the subsequent proteomic analysis and results obtained. It can thus be concluded that future investigations must make judicious decisions regarding the methodology used in extracting proteomic information from the compound starch granules being assessed, since different methods are shown to yield contrasting results herein.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation.  The peptides associated with the starch granule surface were collected according to a modified protocol [15,17]. Trypsin-treated granules were centrifuged at 18 000 g for one minute and supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Pellets were washed five times with a 10-fold excess of double-distilled H2O to remove residual water-soluble proteins. Following water washing, proteins remaining on the starch granule surface were extracted by adding 350 μl of 50% (v/v) isopropanol and 50 mM NaCl and gently agitated for 45 minutes at room temperature. The samples were centrifuged at 18 000 g for one minute, and the supernatant was collected. The peptides from both this isopropanol fraction and the previously reserved aqueous supernatant were dried in a Speed Vac (Speed Vac Concentrator model SVC 100H; Savant Instruments Inc., Hicksville, NY, USA). Peptide pellets were resuspended in 40 μl of double-distilled H2O, purified using ZipTips with C18 resin (MilliporeSigma, Bedford, MA, USA) to remove salt and residual starch, and dried in a Speed Vac. Peptides were resuspended in 40 μl of 0.1% formic acid.  Nano-HPLC-MS/MS analyses of peptides.  Aliquots of dry rice starch powders were incubated with proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma- Aldrich) at a ratio of 24 mL:1 mg at 37°C for 18 hours with gentle agitation. The supernatant was collected and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the following protocol. Further aliquots were incubated with 50% isopropanol:50 mM NaCl solution for 45 minutes at room temperature with gentle agitation. The supernatant was collected and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were re-suspended with 25 mL of 1% FA in water and 2 mL were injected into the LC/MS/MS. All experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nanoRLSC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, US). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column (polymicro technology), 15 cm x 70 μm ID, Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, US) employing a water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient. Samples were loaded onto the column for 105 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. Peptides were separated using 2% acetonitrile in the first 7 min and then using a linear gradient from 2 to 38% of acetonitrile for 70 min, followed by gradient from 38 to 98% of acetonitrile for 9 min, then at 98% of acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by gradient from 98 to 2% of acetonitrile for 3 min and wash 10 min at 2% of acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into mass spectrometer using positive electrospray ionization (ESI) at an ion source temperature of 250°C and an ion spray voltage of 2.1 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) were acquired at a resolution of 60 000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion 30 s. The automatic gain control settings were 4e5 for full FTMS scans and 1e4 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision- induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, US) was used for peptide identification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search engine: SEQUEST-HT implemented in Proteome Discovery was applied for all MS raw files. Search parameters were set to allow for dynamic modification of methionine oxidation, acetyl on N-terminus and static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. The search database consisted of a nonredundant/reviewed Oryza sativa ssp. japonica protein sequences in FASTA file format from the UniProt/SwissProt database. The FDR (False Discovery Rate) was set to 0.05 for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Starch is the primary form of reserve carbohydrate storage in plants. Rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i> L.) is a monocot whose reserve starch is organized into compounded structures within the amyloplast, rather than a simple starch grain (SG). The mechanism governing the assembly of the compound SG from polyhedral granules in apposition, however, remains unknown. To further characterize the proteome associated with these compounded structures, three distinct methods of starch granule preparation (dispersion, microsieve, and flotation) were performed. Phase separation of peptides (aqueous trypsin-shaving and isopropanol solubilization of residual peptides) isolated starch granule-associated proteins (SGAPs) from the distal proteome of the amyloplast and the proximal 'amylome' (the amyloplastic proteome), respectively. The term 'distal proteome' refers to SGAPs loosely tethered to the amyloplast, ones that can be rapidly proteolyzed, while proximal SGAPs are those found closer to the remnant amyloplast membrane fragments, perhaps embedded therein-ones that need isopropanol solvent to be removed from the mature organelle surface. These two rice starch-associated peptide samples were analyzed using nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-HPLC-MS/MS). Known and novel proteins, as well as septum-like structure (SLS) proteins, in the mature rice SG were found. Data mining and gene ontology software were used to categorize these putative plastoskeletal components as a variety of structural elements, including actins, tubulins, tubulin-like proteins, and cementitious elements such as reticulata related-like (RER) proteins, tegument proteins, and lectins. Delineating the plastoskeletal proteome begins by understanding how each starch granule isolation procedure affects observed cytoplasmic and plastid proteins. The three methods described herein show how the technique used to isolate SGs differentially impacts the subsequent proteomic analysis and results obtained. It can thus be concluded that future investigations must make judicious decisions regarding the methodology used in extracting proteomic information from the compound starch granules being assessed, since different methods are shown to yield contrasting results herein. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032314.

### Keywords
Starch granule, Plastoskeleton, Septum-like structure (sls), Amyloplast, Starch granule-associated protein (sgap), Starch grain (sg), Rice

### Affiliations
John L. Holmes Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Ottawa
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5

### Submitter
Zoran Minic

### Lab Head
Dr Illimar Altosaar
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5


