### Accession
PXD037356

### Title
Integrated proteomics and phosphoproteomics revealed druggable kinases in neoadjuvant chemotherapy resistant tongue cancer

### Description
Tongue squamous cell carcinoma is characterised by poor prognosis and high metastatic events. Patients with unresectable tumors are benefiting from neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) which surgical resection, and controls distant metastasis, and locoregional recurrence. However, resistance to NACT limit the success of the treatment regimen. In this study, we investigated the altered proteome and phosphoproteome of NACT resistant and sensitive cohort using Mass spectrometry-based proteomics.  We carried out proteomic as well as phosphoproteomic analysis of treatment naïve tongue cancer patients whose response to NACT is recorded. Proteomic analysis revealed distinct protein expression between the responders and non-responders. The Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed kinases and the pathways associated with NACT resistance in tongue cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted and estimated using BCA (Bicinchoninic Acid) protein assay followed by reduction, alkylation, and precipitation of an equal amount of protein from each sample were performed with 100 mM (dithiothreitol) DTT, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and ice-cold acetone. The samples were then digested with trypsin (1:20, Promega) 12–16 h at 37°C and the peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light cartridge (Waters, Catalog # WAT023501). Peptides were labeled with 10 plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tags) labels (ThermoFisher Scientific). The pooled peptides were fractionated by basic pH liquid chromatography, 10% of each fraction were used for global proteome and the remaining 90% of the peptides from each fraction were subjected to IMAC based phosphopeptide enrichment. The peptides were analyzed on Mass spec parameters for Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis: The peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Easy-nLC-1200 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific). (ThermoFisher Scientific). For the mass spectrometry analysis, each fraction was reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid) and loaded on enrichment column (100 μm × 2 cm, Nanoviper) at a flow rate of 3 μl/min. Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, RSLC C18) at a flow rate of 280 nL/min using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% ACN in a 120 min run. The following parameters were used for MS data acquisition: scan range of 350–1,600 m/z at a mass resolution of 120,000, and the MS/MS data were acquired with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z of 400. The data-dependent acquisition was carried out where the most intense precursor ions were detected.

### Data Protocol
The data were then searched against the Human RefSeq protein database (version 81, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using the SEQUEST search algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Search parameters for Proteome Discoverer analysis were as follows: two missed cleavages allowed, trypsin as cleavage enzyme, a tolerance of 10 ppm on precursors, and 0.02 Daltons on the fragment ions. The fixed modification includes carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 10-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine, and variable modification as oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. For the phosphoproteomic analysis, oxidation of methionine; the phosphorylations of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as dynamic modifications. Data were also searched against a decoy database and filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Tongue squamous cell carcinoma is an aggressive oral cancer with a high incidence of metastasis and poor prognosis. Most of the oral cavity cancer patients present in clinics with locally advanced unresectable tumors. Neoadjuvant treatment is beneficial for these individuals as it reduces the tumor size aiding complete resection. However, patients develop therapy resistance to the drug regimen. In this study, we explored the differential expression of proteins and altered phosphorylation in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy resistant tongue cancer patients. We integrated the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of resistant (n = 4) and sensitive cohorts (n = 4) and demonstrated the differential expression and phosphorylation of proteins in the primary tissue of the respective subject groups. We observed differential and extensive phosphorylation of keratins such as KRT10 and KRT1 between the two cohorts. Furthermore, our study revealed a kinase signature associated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy resistance. Kinases such as MAPK1, AKT1, and MAPK3 are predicted to regulate the resistance in non-responders. Pathway analysis showed enrichment of Rho GTPase signaling and hyperphosphosphorylation of proteins involved in cell motility, invasion, and drug resistance. Targeting the kinases could help with the clinical management of neoadjuvant chemotherapy-resistant tongue cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Tongue, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics
Institute of Bioinformatics, India

### Submitter
Irene A George

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Prashant Kumar
Institute of Bioinformatics, India


