### Accession
PXD005164

### Title
OxiTMT -  Quantitative analysis of the cysteine redoxome by iodoacetyl tandem mass tags

### Description
Developpment on a new proteomics analytical tool for the the study of reversible cysteine oxidation by isobaric labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Lbaeling of oxidized fraction and total cysteine content of two samples that are compared to eachother.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Perseus. Data processing consisted of calculating the required ratio and the statistical tests (significance A) used todetermine the significant values.

### Publication Abstract
The redox conditions that reign inside a cell have a determining effect on a number of biological processes. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are key redox players and have been linked to a number of pathologies. They have also been shown to play an important regulating role in cell signaling events. On the proteome level, thiol groups of cysteinyl side chains constitute the major targets of ROS and RNS. A number of analytical techniques based on mass spectrometry have been developed to characterize the cysteine redoxome, often facing a number of technical challenges, mostly related to the lability, heterogeneity, and low abundance of the oxidized forms. Furthermore, any posttranslational modification (PTM) quantification method needs to take the parent protein's expression level into account. While taking all these limitations into consideration, we have developed a quantitative analytical strategy named OxiTMT, based on chemical labeling with iodoacetyl isobaric tandem mass tags (iodoTMT). OxiTMT allowed the generation of quantitative redox data that could be normalized by the protein's expression profile in up to three different conditions. The method was tested on Escherichia coli with or without an oxidative treatment. Results showed the method to be adequate for the analysis of cysteine PTMs with a good coverage of the cysteine redoxome, especially for the low abundant oxidized species. Some of the challenges that face reporter ion quantification of PTMs by mass spectrometry were also assessed. This study serves as a proof of concept of the established protocol and consequent data treatment step. The use of tandem mass tags opens the ways towards the application of the method to the study of tissues and sera. Graphical abstract OxiTMT workflow.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Proteopics, Redox, Tmt

### Affiliations
ESPCI ParisTech
ESPCI Paris, PSL Research University, Spectrométrie de Masse Biologique et Protéomique (SMPB), CNRS USR 3149, 10 rueVauquelin, F75231 Paris cedex05, France.

### Submitter
Shakir Shakir

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle VINH
ESPCI Paris, PSL Research University, Spectrométrie de Masse Biologique et Protéomique (SMPB), CNRS USR 3149, 10 rueVauquelin, F75231 Paris cedex05, France.


