### Accession
PXD031461

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of airway epithelial cells from COPD and control pre- and post-influenza virus infection

### Description
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) collectively refers to chronic and progressive lung diseases causing not fully reversible limitations in airflow. COPD patients are at high risk for severe respiratory symptoms upon influenza virus infection. Airway epithelial cells provide the first-line antiviral defense, but whether their susceptibility and response to influenza virus infection changes in COPD has not been elucidated. Therefore, this study aimed to i) compare the susceptibility of COPD- and control-derived airway epithelium to influenza virus, and ii) assess protein changes during influenza virus infection by quantitative proteomics. Fluorescent stainings confirmed expression of human- and avian-type influenza virus receptors in primary human bronchial epithelial cells (phBECs) from COPD patients (n=4) and controls (n=3) differentiated at the air-liquid interface. Subjects were closely matched in age, sex, and smoking history and, for COPD-derived phBECs, included stage II (n=2), stage III (n=1) and stage IV (n=1). Proteomics of fully differentiated phBECs pre- and post-influenza A virus infection with A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PR8) revealed no significant differences between GOLD stage II/ III COPD (n=3) and control phBECs in terms of flu receptor expression, cell type composition, virus replication, or protein profile pre- and post-infection. In contrast, COPD GOLD stage IV phBECs (n=1) showed a distinct pattern of flu receptor expression and a typical COPD phenotype as assessed by a literature-derived panel of 20 proteins and quantification of cell type composition. Independent of health state, proteomics showed a robust antiviral response to influenza virus infection, as well as upregulation of several novel influenza virus-regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Equal total protein amounts (10µg) of the cell lysate were digested with a modified filter-aided sample preparation procedure using Lys-C and trypsin as proteases and Microcon® centrifugal filters (Sartorius Vivacon 500 30kDa) for buffer exchange and on-filter digest. Approx. 0.5 µg of peptides per sample were measured in a randomized fashion on a Q-ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific) in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode as described previously. Briefly, peptides were automatically loaded on a trap column (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, LC Packings) prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250nl/min flow rate in a 105 minutes non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. Profile precursor spectra from 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at 120000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Subsequently fragment spectra were recorded in 37 overlapping DIA isolation windows of variable size covering in total 300 to 1650 m/z, each at 30000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and a normalized collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
The recorded raw files were analyzed using the Spectronaut Pulsar software (Biognosys) with a peptide and protein identification false discovery rate setting of <1%, using an in-house human spectral library which was generated using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics) and the Swissprot Human database (release 2017_02). Quantification was based on MS2 area levels of all unique peptides per protein fulfilling the percentile 0.25 setting. Normalized protein quantifications were exported and used for calculations of fold-changes and significance values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flu receptor, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), Organotypic, Primary human bronchial epithelial cells, Influenza virus, Proteomics, Airlift, Differentiated

### Affiliations
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Munich
Institute of Lung Health and Immunity and Comprehensive Pneumology Center with the CPC-M BioArchive, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL) - München (Germany)

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Staab-Weijnitz
Institute of Lung Health and Immunity and Comprehensive Pneumology Center with the CPC-M BioArchive, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL) - München (Germany)


