### Accession
PXD016523

### Title
Precise temporal regulation of post-transcriptional repressors is required for an orderly Drosophila maternal-to-zygotic transition

### Description
In animal embryos the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) hands developmental control from maternal to zygotic gene products. We show that the maternal proteome represents over half of the protein coding capacity of the Drosophila melanogaster genome and that 2% of this proteome is rapidly degraded during the MZT. Cleared proteins include the post-transcriptional repressors Cup, Trailer hitch (TRAL), Maternal expression at 31B (ME31B), and Smaug (SMG). While the ubiquitin-proteasome system is necessary for clearance of all four repressors, distinct E3 ligase complexes target them: the C-terminal to Lis1 Homology (CTLH) complex targets Cup, TRAL and ME31B for degradation early in the MZT; the Skp/Cullin/F-box-containing (SCF) complex targets SMG at the end of the MZT. Deleting the C-terminal 233 amino acids of SMG make it immune to degradation. We show that artificially persistent SMG downregulates the zygotic re-expression of mRNAs whose maternal contribution is cleared by SMG. Thus, clearance of SMG permits an orderly MZT.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample of ~300 y w embryos was collected over a period of 1 hour at 22 C , then aged to the desired stage at the same temperature: (1) as early as possible – sample was not aged; The median time of this collection was defined as 0min (2) Cycle 14 – 2 hours and 40 minutes190min; (3) germ-band extension – 5 hours330min; (4) germ-band retraction – 11 630minhours; and (5) trachea filling – 211290min hours. All stages were confirmed by visualizing a random sample of ~ 30 embryos under the stereo microscope (Stemi 2000) in halocarbon 27 oil. The embryos were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen until lysis. The sample was pre-fractionated with a medium pH reverse chromatography. The fractions were analyzed via TMTc+ on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher). The  LC-MS instrument was equipped with Easy nLC 1200 high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump. For each run, peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column, packed first with approximately 0.5 cm of 5µm BEH C18 packing material (Waters) followed by 30 cm of 1.7µm BEH C18 (Waters).  Separation was achieved by applying 6%-30% ACN gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO over 90 min at 350 nL/min at 60 °C. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a microtee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was using the TMTc+ method. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a survey scan ranging from 500-1400 m/z at resolution of 120k (200m/z). 10 most intense ions for CID MS2 fragmentation using the quadrupole. Only peptides of charge state 2+ were included. Dynamic exclusion range was set to 60 seconds with mass tolerance of 10ppm. Selected peptides were fragmented using 32% HCD collision energy, and the resultant MS2 spectrum was acquired using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60k and 0.4 Th isolation window.

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z. Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm v.28 (rev. 12) by searching the data against the appropriate proteome reference dataset acquired from UniProt. This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a Linear Discriminant analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear Discriminant scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Mzt, Drosophila, Development

### Affiliations
Lewis Seigler Institute of Interactive Genomics and Depatment of MOlecular Biology, Princeton University
Princeton University 

### Submitter
Meera Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wuhr
Lewis Seigler Institute of Interactive Genomics and Depatment of MOlecular Biology, Princeton University


