### Accession
PXD036223

### Title
Combined proteomics and CRISPR-Cas9 screens in PDX identify ADAM10 as essential for leukemia in vivo

### Description
Acute leukemias represent deadly malignancies which require better treatment. As challenge, treatment is counteracted by a microenvironment protecting dormant leukemia stem cells. To identify responsible surface proteins, we performed deep proteome profiling on minute numbers of dormant patient-derived xenograft (PDX) leukemia stem cells isolated from mice. Candidates were functionally screened by establishing a comprehensive CRISPR-Cas9 pipeline in PDX models in vivo. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10 (ADAM10) was identified as essential vulnerability required for survival and growth of different types of acute leukemias in vivo and reconstitution assays in PDX models proved the relevance of its sheddase activity. Of translational importance, molecular or pharmacological targeting of ADAM10 reduced PDX leukemia burden, cell homing to the murine bone marrow and stem cell frequency, and increased leukemia response to conventional chemotherapy in vivo. These findings identify ADAM10 as attractive therapeutic target for future treatment of acute leukemias.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched cells (by FACS sorting) were lysed in 0.2 %SDC buffer (0.2%SDC, 10mM Tris pH8.5, 4mM CAA and 1mM TCEP), boiled at 95°C, sonicated for 5mins on a Biorupter plus (Diagenode). Samples were digested with mixture of proteases LysC (1:100 ratio) and Trypsin (1:100 ratio) overnight at 37°C. To the digested peptide volume, five times volume of Isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed to stop the digestion. The peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and once with 0.2% TFA. Purified peptides were eluted twice with 20µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
We used DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) which has the TIMS module incorporated to process the data following previously published recommendation (Demichev V, Nature Comm 2022). DIA-NN was operated with maximum mass accuracy tolerances set to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2 spectra. Library generation was set to FASTA digest for library search, Deep learning based spectra, RT, and IM profiling. Match between run (MBR) was enabled. Quantification mode was set to Robust LC (high precision). The data was searched for proteins and peptides against Uniprot Human (version 2018) fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the levels of protein and peptide. All other settings were left default. Enabled default parameters were: Protease (Trypsin/P), Missed cleavages (1), Maximum number of variable modification (null), peptide length (7-44) and precursor charge range (1-4). The output was filtered at precursor q-value <1% and global protein q-value <1%. When reporting protein numbers and quantities, the Protein.Group column in DIA-NN’s was used to identify the protein group and the PG.MaxLFQ column was used to obtain the normalized quantity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leukemia stem cell, Leukemia, Adam10, Crispr, Dia pasef, Proteome

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling Unit, German Cancer  Research Center, Heidelberg,Germany
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Kumar Jayavelu
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling Unit, German Cancer  Research Center, Heidelberg,Germany


