### Accession
PXD027316

### Title
Sublytic membrane attack complex drives glycolysis and mitochondrial dysfunction with inflammatory consequences in human monocyte-derived macrophages

### Description
The terminal stage of the complement activation pathways, the membrane attack complex (MAC), is upregulated in diabetic and rheumatoid arthritis patients, contributing pathologically by increasing inflammation. Previous research has highlighted that a sublytic dose of MAC can initiate NLRP3 inflammasome activation via calcium influx and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. Here, we show that sublytic concentrations of MAC mediate a previously undescribed perturbation in cellular energy metabolism in human monocyte-derived macrophages, by phenotypic skewing towards glycolysis and upregulation of glycolysis-promoting genes. Sublytic MAC concentrations drive mitochondrial dysfunction, characterised by a fragmented mitochondrial morphology, loss of maximal respiratory response, depleted mitochondrial membrane potential as well as increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production. The consequences of these alterations in glycolytic metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction lead to NLRP3 inflammasome activation, driving gasdermin D formation and IL-18 release. This novel link between sublytic MAC and immunometabolism, with direct consequences for downstream inflammatory processes, is important for development of novel therapeutics for areas where MAC may mediate disease.

### Sample Protocol
hMDMs at 1 million cells/well in 24-well plates were washed in assay media (RPMI-1640 with 2mM L-Glutamine) and treated with sublytic MAC, anti-C7 control or left untreated with assay media for 4 hours. hMDMs were washed in assay media and lysed in the culture plates using a PreOmics kit, and scraped into tubes. Protein quantitation was performed by BCA assay. Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin and then labelled using 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher). Samples were combined to yield two TMT10 labelled sets, each containing one internal reference scaling (IRS) channel. The IRS sample is made by combining equal aliquots of all 18 samples and allows for normalization across the TMT sets. Mixing ratios and labelling efficiency were tested by injecting a small amount of each TMT pool on a QExactive Oritrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The two TMT-labelled pools were fractionated using HILIC manual spin columns (Nest Group, Inc) into 4 fractions. The 4 fractions were dried under vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA in HPLC grade water. Each fraction was separated by nanoflow HPLC (Easy nLC 1000, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) using a C18 PepMap trap column  (2cm x 175µm ID, PepMap C18, 3µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and a 25 cm EasySpray column (PepMap 25cm x 75µm ID, C18, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) with a linear gradient (2-28% MeCN, 0.1% FA) over 240 minutes at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) operated in positive ionisation mode with data dependent acquisition. Full scan spectra were acquired at a scan range of 400 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. The 10 most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter of 2.0 m/z and higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed with a stepped collision energy of 24, 27, 30 V. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 with an AGC target of 5e4 ions and a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification for the total TMT labelled data set was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.0. The reporter ion MS2 type set as TMT10plex; trypsin/P set as the enzyme; fixed modification PreOmics iST-NHS (C); variable modification Oxidation (M); maximum 2 missed cleavages. Searches were conducted using the human Uniprot database. Quantification of proteins uses razor peptides with a minimum count of 2. Contaminants and reverse hits were removed from the data sets prior to analyses. The data were IRS normalised within and across the TMT sets prior to statistical analyses. A total of 2885 proteins were identified of which 1982 were quantified. Statistical analyses were performed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016). Perseus was used for generation of hierarchical clustering of normalized protein intensities (z-score) for significantly regulated proteins (ANOVA permutation=based FDR <0.05) and for the one-way ANOVA, FDR corrected, with post-hoc Tukey’s test (p<0.05 significant for MAC vs untreated and MAC vs AC7) significant proteins from which a list of MAC regulated proteins was generated and used for supplementary tables, panel of proteins of  interest and GO enrichment tests found in proteomics figures  Upregulated and downregulated pathways from proteomics data were obtained using statistical enrichment testing for GO biological processes provided by PANTHER classification system online software (using ID lists with associated expression value z-scores).

### Publication Abstract
The complement system is an ancient and critical part of innate immunity. Recent studies have highlighted novel roles of complement beyond lysis of invading pathogens with implications in regulating the innate immune response, as well as contributing to metabolic reprogramming of T-cells, synoviocytes as well as cells in the CNS. These findings hint that complement can be an immunometabolic regulator, but whether this is also the case for the terminal step of the complement pathway, the membrane attack complex (MAC) is not clear. In this study we focused on determining whether MAC is an immunometabolic regulator of the innate immune response in human monocyte-derived macrophages. Here, we uncover previously uncharacterized metabolic changes and mitochondrial dysfunction occurring downstream of MAC deposition. These alterations in glycolytic flux and mitochondrial morphology and function mediate NLRP3 inflammasome activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine release and gasdermin D formation. Together, these data elucidate a novel signalling cascade, with metabolic alterations at its center, in MAC-stimulated human macrophages that drives an inflammatory consequence in an immunologically relevant cell type.

### Keywords
Qexactive, Lc-ms/ms, Membrane attack complex, Glycolysis upregulation

### Affiliations
GlaxoSmithKline
Discovery Analytical, GSK, Upper Providence, USA

### Submitter
Eleanor Dickinson

### Lab Head
Dr Roland Annan
Discovery Analytical, GSK, Upper Providence, USA


