### Accession
PXD009190

### Title
A 17 kDa fragment of lactoferrin associates with the termination of inflammation and peptides within promote resolution

### Description
During the resolution of inflammation macrophages engulf apoptotic polymorphonuclear cells (PMN) and can accumulate large numbers of their corpses. Here we report that resolution-phase-macrophages acquire the neutrophil-derived glycoprotein lactoferrin (Lf) in vivo and ex vivo and process it to short fragments. During the onset and resolving phases of inflammation in murine peritonitis and bovine mastitis Lf fragments of 15 and 17 kDa occurred in various body fluids, and the murine fragmentation and release were mediated by macrophages. The 17 kDa fragment contained two bioactive tripeptides, FKD and FKE that promoted human macrophage reprogramming to a pro-resolving phenotype. At low concentrations (1-10 M) this was reflected by inhibition of LPS-induced TNFand IL-6 secretion and increased IL-10 levels. Both peptides inhibited ERK and cJun activation following macrophage exposure to LPS. In addition, FKD, and to a lesser extent FKE, promoted neutrophil-mediated resolution at high concentrations (30-100 M) by enhancing the formation of cytokine-scavenging aggregated NETs at low cellular density. Thus, PMN lactoferrin is acquired, processed and

### Sample Protocol
The coomassie-stained bands corresponding to the 15 and 17 kDa fragments of bovine Lf from milk samples were proteomically-analyzed at the Smoler Proteomics Center, The Technion, Israel, according to the following protocol: The proteins in each sample were denatured in 8M urea, reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), and modified with 10mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature for 30 min). The urea was diluted to 2M, and the sample was trypsinized in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (modified trypsin; Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37 ºC. A second step of trypsinization was performed by adding another portion of trypsin and incubation at 37ºC for 4 h. Mass spectrometry was done according to the following protocol: the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 tips (homemade), dried and re-suspended in 50mM Hepes (pH 6.4). Labeling by dimethylation was done in the presence of 100 mM NaCBH3 (Sterogene 1M), by adding light formaldehyde  (35 % Frutarom, 12.3M) to one of the samples, and heavy formaldehyde (20% w/w, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, 6.5M) to the other sample to a final concentration of 200 mM.  After 1 hour incubation at room temperature the pH was raised to 8 and the reaction was incubated for 1 hour. Neutralization was done with 25 mM ABC for 30 min and equal amounts of the light and heavy peptides were mixed, cleaned on C18 and re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 200-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 90 min gradients of 5 to 45% and 15 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.25 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by an ion-trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap, Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (CID) of the 7 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the Sequest 3.31 software (J. Eng and J. Yates, University of Washington and Finnigan, San Jose) searching against the bovine part of the NCBI-NR database. Peptide quantities were calculated as area under the pick using the PepQuant algorithm from Bioworks. Sequences from the identified peptides were aligned relative to full-length Lf using STRAP, Interactive Structure based Sequence Alignment Program (www.bioinformatics.org/strap/), along with pubmed protein database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/).

### Publication Abstract
During the resolution of inflammation, macrophages engulf apoptotic polymorphonuclear cells (PMN) and can accumulate large numbers of their corpses. Here, we report that resolution phase macrophages acquire the neutrophil-derived glycoprotein lactoferrin (Lf) and fragments thereof <i>in vivo</i> and <i>ex vivo</i>. During the onset and resolving phases of inflammation in murine peritonitis and bovine mastitis, Lf fragments of 15 and 17&#x2009;kDa occurred in various body fluids, and the murine fragmentation, accumulation, and release were mediated initially by neutrophils and later by efferocytic macrophages. The 17-kDa fragment contained two bioactive tripeptides, FKD and FKE that promoted resolution phase macrophage conversion to a pro-resolving phenotype. This resulted in a reduction in peritoneal macrophage numbers and an increase in the CD11b<sup>low</sup> subset of these cells. Moreover, FKE, but not FKD, peptides enhanced efferocytosis of apoptotic PMN, reduced TNF&#x3b1; and interleukin (IL)-6, and increased IL-10 secretion by lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages <i>ex vivo</i>. In addition, FKE promoted neutrophil-mediated resolution at high concentrations (100&#x2009;&#xb5;M) by enhancing the formation of cytokine-scavenging aggregated NETs (tophi) at a low cellular density. Thus, PMN Lf is processed, acquired, and "recycled" by neutrophils and macrophages during inflammation resolution to generate fragments and peptides with paramount pro-resolving activities.

### Keywords
Lactoferrin, Resolution of inflammation, Efferocytosis, Macrophages, Netosis

### Affiliations
Haifa University
The Laboratory for Molecular Pathways in the Resolution of Inflammation, The Departments of Biology and Human Biology, University of Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Sagie Schif

### Lab Head
Dr Amiram Ariel
The Laboratory for Molecular Pathways in the Resolution of Inflammation, The Departments of Biology and Human Biology, University of Haifa, Israel


