### Accession
PXD023093

### Title
Uncovering deeply conserved motif combinations in rapidly evolving noncoding sequences

### Description
Here we focus on identifying conserved elements that are required for Chaserr function, a lncRNA that we recently characterized as being essential for mouse viability (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13075-8). Chaserr is highly conserved in different species, and is located in close proximity (<2kb) to the transcription start site of CHD2. It acts in concert with the CHD2 protein to maintain proper Chd2 expression levels. Using the LncLOOM framework we identified AUGG enriched conserved elements which are located in the last exon of mouse Chaserr. In order to identify proteins that potentially bind to these conserved regions, we used in vitro transcription to generate the following biotinylated RNAs; along with their antisense controls: 1) The WT sequence, containing the first 322 nt of the last exon of Chaserr (bases 764–1086 of the NR_037601 isoform). An antisense control fragment was also prepared, labelled as AWT 2) The mutant conserved (MC) sequence, that contained AUGG→UACC mutations in four conserved motifs that were found using LncLOOM. An antisense control fragment was also prepared, labelled as AMC 3) The muatant all (MA) sequence in which all seven of the AUGG sites in the last exon were mutated to UACC. An antisense control fragment was also prepared, labelled as AMA 4) We also included a No Probe Control, which did not contain an RNA fragment.  The fragments were incubated with N2a cell lysates followed by RNA-pulldown and Mass Spec analysis. The experiment was performed in triplicate. A total of 938 proteins were found to associate with the WT sequence: 74 of these were enriched ≥3-fold compared to the antisense sequence.We identified 9 proteins that had ≥2-fold higher recovery when using the WT sequence compared to both mutants. Included in these proteins was DHX36, which showed the highest enrichment compared to the mutated sequences. We validated the association of DHX36 with Chaserr through RNA immunoprecipitation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Templates for in vitro transcription were generated by amplifying synthetic oligos (Twist Bioscience) and adding the T7 promoter to the 5' end for sense sequences and to the 3' end for antisense control sequences.  Biotinylated transcripts were produced using the MEGAscript T7 in vitro transcription reaction kit (Ambion) and Biotin RNA labeling mix (Roche). Template DNA was removed by treatment with DNaseI (Quanta). Neuro2a cells (ATCC) were lysed with RIPA supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, #P8340) + 100 U/ml RNase inhibitor (#E4210-01), and 1 mM DTT for 15 min on ice. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 21130 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (NEB #S1420S) were washed twice in buffer A(NaOH 0.1M and NaCl 0.05M), once in buffer B (NaCl 0.05M) and then resuspended in two tubes of binding/washing (NaCl 1M, 5mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 0.5mM EDTA supplement with PI + 100 U/ml RNase inhibitor, and 1 mM DTT ). One tube of beads was washed three times in RIPA supplemented with PI and DTT 1mM, after which cell lysate was added and pre-cleared with overhead rotation at 4 °C for 30 min. The second tube was equally divided into individual tubes for each RNA probe. 2–10 pmol of the biotinylated transcripts were then added to the respective tubes and rotated overhead at 4 °C for 30 min. The beads were then washed three times in binding/washing buffer, afterwhich equal amounts of the pre-cleared cell lysate was added to each sample of beads and RNA probe. The samples were then rotated overhead at  4 °C for 30 min. Following rotation, the beads were washed three times with high salt CEB (10mM HEPES pH7.5, 3mM MgCl2 , 250mM NaCl, 1mM DTT and 10% glycerol). Proteins were then eluted from the beads in 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 for 10 min in room temperature. Eluted proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi,USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept at−80°C until further analysis.  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Dry digested  samples were dissolved in 97:3% H2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30%B in 55 min, 30% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions.  The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 20sec  and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mouse (Mus musculus) protein database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Revert” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between the experimental groups, across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lncloom, Conserved elements, Chaserr, Lncrnas, Dhx36

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

### Submitter
Caroline Ross

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Ulitsky
Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel


