### Accession
PXD004668

### Title
Interactome of Nematostella GW182 in HEK293 cells

### Description
Here, we dissect the function of GW182 protein in the cnidarian Nematostella, separated by 600 million years from other Metazoa. Using cultured human cells, we show that Nematostella GW182 recruits the CCR4-NOT deadenylation complexes via its tryptophan-containing motifs, thereby inhibiting translation and promoting mRNA decay. Further, similarly to bilaterians, GW182 in Nematostella is recruited to the miRNA repression complex via interaction with Argonaute proteins, and functions downstream to repress mRNA. Thus, our work suggests that this mechanism of miRNA-mediated silencing was already active in the last common ancestor of Cnidaria and Bilateria. Despite this remarkable mechanistic conservation Argonaute and GW182 differentially co-evolved in bilaterians and cnidarians seemingly leading to distinct interaction surfaces.

### Sample Protocol
Protein eluates (triplicates) from GST pull-down were reduced, alkylated and  in solution digested with LysC and Trypsin. Peptides were StageTip purified and desalted. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase chromatography (20cm microcolumn; 8-60% acetonitrile gradient (224 min) with 0.5% formic acid at a nanoflow rate of 250 nl/min). Eluting peptides were directly ionized by electrospray ionization and transferred into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry parameter: data-dependent positive mode, one full scan (m/z range = 300-1,700; R = 70,000; target value: 5 x 106; maximum injection time = 120 ms). Top 10 most  intense ions with a charge state greater than one were selected (R =35, 000, target value = 5 x 105; isolation window = 4 m/z; maximum injection time = 120 ms). Dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis: MaxQuant software v1.5.1.2.,  Andromeda search engine, Database:  decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2014-10) and GST GW182 bait construct seuqneces. Search parameter:  variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length  six amino acids,  maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. Quantification: Label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant: Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification (minimum ratio count of 1). Retention times recalibration,  “Match between runs” option on, maximal retention time window was set to 2 min. Data analysis and statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software. LFQ intensity values were filtered  for a minimum number of data points of 3 in at least one group, missing values were imputed  (width = 0.3; shift = 1.8).  Pull-downs and control were defined as groups of 3 replicates and significantly enriched proteins were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy. Significance corresponding to an FDR of 0.5 was determined by a permutation-based method.

### Publication Abstract
Our current knowledge about the mechanisms of miRNA silencing is restricted to few lineages such as vertebrates, arthropods, nematodes and land plants. miRNA-mediated silencing in bilaterian animals is dependent on the proteins of the GW182 family. Here, we dissect the function of GW182 protein in the cnidarian Nematostella, separated by 600 million years from other Metazoa. Using cultured human cells, we show that Nematostella GW182 recruits the CCR4-NOT deadenylation complexes via its tryptophan-containing motifs, thereby inhibiting translation and promoting mRNA decay. Further, similarly to bilaterians, GW182 in Nematostella is recruited to the miRNA repression complex via interaction with Argonaute proteins, and functions downstream to repress mRNA. Thus, our work suggests that this mechanism of miRNA-mediated silencing was already active in the last common ancestor of Cnidaria and Bilateria.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Hek293, Lc-msms, Gw182

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Proteome Dynamics Group, Max Delbrueck Center, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics Group, Max Delbrueck Center, Berlin, Germany


