### Accession
PXD013532

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the processes leading to Madurella mycetomatis grain formation in Galleria mellonella larvae

### Description
Mycetoma is a neglected chronic and granulomatous infection primarily associated with the fungal pathogen Madurella mycetomatis. Infection is characterised by the formation of fungal grains inside the infected tissue which commonly result in severe deformity and disability. Currently the biochemical processes and interactions between host and pathogen which result in grain formation are  unknown. Furthermore, the infection process in mammals takes months to fully develop. In order to unravel these processes Galleria mellonella larvae were infected with M. mycetomatis and hyphae and grain formation, survival, fungal burden and proteomic responses of larvae were monitored for 10 days.   At 24 h post infection proteins indicative of muscle invasion and humoral immune response activation were enriched in infected larval hemolymph. By 72 h immune related hdd11 was increased  337 fold, heat shock proteins 90 was increased 40 fold and glutathione-S-transferase was increased 25 fold. By 7 days post infection proteins which were associated with grain formation (hdd11 [533 fold], hemocentin [54 fold]) and a range of antimicrobial peptides were enriched. During the 7 day period a variety of proteins were decreased in infected hemolymph (e.g. hexamerin, apolipophorin and cationic peptide CP8). This data also identified 75 M. mycetomatis proteins released into hemolymph during infection.  Proteins were also extracted from M. mycetomatis grains taken from larvae infected for 24, 72 and 7 days. These proteins give an insight into  the interactions between the larval immune response and M. mycetomatis at the cellular levels during infection. These results identify similarities between the infection  processes of M. mycetomatis in G. mellonella larvae and in humans and identify novel proteins from M. mycetomatis which may play a crucial role in grain development.

### Sample Protocol
1) Proteomic response of G. mellonella larval hemolymph to M. mycetomatis The cell free hemolymph was diluted in PBS and protein quantification obtained by Bradford protein assay and protein was acetone precipitatedincipiated (75 μg) overnight by the addition of 3 times total volume of ice cold acetone. Proteins were when subjected to label free quantitative LC-MS/MS.  2) Analysis of the M. mycetomatis grain proteome over time in G. mellonella larvae M. mycetomatis grains were dissected from G. mellonella larvae, washed by centrifugation with PBS and frozen in PBS overnight. Grains were washed twice with PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M Tris-HCl supplemented with protease inhibitors [1 μg/ ml TLCK, Aprotinin, PMSF, leupeptin]), subjected to sonication (3 cycles of 6 x 10 seconds pulses at 20% power) and clarified by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 5 minutes). Protein supernatant concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay and protein was acetone principiated (75 μg) overnight by the addition of 3 times total volume of ice cold acetone. Proteins were subjected to label free quantitative LC-MS/MS.  Label free proteomics workflow Proteins  were analyzed by label free mass spectrometry by standardised protein purification procedures as described [19]. In summary, 0.75 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against the proteome of M. mycetomatis (proteins in hemolymph and grains) obtained from Uniport and the EST contigs of G. mellonella (hemolymph and grain proteins) obtained in house.  Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3 as described [19]. Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of INteracting Genes/Proteins (STRING) [28] v10.5 (http://string-db.org/) was used to map known and predicted protein:protein interactions. UniProt gene lists (extracted from Perseus) were inputted and analysed in STRING using the medium confidence (0.5) setting to produce interactive protein networks for proteins increased and decreased in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Mycetoma is a neglected chronic and granulomatous infection primarily associated with the fungal pathogen Madurella mycetomatis. Characteristic of this infection is the formation of grains. However, the processes leading to grain formation are not known. In this study, we employed a proteomic approach to characterise M. mycetomatis grain formation in Galleria mellonella larvae and map the processes leading to grain formation over time. For this, at 1 day, 3 days and 7 days post-inoculation, proteins from grains and hemolymph were extracted and analysed by label-free mass spectrometry. A total of 87, 51 and 48 M. mycetomatis proteins and 713, 997, 18 G. mellonella proteins were found in grains on day 1, 3 and 7 post-inoculation respectively. M. mycetomatis proteins were mainly involved in cellular metabolic processes and numerous enzymes were encountered. G. mellonella proteins were primarily involved in the nodulation process. The proteins identified were linked to nodulation and grain formation and four steps of grain formation were identified. The results of this proteomic approach could in the future be used to design novel strategies to interfere with mycetoma grain formation and to combat this difficult to treat infection.

### Keywords
Infection, Madurella; galleria, Mini-model, Grain, Proteomics, Immunity, In vivo screening

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


