### Accession
PXD040399

### Title
Systemic LRG1 expression in melanoma is associated with disease progression and recurrence

### Description
Treatment of late-stage melanoma patients with immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) is currently one of the most effective standard therapies. The response rates upon neoadjuvant ICB in stage III melanoma are higher as compared to stage IV disease. Given that successful ICB depends on systemic immune response, we hypothesized that systemic immune suppression might be a mechanism responsible for lower response rates in late-stage disease, and also potentially with disease recurrence in early-stage disease.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay and 600 μg worth of protein was loaded onto a Pierce Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by a 1-hour end-on-end rotating incubation at room temperature. The depleted serum was collected by centrifuging for 2 minutes at 1 000G and each sample was split in two to generate parallel workflow duplicates. A detergent-based buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 10mM Tris, 40 mM chloroacetamide) with Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was added to enhance protein denaturation and boiled for 5 minutes at 95 °C. 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and LysC (Wako, Richmond, VA, USA) at 1:50 and 1:75 enzyme:substrate ratios, respectively. The digestion was quenched with 10% formic acid and the resulting peptides were cleaned-up using Oasis HLB 96-well uElution plates (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The eluate was dried and resolubilized in 1% FA achieving a concentration of 1 μg/ μL.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for OpACIN-neo and stage III/IV cohort samples and Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer with a FAIMS-PRO interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for PRADO samples, operated in data-independent mode (DIA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 50 cm reversed phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 M, 100A, 75 m x 50 cm) for OpACIN-neo and stage III/IV cohort samples and on a 25 cm reversed phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 M, 100A, 75µm x 25cm) for PRADO samples. For OpACIN-neo samples, proteome samples were eluted over a linear gradient ranging from 5-25% acetonitrile over 100 min, 25-100% acetronitrile for 5 minutes, followed by 100% acetonitrile for the final 15 minutes with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. DIA runs consisted of a MS1 scan at 60 000 resolution at m/z 200 followed by 30 sequential quadrupole isolation windows of 20 m/z for HCD MS/MS with detection of fragment ions in the OT at 30 000 resolution at m/z 200. The m/z range covered was 400–1200 and the Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set to 1e6 for MS and 2e5 for MS/MS. The injection time was set to 100ms for MS and ‘auto’ for MS/MS scans. For PRADO samples, proteome samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 60-min gradient, containing a 50-min linear increase from 6% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 10-min wash at 90% solvent B. FAIMS was operated in the standard resolution mode, with additional FAIMS gas flow of 3.5L/min. DIA runs consisted of a MS1 scan at 120 000 resolution at m/z 200 followed by 39 sequential quadrupole isolation windows of 15 m/z for HCD MS/MS with detection of fragment ions in the OT at 30 000 resolution at m/z 200. The m/z range covered was 400–1000 and FAIMS CV was set to -45V. The injection time was set to 45ms for MS and ‘auto’ for MS/MS scans.

### Publication Abstract
In 1989 the Catholic Health Association, in conjunction with the University of Iowa Center for Health Services Research, surveyed chief executive officers (CEOs) of rural hospitals regarding their hospital's viability and strategic behaviors and orientations. An extensive questionnaire was sent to the CEOs of all Catholic, all other religious not-for-profit, and all investor-owned rural hospitals, as well as to a 50 percent random sample of government and other not-for-profit rural hospitals. CEOs on average perceived that their hospital's viability relative to that of other rural hospitals was higher in 1989 than it had been in 1987. Ninety-four percent of hospitals whose CEOs perceived an increase in viability had been medium- or low-viability hospitals two years earlier. Thus, despite reports of deteriorating conditions for rural hospitals, rural hospital CEOs appeared to be relatively optimistic regarding their institution's viability. Changes in strategic direction accompanied these perceived increases in viability. The predominant strategic orientation adopted by rural hospitals in 1987 was that of the defender, but many hospitals that used this approach switched to the analyzer orientation by 1989. Significant shifts also occurred toward the reactor orientation from the analyzer and defender orientations. A greater percentage of hospitals with a perceived increase in viability between 1987 and 1989 altered their organizational role. The most common change for these hospitals was from limited care to basic care.

### Keywords
Checkpoint inhibitor, Lrg1, Melanoma, Serum, Systemic immune suppression

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Oncology and Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Utrecht University
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht


### Submitter
Peter Robert Mosen

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Blank
Department of Molecular Oncology and Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


