### Accession
PXD032218

### Title
MS Analysis In vivo treatment of YAP1 SH tagged with phosphatase inhibitors

### Description
Investigation of YAP1 interactome plasticity via APMS

### Sample Protocol
The expression of YAP1 SH-tagged integrated in T-REx-HEK 293 Flp-In cells was induced with 1 µg/ml tetracycline. After 24 hours, media was replaced with growth media and cells were stimulated with 100 μM and 150nM of Vanadate and Okadaic acid (Biovision) for 2 and 20 minutes, and 60 and 150 minutes, respectively. Pervanadate was freshly prepared by mixing in ice for 20 minutes Na3VO4 (Sigma Aldrich) with H2O2 in a molar ratio 1:5, following the protocol of Huyer et al.50. After stimulation, cells were harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen (three 150mm tissue culture plates at 80% cell confluency). The frozen pellet was lysed with the following buffer (HNN lysis buffer): 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1mM PMSF, 1.2 µM Avidin (IBA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma), using 800 µl of lysis buffer for each lysed cell plate. The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) and digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with 50ml crosslinked Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA) for 1 h on a rotation shaker. Before the incubation with lysate, beads were crosslinked with 5 mM of di-succinimidylsuberate DSS (Thermo) in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl for 30 minutes at 37 °C with strong agitation and quenched with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 37 °C with strong agitation. Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ), following the FASP protocol49. Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8,000 × g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Thermo PepMap RSLC column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 60 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1600 m/z) at 120,000 resolution followed by fifteen MS/MS scans in the Ion Trap. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 2.0 m/z isolation window. Precursors with MS signal that exceeded a threshold of 500 were fragmented (CID, Normalized Collision Energy 35%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates of YAP1 SH tagged purification without stimulation and with vanadate stimulation (2 and 20 minutes) and with okadaic acid stimulation (60 and 150 minutes). To identify YAP1 interactors, we analyzed twelve purification controls with GFP SH tagged. Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine54 against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 10.10.18) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides, maximum one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modification and “match between runs” option. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance were set, respectively, to 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da. False discovery rate of <1% was used at the protein level to infer the protein presence. The protein abundance was determined from the intensity of top two unique peptides for each protein. Interactome definition: high confident interactors of AP-MS experiments were determined by SAINTexpress20 with default parameters using spectral counts obtained from Max Quant analysis (MS/MS Count). Twelve SH-GFP pulldowns processed and measured in parallel with the samples and additional control runs from the CRAPome database (http://crapome.org/55) were used to filter high confidence interactors of YAP1 (SAINT threshold score > 0.90). MS1 quantification of phosphorylated peptides: phosphorylated peptides were filtered based on Andromeda phospho localization probability score (>0.8). Furthermore, phospho-sites that were not detected in all three replicates in at least one condition were filtered out. Phospho-peptide intensities were bait normalized and missing value were imputed with the median of biological replicates (only one missing value per condition) or using random sampling from a normal distribution generated 5% less intense values. MS1 quantification of interactors: LFQ protein intensities of high confidence interactors were bait normalized and missing values were imputed with the median of biological replicates (only one missing value per condition) or using random sampling from a normal distribution generated 5% less intense values. Two sided t test and p values (Benjamini and Hochberg method correction) were computed to compare treated and control groups. Cluster of kinetic profiles for interactors was performed with normalization to unstimulated samples and with a fuzzy cluster algorithm (mfuzzy package, R).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yap1, Phospho, Apms

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry


