### Accession
PXD043731

### Title
TDP-43 forms amyloid filaments with a distinct fold in type A FTLD-TDP

### Description
TDP-43, amyloid, filament, fibril, protein aggregation, neurodegenerative disease, neurodegeneration, dementia, frontotemporal dementia, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, citrullination, methylation, brain

### Sample Protocol
Pronase-treated, sarkosyl-insoluble pellets extracted from 0.1 g of tissue were resuspended in 100 μl hexafluoroisopropanol and incubated at 37°C overnight. The resuspended pellets were then sonicated for 2 min at 50% amplitude (QSonica Q700), followed by incubation at 37°C for 2 h. This sonication and incubation cycle was repeated until all material was visibly resuspended. The resuspended pellets were centrifuged at 166,000 g for 15 min and the supernatant was collected and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Savant). The dried protein samples were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 8M urea and were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with chymotrypsin (Promega) at 25°C overnight. Protease digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min and the supernatants were desalted and fractionated using custom-made C18 stop-and-go-extraction (STAGE) tips (3M Empore) packed with porous oligo R3 resin (Thermo Scientific). STAGE tips were equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile (MeCN) containing 0.5% FA, followed by 0.5% FA. Bound peptides were eluted stepwise with increasing MeCN concentrations from 5-60% MeCN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and partially dried down by vacuum centrifugation (Savant). Fractionated peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped by a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (Waters) using a binary gradient formed of 2% MeCN in 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 80% MeCN in 0.1% FA (buffer B) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were introduced directly via a nanoFlex ion source into an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120K; mass range of 380-1400 m/z; AGC target of 4e5; MaxIT of 50 ms; and dynamic exclusion of 60 s. MS2 analysis was carried out with HCD activation orbitrap detection with a resolution of 15K; AGC target of 5e4; MaxIT of 50ms; NCE of 30%; and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against the human reviewed database (UniProt, downloaded 2019) using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, v2.4). Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. A maximum of three missed chymotrypsin cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as static modification. Methionine oxidation; arginine citrullination and methylation; and asparagine and glutamine deamination were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. MS/MS spectra containing arginine citrullination and methylation were manually confirmed.

### Publication Abstract
The abnormal assembly of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) in neuronal and glial cells characterizes nearly all cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and around half of cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)<sup>1,2</sup>. A causal role for TDP-43 assembly in neurodegeneration is evidenced by dominantly inherited missense mutations in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP-43, that promote assembly and give rise to ALS and FTLD<sup>3-7</sup>. At least four types (A-D) of FTLD with TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP) are defined by distinct brain distributions of assembled TDP-43 and are associated with different clinical presentations of frontotemporal dementia<sup>8</sup>. We previously showed, using cryo-electron&#xa0;microscopy, that TDP-43 assembles into amyloid filaments in ALS and type B FTLD-TDP<sup>9</sup>. However, the structures of assembled TDP-43 in FTLD without ALS remained unknown. Here we report the cryo-electron microscopy structures of assembled TDP-43 from the brains of three individuals with the most common type of FTLD-TDP, type A. TDP-43 formed amyloid filaments with a new fold that was the same across individuals, indicating that this fold may characterize type A FTLD-TDP. The fold resembles a chevron badge and is unlike the double-spiral-shaped fold of ALS and type B FTLD-TDP, establishing that distinct filament folds of TDP-43 characterize different neurodegenerative conditions. The structures, in combination with mass spectrometry, led to the identification of two new post-translational modifications of assembled TDP-43, citrullination and monomethylation of R293, and indicate that they may facilitate filament formation and observed structural variation in individual filaments. The structures of TDP-43 filaments from type A FTLD-TDP will guide mechanistic studies of TDP-43 assembly, as well as the development of diagnostic and therapeutic compounds for TDP-43 proteinopathies.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Brain, Protein aggregation, Filament, Tdp-43, Frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Neurodegeneration, Neurodegenerative disease, Amyloid, Methylation, Frontotemporal dementia, Dementia, Fibril

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK
MRC@Laboratory of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Renren (Heidy) Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Benjamin Ryskeldi-Falcon
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK


