### Accession
PXD034790

### Title
Native holdup (nHU) to measure binding affinities from cell extracts

### Description
Characterizing macromolecular interactions is essential for understanding cellular processes, yet nearly all methods used to detect protein interactions from cells are qualitative. Here, we introduce a native holdup (nHU) approach that requires minimal sample preparation, investigates binding mechanisms, and quantifies equilibrium binding constants of protein interactions from cell extracts. We use nHU coupled with western blotting (nHU-WB) and mass spectrometry (nHU-MS) to explore interactions of SNX27, a cargo adaptor of the retromer complex. We find good agreement between affinities measured using minimal binding fragments and those measured directly from cell extracts using nHU. This challenges the unwritten paradigm stating that biophysical parameters like binding constants cannot be accurately determined from cells or cellular extracts. We discuss the strengths and limitations of nHU and provide simple protocols that can be implemented in most laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion for mass spectrometry The nHU samples were precipitated with TCA 20% overnight at 4°C and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The protein pellets were washed twice with 1 mL cold acetone and air dried. The protein extracts were solubilized in urea 8 M, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Double digestion was performed at 37°C with 500 ng endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Richmond, USA) for 4 h, followed by 4-fold dilution and an overnight digestion with 500 ng trypsin (Promega, Charbonnieres les Bains, France). Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum.  LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Peptide mixtures were injected in 0.1% TFA on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min at 5 µL/min with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and then separated on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 220 nl/min and 38°C with a 90 min linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O), regeneration at 5% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1,500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. (TOP20CID method) Unassigned and single charged states were excluded from fragmentation. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s after one repeat count with mass width at ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on human FASTA database downloaded from SwissProt (reviewed, release 2021_06_03, 20380 entries, https://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C, + 57.021 Da) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%. Label-free quantification was based on the extracted ion chromatography intensity of the peptides. All samples were measured in technical triplicates. The measured extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) intensities were normalized based on median intensities of the entire dataset to correct minor loading differences. For statistical tests and enrichment calculations, not detectable intensity values were treated with an imputation method, where the missing values were replaced by random values similar to the 10% of the lowest intensity values present in the entire dataset. Unpaired two tailed T-test, assuming equal variance, were performed on obtained log2 XIC intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing macromolecular interactions is essential for understanding cellular processes, yet most methods currently used to detect protein interactions from cells are qualitative. Here, we introduce the native holdup (nHU) approach to estimate equilibrium binding constants of protein interactions directly from cell extracts. Compared to other pull-down-based assays, nHU requires less sample preparation and can be coupled to any analytical methods as readouts, such as Western blotting or mass spectrometry. We use nHU to explore interactions of SNX27, a cargo adaptor of the retromer complex and find good agreement between in vitro affinities and those measured directly from cell extracts using nHU. We discuss the strengths and limitations of nHU and provide simple protocols that can be implemented in most laboratories.

### Keywords
Protein interaction, Mass spectrometry, Native holdup

### Affiliations
CNRS
IGBMC,UMR7104, Illkirch

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Gilles Travé
IGBMC,UMR7104, Illkirch


