### Accession
PXD015452

### Title
Multiomics Analyses Reveal Dynamic Bioenergetic Pathways and Functional Remodeling of the Heart During Intermittent Fasting

### Description
Intermittent fasting (IF) reduces cardiovascular risk factors in animals and humans, and can protect the heart against ischemic injury in models of myocardial infarction, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. To delineate molecular perturbations in response to IF, we carried out comprehensive analyses of molecular pathways and biological processes using proteomic and phosphoproteomic data followed by functional analysis of hearts from mice maintained for 6 months on either daily 12- or 16-hour fasting, every-other-day fasting or ad libitum control feeding regimens. IF regimens significantly affected pathways that regulate cyclic GMP signaling, lipid and amino acid metabolism, cell adhesion, cell death and inflammation. Comparison of differentially expressed proteome and transcriptome upon IF showed higher correlation of pathway alternation in early IF regimen, but inverse correlation of metabolic processes such as fatty acid oxidation and immune processes in later IF regimens. Echocardiographic analyses demonstrated that IF enhances stress-induced cardiac performance. In addition to providing a valuable resource, our systemic analyses reveal molecular framework for understanding how IF impacts the function of the heart and its vulnerability to injury and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue sample was crushed in liquid nitrogen prior to lysis with 6M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), 2M thiourea (Invitrogen) and 20mM Hepes. Lysate was collected after centrifugation at 2e4g for 20min at 15C and protein measurement was made using Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific™). 50 μg of protein was used to prepare for each TMT label in a total of two sets of TMT10plex™ set, and samples were assigned to each TMT set by randomization. For reference channel of 126-TMT label, a total of 50 μg protein pooled from the 4 ALs was used. Reduction was performed with final concentration 5mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) incubation for 30min followed by alkylation with final concentration 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min incubation in dark. Digestion was performed using lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals GmbH) with enzyme: protein = 1:100 at 37C overnight. The urea in the lysis buffer was diluted to final concentration of 1M with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by trypsin digestion (Promega) with enzyme: protein = 1:50 at 37C for 8h. Digested peptides were desalted using 1ml Empore C18 cartridges (3M) and mixed with TMT label reconstituted in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 1h. Reaction was quenched using final 5% hydroxylamine (Merck) in triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer (Fluka) for 15min. Labeled peptides were mixed before vacuum-dried and fractionated using basic reverse phase chromatography (Shimadzu NexeraXR high performance liquid chromatography). Fractions were combined orthogonally into 15 fractions and vacuum-dried.   IMAC was employed for selective enrichment of phosphopeptides. Briefly, Ni-NTA agarose conjugates (Qiagen) was rinsed thrice with MilliQ water and incubated with 100mM EDTA pH 8.0 for 30min at to strip the nickel. Residual nickel was removed by rinsing the resin thrice with MilliQ water, followed by incubation with 100 mM iron chloride solution for 30-45 min. The resin was then washed thrice with MilliQ water followed by 80 % ACN / 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 50 % ACN / 0.1 % TFA, followed by 1:1 dilution with 99.9 % ACN / 0.1 % TFA. The peptides were incubated with 10 μl of IMAC beads for 30 min with end-over-end rotation and the beads were subsequently loaded onto self-packed C18 stage tips pretreated with 200 μl methanol, washed with 50 % ACN / 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and equilibrated with 1% FA. Following loading onto the stage tip, the IMAC beads were washed with 80 % ACN / 0.1 % TFA and 1 % FA. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the IMAC beads onto C18 membranes using 500 mM dibasic sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), followed by washing using 1% FA. The phosphopeptides were stored on the stage tip until they were ready to be analysed by LC-MS. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 membranes with 50% ACN / 0.1 % FA, vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.1% FA for LC-MS analysis.  Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA for analysis on Thermo Easy nLC 1000 that was connected to Q Exactive™ Plus or Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™). The trap column used was C18 Acclaim PepMap™ 100 (5μm, 100A, 100 μm I.D. x 2 cm) and the analytical column was PepMap™ RSLC C18 (2μm, 100A, 75μm I.D. x 50 cm). The LC solvent A comprised of 0.1 M FA in 2% ACN and LC solvent B comprised of 0.1 M FA in 95% ACN. For proteome analysis, the gradient was as follows: 5–50% solvent B in 180 min; 50-100 % solvent B in 10 min; 100% solvent B for 10 min at the flow rate of 200nL/min.  The mass spectrometer was set in the data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 380 – 1600) were acquired with a resolution of 14e4 at an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Top 20 most intense peptide ions in each MS scan were sequentially isolated to an ACG target value of 1e5 with resolution of 35e3 and fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 30 at MS2 level with fixed first mass at 110 and isolation window of 1.2 Th. For phosphoproteome analysis, a 265 min gradient was used, ranging from 0 to 40 % solvent B in 240 min, followed by a 10 min gradient ranging from 40 to 80 % solvent B and maintained for 10 min at 80 % solvent B Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–2000) were collected with a resolution of 7e4, an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. Top 20 most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity threshold of 1E4, underfill ratio of 1 % and a charge state  2 were sequentially isolated with a window of 2 Th to a target value of 5e4 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. These were fragmented in the high energy collision cell by dissociation, using a normalized collision energy of 25 %. The MS/MS was acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100 and a resolution of 17,500 and dynamic exclusion of duration of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteome and phosphoproteome data processing  For 10plex-TMT labeled proteome analysis, raw MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific™). Database search was performed using the integrated Sequest HT search engine against the Uniprot mouse FASTA database (release January 2018) for tryptic peptides with maximum of two missed cleavage sites, MS and MS/MS mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Searches included cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT-modifications at peptide N-termini and lysine residues as fixed modifications, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were performed at false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.   For phosphoproteome analysis, raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016a). The Andromeda search engine was employed to search against the UniProt mouse FASTA database (release January 2018). For identification of proteins, peptides and modifications, the FDR was set at 0.01 allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages as well as an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. The search was performed with phosphorylation of sites serine, threonine and tyrosine (STY), oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and trypsin as cleaving enzyme. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm as implemented in MaxQuant with minimum ratio count set to 1 and match between run feature enabled to transfer peptide identifications across MS runs (match time window = 2 , alignment time window = 20) (Cox et al., 2014). A minimum Andromeda score of 40 was used for phosphopeptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Intermittent fasting (IF) has been shown to reduce cardiovascular risk factors in both animals and humans, and can protect the heart against ischemic injury in models of myocardial infarction. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms behind these effects remain unclear. To shed light on the molecular and cellular adaptations of the heart to IF, we conducted comprehensive system-wide analyses of the proteome, phosphoproteome, and transcriptome, followed by functional analysis. Using advanced mass spectrometry, we profiled the proteome and phosphoproteome of heart tissues obtained from mice that were maintained on daily 12- or 16 hr fasting, every-other-day fasting, or ad libitum control feeding regimens for 6 months. We also performed RNA sequencing to evaluate whether the observed molecular responses to IF occur at the transcriptional or post-transcriptional levels. Our analyses revealed that IF significantly affected pathways that regulate cyclic GMP signaling, lipid and amino acid metabolism, cell adhesion, cell death, and inflammation. Furthermore, we found that the impact of IF on different metabolic processes varied depending on the length of the fasting regimen. Short IF regimens showed a higher correlation of pathway alteration, while longer IF regimens had an inverse correlation of metabolic processes such as fatty acid oxidation and immune processes. Additionally, functional echocardiographic analyses demonstrated that IF enhances stress-induced cardiac performance. Our systematic multi-omics study provides a molecular framework for understanding how IF impacts the heart's function and its vulnerability to injury and disease.

### Keywords
Heart, Intermittent fasting, Transcriptome, Proteome, Mice, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
IMCB
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, Singapore

### Submitter
Asfa Alli Shaik

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha GUNARATNE
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, Singapore


