### Accession
PXD018982

### Title
Cytokine-enhanced cytolytic activity of Exosomes from NK Cells

### Description
Natural killer (NK) cells are a type of innate lymphocytes that play key roles in immune surveillance against tumors and viral infection. NK cells distinguish abnormal cells from healthy cells by cell-cell interaction with cell surface proteins and then attack target cells via multiple mechanisms involving TRAIL, Fas Ligand, cytokine secretion, perforin, and granzymes. In addition, extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes derived from NK cells (NK-EVs), possess cytotoxic capacity against tumor cells, but their characteristics and regulation by cytokines remain unknown. Here, we report that EVs derived from human NK-92 cells stimulated with IL-15 + IL-21 show enhanced cytotoxic capacity against tumor cells in a granzyme B independent manner. In addition, small RNA-seq and mass spectrometry analyses indicate that miRNA and protein profiles in EVs are altered by cytokine stimulation. We also show NK-EVs are taken up by target cells via macropinocytosis. Collectively, our findings reveal novel characteristics of NK-EVs and the mechanism of their incorporation into target cells.

### Sample Protocol
The pellets of NK-EVs were solubilized in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, pH 7.55 and the proteins reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were then loaded onto S trap columns (Protifi) for overnight trypsin digestion, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resultant peptides were desalted on a C18 spin column (Pierce) and lyophilized. Dried peptides were solubilized in 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid, 97.5% water for analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) was used to search the data against human proteins from the UniProt database using SequestHT. The Percolator node was used to score and rank peptide matches using a 1% false discovery rate. Fully tryptic limits were used, maximum two missed cleavages, cystine carbamidomethylation static modification, and variable oxidation of methionine was used.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells play key roles in immune surveillance against tumors and viral infection. NK cells distinguish abnormal cells from healthy cells by cell-cell interaction with cell surface proteins and then attack target cells via multiple mechanisms. In addition, extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from NK cells (NK-EVs), including exosomes, possess cytotoxic capacity against tumor cells, but their characteristics and regulation by cytokines remain unknown. Here, we report that EVs derived from human NK-92 cells stimulated with IL-15&#x2009;+&#x2009;IL-21 show enhanced cytotoxic capacity against tumor cells. Major cytolytic granules, granzyme B and granzyme H, are enriched by IL-15&#x2009;+&#x2009;IL-21 stimulation in NK-EVs; however, knockout experiments reveal those cytolytic granules are independent of enhanced cytotoxic capacity. To find out the key molecules, mass spectrometry analyses were performed with different cytokine conditions, no cytokine, IL-15, IL-21, or IL-15&#x2009;+&#x2009;IL-21. We then found that CD226 (DNAM-1) on NK-EVs is enriched by IL-15&#x2009;+&#x2009;IL-21 stimulation and that blocking antibodies against CD226 reduced the cytolytic activity of NK-EVs. We also show NK-EVs are taken up by target cells via macropinocytosis. Collectively, our findings elucidate the novel properties of NK-EVs and the mechanism of their incorporation into target cells.

### Keywords
Exosome, Cytokine, Nk cells

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute, NIH
Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, NIH United States

### Submitter
Lisa Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa M. Jenkins
Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, NIH United States


