### Accession
PXD044323

### Title
Autoantigen screening using pull-down and LC-MS

### Description
Autoantibodies from a mice model were utilized to pull-down a range of antigens, which were identified by nanoLC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Autoantigen pull-downs were based upon a prior protocol (PMID: 29728570). The label-free proteomics analyses were performed similar to a previous protocol (PMID: 29847139). Briefly, 25 µl eluate was mixed with SDS-PAGE sample buffer, subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by reduction, blocking of reduced cysteine residues and in-gel trypsin digestion. Resulting peptides were purified with PepClean C18 Spin Columns and vacuum dried. Peptide samples were trapped and separated by liquid chromatography (Easy-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) using pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, Nanoviper, Thermo Scientific) and analytical column (EASY-Spray column, PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 25 cm) in a 60 minute gradient of 4-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, coupled to the mass spectrometer (MS) Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific, Bremen).  Full scan (MS1) resolution was set at 60,000 (at 200 m/z) and the scan range was between 372-1800 m/z. Up to the 12 most intense peaks in MS1 were fragmented in MS2 using data dependent acquisition. MS2 resolution was set at 15,000. Unassigned and +1 charge state was excluded from fragmentation and a dynamic exclusion of 15 seconds was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant70 (version 1.5.3.30) with its Andromeda algorithm against a mouse sequence database (Mus musculus proteome with 17,544 reviewed sequences downloaded from Uniprot database, https://www.uniprot.org/ on April 12th 2022). The “match between runs” was applied and iBAQ data were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Antigen, Antibody, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Aarhus University, Denmark


