### Accession
PXD037249

### Title
A SAM key domain required for enzymatic activity and allosteric activation of the Fun30 nucleosome remodeler

### Description
Fun30 is the prototype of the Fun30-SMARCAD1-ETL sub-family of nucleosome remodelers involved in DNA repair and gene silencing. These proteins appear to act as single subunit nucleosome remodelers, but their molecular mechanisms are, at this point, poorly understood. Using multiple sequence alignment and structure prediction, we identify an evolutionarily conserved domain that is modeled to contain a SAM-like fold with one long, protruding helix, which we term SAM-key. Deletion of the SAM-key within budding yeast Fun30 leads to a defect in DNA repair and gene silencing similar to that of the fun30 mutant. In vitro, Fun30 protein lacking the SAM key is able to bind nucleosomes but is deficient in DNA-stimulated ATPase activity as well as nucleosome sliding and eviction. A structural model based on AlphaFold2 prediction and verified by crosslinking-MS indicates an interaction of the long SAM-key helix with protrusion I, a subdomain located between the two ATPase lobes that is critical for control of enzymatic activity. Mutation of the interaction interface phenocopies the domain deletion with a lack of DNA-stimulated ATPase activation and a nucleosome remodeling defect, thereby confirming a role of the SAM-key helix in regulating ATPase activity. Our data thereby demonstrate a central role of the SAM-key domain in mediating the activation of Fun30 catalytic activity, thus highlighting the importance of allosteric activation for this class of enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Vacuum-dried peptides were dissolved at a concentration of 100 ng/uL in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides (100 ng) were separated and measured at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using the Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 30-cm analytical column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using an increasing percentage of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B over 40 minutes, to 95% B over 10 minutes was used, and elution strength was held at 95% B for 5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1650 Th (resolution of 60k at m/z = 200 Th). Up to 15 of the most abundant precursors were selected and fragmented using stepped Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 19, 27, 35). The MS2 spectra were recorded with a dynamic m/z range (resolution of 30k at m/z = 200 Th). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3 x 106 and 105, respectively, within a maximum injection time of 100 and 60 ms for the MS1 and MS2 scans. Charge state 2 was excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher) with the XlinkX/PD nodes integrated. “NonCleavable” was set as acquisition strategy. The database search was performed against a FASTA containing the sequence(s) of the protein(s) under investigation as well as a contaminant database. DSS/BS-3 was set as a crosslinker, Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Identifications were accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level was applied by the XlinkX Validator node with setting simple.

### Publication Abstract
Fun30 is the prototype of the Fun30-SMARCAD1-ETL subfamily of nucleosome remodelers involved in DNA repair and gene silencing. These proteins appear to act as single-subunit nucleosome remodelers, but their molecular mechanisms are, at this point, poorly understood. Using multiple sequence alignment and structure prediction, we identify an evolutionarily conserved domain that is modeled to contain a SAM-like fold with one long, protruding helix, which we term SAM-key. Deletion of the SAM-key within budding yeast Fun30 leads to a defect in DNA repair and gene silencing similar to that of the <i>fun30</i>&#x394; mutant. In vitro, Fun30 protein lacking the SAM-key is able to bind nucleosomes but is deficient in DNA-stimulated ATPase activity and nucleosome sliding and eviction. A structural model based on AlphaFold2 prediction and verified by crosslinking-MS indicates an interaction of the long SAM-key helix with protrusion I, a subdomain located between the two ATPase lobes that is critical for control of enzymatic activity. Mutation of the interaction interface phenocopies the domain deletion with a lack of DNA-stimulated ATPase activation and a nucleosome-remodeling defect, thereby confirming a role of the SAM-key helix in regulating ATPase activity. Our data thereby demonstrate a central role of the SAM-key domain in mediating the activation of Fun30 catalytic activity, thus highlighting the importance of allosteric activation for this class of enzymes.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Yeast, Resection, Regulation, Fun30, Sam, Key

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Pfander
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried,  Germany


