### Accession
PXD012177

### Title
Cassiopea xamachana: Cassiosomes

### Description
Cassiosomes are cell clusters that contain symbiotic dinoflagellates and nematocysts and released in a suspension of mucus by the up-side down jellyfish Cassiopea xamachana into the water column. Divers passing Cassiopea colonies experience skin irritation without directly disturbing the jellyfish. Cassiosomes and the structures that release them (vesicular appendages) were examined via shotgun mass spectrometry to determine whether these structures contain toxins that could be responsible for skin irritation.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus and vesicular appendages were collected from live Cassiopea xamachana. Cassiosomes were separated from mucus and pelleted. Cassiosome pellets and vesicular appendages were lysed via sonication in SDS PAGE sample buffer and run on a 10% Bis-Tris gel. Each lane of the gel was excised in 10 bands and in-gel digestion via trypsin was performed. LC-MS/MS was performed on the samples using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) at nano flow rates and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) (orbitrap for MS scans followed by ion trap for MS2 scans).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a common standards and contaminants database with ~190 sequences and a database containing the sequences for the 3 predicted toxins (g9509.t1_CrTx, g17161.t1_CrTx, and g17159.t1_CqTx,CrTx) with Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cassiopea, Upside-down jellyfish, Toxins, Cassiosomes

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Janna Schultzhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Janna Schultzhaus
Naval Research Laboratory


