### Accession
PXD019863

### Title
Data-dependent and independent acquisition of Salmonella in epithelial cells throughout the infection process

### Description
Viewing the scarce amount of protein material coming from the bacterial pathogen in infection models and despite the availability of contemporary, highly sensitive and fast scanning mass spectrometers, the power requirement still not suffices to study the host and pathogen proteomes simultaneously. In the present work we aimed to establish a DIA mass spectrometry workflow for improving the protein identification and quantification of LC-MS/MS, in Salmonella infected epithelial cells, therefore enabling simultaneous host and pathogen protein expression profiling at different time post infection.

### Sample Protocol
Human epithelial cervix (HeLa ATCC® CCL2™) cells, were cultured in a 5% CO2 gas-equilibrated humidified incubator at 37°C in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) media (Gibco, cat no 31966-047) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, cat no 10270-106) and 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco; cat no 5070-063). Cells were sub-cultivated at 1:8 ratio every 4 days. For infection experiments, the day before the infection, 10,000,000 cells were seeded in T-175 cell culture flasks (Greiner Bio One, cat no 660160) to reach a final ~85% confluency in DMEM media supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and without antibiotics supplementation (infection media). Serum heat-inactivation was done incubating the serum at 56°C for 30 min. To prepare the bacteria for infection, growing conditions to induce Salmonella Pathogenicity Island (SPI)-1 genes expression were implemented: a single colony of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain SL1344 (Salmonella Genetic Stock Center, Calgary, Canada; cat n° 438, (Hoiseth and Stocker 1981)) was used to inoculate 3 mL of Luria Beltrami (LB) Miller broth (10 g/L Bacto tryptone, 5 g/L Bacto yeast extract, 10 g/L NaCl) in round-bottom falcon tubes (Corning, cat no 352059). Saturated cultures, grown for 18h at 37°C and 180 rpm in a shaking incubator (INFORS HT Ecotron), reached a final optical density measured at 600 nm (OD600) ~2, were diluted 1:50 in the same media in T-25 flasks with ventilation to late exponential phase (OD600 ~4) at 37°C and 180 rpm. Then, cells were washed with pre-warmed Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS, Gibco; cat no 14190-144) and resuspended in HeLa cells infection media (DMEM, 10% heat-inactivated FBS).  In the invasion assays, bacteria were added to HeLa cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100 and bacteria internalization was allowed to happen for 30 min in a 5% CO2 gas-equilibrated humidified incubator at 37°C. After this time, HeLa cells were DPBS washed and extracellular bacteria were killed by addition of culture media (DMEM 10% FBS 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin) supplemented with gentamycin 100 µg/mL. Infected cells were incubated at 5% CO2 37°C until corresponding acquisition time point. For time points after 2 hpi gentamycin concentration was decreased to 10 µg/mL, since longer exposure to higher concentrations of gentamycin produces bacterial stress (Menashe, Kaganskaya et al. 2008). At the indicated time points (2, 4, 8, 16 and 24 hpi), cells were PBS-washed and collected by addition of Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%), Phenol red (Gibco, cat no 25300054) during 5 min at 5% CO2 37°C in Eppendorf tubes. Next, cells were PBS-washed (150 g, 5 min) 2 times and pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen.  For proteome extraction and mass spectrometry analysis, 4 biological replicates of each infection time point were performed. The frozen pellets were stored at -80°C, until complete collection of samples, and then, processed all together. Cell pellets (HeLa/Salmonella) were lysed in Gu.HCl by freeze-thaw and sonication and protein concentration determined by Bradford. For all sample mixes, 2x water diluted aliquots (400 µg) were acetone precipitated. Pellets were resuspended in 10% TFE, and digested overnight using mass-spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:100 w/w) at 37°C, 550 rpm. Methionine oxidation was performed in hydroxen peroxide and peptides were extracted using C18 reversed phase sorbent 100 µL pipette tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA, cat no A57003100K). Then, peptides were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 50 µL (artificial mixtures) of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile spiked with an iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) for retention time (RT) prediction.

### Data Protocol
From each sample 10 µL was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF BioPharma mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were loaded and separated on an analytical column, a 200 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient reaching 99% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 135 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min , followed by a 5-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode. Full-scan MS spectra ranging from 375-1500 m/z (400-900 m/z) with a target value of 5E6 were followed by 30 quadrupole isolations with an isolation width of 10 m/z for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 3E6  for maximum injection time of 45 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer without multiplexing. The isolation intervals ranged from 400 – 900 m/z with an overlap of 5 m/z.   Data-independent acquisition (DIA) Pre-processing: 24 raw data files corresponding to quadruplicates of 6 conditions: 2, 4, 8, 16, 24 hpi next to non-infected control, of Salmonella infecting HeLa samples were converted to mzML by MSConvert using vendor peakPicking. The resulting mzML files were searched using EncylopeDIA software (version 0.90) with default settings. Sample-specific Percolator output files and chromatogram libraries were stored. Per dilution, a combined chromatogram library was created consisting of the three replicates. This performs a Percolator re-running of the combined results and provides peptide and protein quantifications at a 1% peptide and protein Q-value, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition (dda), Salmonella, Hela cells, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Data-independent acquisition (dia)

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
UGent

### Submitter
Ursula Fels

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


