### Accession
PXD039853

### Title
MS-based proteomic characterization of SIN3-containing complexes in C. elegans

### Description
The SIN3 transcriptional coregulator influences gene expression through multiple interactions that include histone deacetylases (HDACs). Haploinsufficiency and mutations in SIN3 are the underlying cause of Witteveen-Kolk syndrome and related intellectual disability (ID)/autism syndromes, emphasizing its key role in development. However, little is known about the diversity of its interactions and functions in developmental processes. To gain insight in the repertoire of proteins that interact with SIN-3, we performed IP-MS on mCherry::SIN-3 expressing embryos. Furthermore, we analyzed the partnership of ARID-1::GFP, ARID-1 being an already described subunit of the SIN-3L complex.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations were performed on frozen embryos prepared by hypochlorite treatment from animals grown at 20°C on enriched NGM seeded with 10X concentrated HB101 bacteria. After hypochlorite treatment, embryos were washed once in IP buffer (50 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 7.5; 300 mM KCl; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM MgCl2; 0.2% Igepal-CA630; and 10% glycerol) and flash-frozen in beads in liquid nitrogen. Embryos were then grounded to powder, resuspended in 1 bead volume of IP buffer containing 2X complete protease inhibitors (Roche) and sonicated on ice at an amplitude of 30% for 2.5 min (15’’ ON/15’’ OFF pulses) using an Ultrasonic Processor (Bioblock Scientific). Protein extracts were recovered in the supernatant after centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye). All immunoprecipitations were performed with 70 mg of total protein extract in 10 ml diluted in IP buffer. Each sample was incubated for preclearing with 200 μL slurry of binding control magnetic agarose beads (ChromoTek bmab) for 1 h at 4°C. Then 200 μL of GFP-TRAP MA (ChromoTek gtma) or 300 μL RFP-TRAP MA beads slurry (ChromoTek rtma) were added to the sample. Beads incubation was performed 3h on a rotator at 4°C. Beads were collected with a magnet, washed three times in IP buffer and once in Benzo buffer (HEPES/KOH 50 mM, pH 7.5; KCl 150 mM; EDTA 1 mM; MgCl2 1 mM; Igepal-CA630 0.2%; and glycerol 10%). Beads were then incubated in 400 μl of Benzo buffer containing 2,500 units of benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 4°C and washed three times in IP buffer. Eluates were recovered by incubation at 95°C for 10 min in 60 μl of 1× LDS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins from IP eluates solubilized in Laemmli buffer were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 120 min and 90 min acetonitrile gradients for SIN-3 and ARID-1 interactomes respectively. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Caenorhabditis elegans taxonomy, 20220531 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of the bait proteins, and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin...). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (version 2.2.0) was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Co-immunoprecipitation, Nanolc-ms/ms, Sin3 transcriptional coregulator

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


