### Accession
PXD005782

### Title
The sequence-specific peptide-binding activity of the protein sulfide isomerase AGR2 directs its’ stable binding to the oncogenic receptor EpCAM

### Description
AGR2 is an oncogenic endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein disulfide isomerase. AGR2 protein has a relatively unique property for a chaperone in that it can bind sequence-specifically to a peptide motif (TTIYY).  A synthetic TTIYY-containing peptide column can be used to affinity-purify AGR2 from crude lysates highlighting peptide selectivity in complex mixtures. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry localized the dominant region in AGR2 that interacts with the TTIYY peptide to within a structural loop from amino acids 131-135 (VDPSL). A peptide binding site consensus of Tx[IL][YF][YF] was developed for AGR2 by measuring its activity against a alanine mutagenized synthetic peptide library.  Screening the human proteome for proteins harboring this consensus motif revealed an enrichment in transmembrane proteins and we focus on validating EpCAM as one such oncogenic protein.  Recombinant AGR2 and EpCAM proteins formed a dose-dependent protein-protein interaction in vitro. Proximity ligation assays demonstrated that endogenous AGR2 and EpCAM protein associate in cells. Introducing a single alanine mutation in EpCAM at Tyr251 attenuated its binding to AGR2 in vitro and in cells. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify a stable binding site for AGR2 on EpCAM, adjacent to the TILYY motif and surrounding EpCAM’s detergent binding site. Together, these data define a dominant peptide-binding site on AGR2 that mediates its specific peptide-binding function. A model client protein, EpCAM, is proposed for AGR2 to study how an ER-resident chaperone can dock specifically and regulate assembly of a protein destined for the secretory pathway.

### Sample Protocol
The EpCAM was incubated for 60 min prior to the exchange at room temperature with AGR2 WT or with buffer. The deuteration was initiated by a sequential 10-fold dilution into a deuterated buffer carried out at room temperature. The EpCAM internal disulfide bonds were reduced with dithiothreitol followed quenching by the addition 0.875M HCl in 1M glycine with pepsin at 2 min, 10 min, 60 min, and 197 min. A peptide (P16) binding site consensus of Tx[IL][YF][YF] was developed for AGR2. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify a stable binding site for AGR2 on EpCAM, adjacent to the TILYY motif. The peptide: AGR2 protein ratio was at 10:1 to give a final concentration of the AGR2-binding peptide at 10 µM and a final concentration of DMSO was 1%. Protein was incubated with peptide for 30 min prior to the exchange. Deuteration of the AGR2 wt and AGR2S134A proteins was initiated by a sequential 10-fold dilution into a deuterated buffer. Both deuterium  exchanges were carried out at room temperature and were quenched by the addition of 10 l of 1 M HCl in 1 M glycine at 30 seconds, 1 min, 3 min, 10 min, 30 min, 1 h, and 3 h followed by rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen. LC-MS/MS analysis EpCAM samples were immediately submitted to analysis and the rest of the samples were thawed and injected onto an immobilized pepsin column (15 µl bed volume, flow rate 100 µl/minutes in 2% acetonitrile / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid). Peptides were trapped and desalted on-line on a peptide microtrap (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) for 3 minutes at flow rate 50 µl/minutes. The peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (Jupiter C18, 1.0 x 50 mm, 5 µm, 300Å, Phenomenex, CA) and separated using a linear gradient elution of 10 % B for 2 minutes, followed by 17 minutes isocratic elution at 40 % B. Solvents were: A – 0.1% formic acid in water, B – 80% acetonitrile / 0.08% formic acid. The immobilized pepsin column, trap cartridge, and the analytical column were kept at 1°C. Mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ESI ionization on-line connected with a robotic system based on the HTS-XT platform (CTC Analytics). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode for peptide mapping (HPLC-MS/MS). Each MS scan was followed by MS/MS scans of the top three most intensive ions from both CID and HCD fragmentation spectra.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SequestHT against the cRap protein database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) containing sequences of the MDM2, AGR2, and EpCAM proteins with the following search settings: mass tolerance for precursor ions of 10 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da, no enzyme specificity and no fixed or variable modifications were applied. The false discovery rate at peptide identification level was set to 1%. Sequence coverage was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and graphically visualized with MS Tools application.  Analysis of deuterated samples was performed in LC-MS mode with ion detection in the orbital ion trap. The MS raw files together with the list of peptides (peptide pool) identified with high confidence characterized by requested parameters (retention time, XCorr, and charge) were processed using HDExaminer version 2.2 (Sierra Analytics). The software was able to analyze protein or peptide deuteration behavior, created the uptake plots that showed peptide deuteration over time with calculated confidence level (high, medium confidence are accepted, low is rejected). The results from the peptide pool were displayed as butterfly comparison plots that showed the deuteration percentage as a function of peptide index calculated for different protein states. This function include other useful information about how well the peptide pool cover protein (numper of peptides, percentage of coverage protein sequence, standard deviation, average redundance etc.). Moreover each peptide has plot with deuteration behavior over time (graphs showing % deuteration over a time course). Other graphs displaying the evolution of deuteration at individual parts of the protein at the same time and different protein states were plotted using the Draw H/D Protection Plot.

### Publication Abstract
AGR2 is an oncogenic endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein disulfide isomerase. AGR2 protein has a relatively unique property for a chaperone in that it can bind sequence-specifically to a specific peptide motif (TTIYY). A synthetic TTIYY-containing peptide column was used to affinity-purify AGR2 from crude lysates highlighting peptide selectivity in complex mixtures. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry localized the dominant region in AGR2 that interacts with the TTIYY peptide to within a structural loop from amino acids 131-135 (VDPSL). A peptide binding site consensus of Tx[IL][YF][YF] was developed for AGR2 by measuring its activity against a mutant peptide library. Screening the human proteome for proteins harboring this motif revealed an enrichment in transmembrane proteins and we focused on validating EpCAM as a potential AGR2-interacting protein. AGR2 and EpCAM proteins formed a dose-dependent protein-protein interaction <i>in vitro</i> Proximity ligation assays demonstrated that endogenous AGR2 and EpCAM protein associate in cells. Introducing a single alanine mutation in EpCAM at Tyr251 attenuated its binding to AGR2 <i>in vitro</i> and in cells. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify a stable binding site for AGR2 on EpCAM, adjacent to the TLIYY motif and surrounding EpCAM's detergent binding site. These data define a dominant site on AGR2 that mediates its specific peptide-binding function. EpCAM forms a model client protein for AGR2 to study how an ER-resident chaperone can dock specifically to a peptide motif and regulate the trafficking a protein destined for the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Human, Protein-protein interaction, Epcam, Lc-ms/ms, Agr2, Hdx

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Hupp
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR


