### Accession
PXD014680

### Title
N-glycosylation site identification in Arabidopsis thaliana apoplastic fluid proteome

### Description
N-glycosylation site identification in Arabidopsis thaliana apoplastic fluid proteome by legumain using two alternative workflows to cross validate with dimethylation.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana columbia (Col-8) Apoplastic fluid proteome enrichment was carried out as described in (Joosten, 2012). The extract (100 µg) was pre-treated with PNGaseF for 2 hours at 37 ºC followed by legumain digestion with protease to extract ratio of 1:50 at 37 ºC, pH 6 (pH adjusted with final concentration of 0.1 M MES pH 6.0). In parallel, another 100 µg of protein extract was pre-digested with legumain and then treated with PNGaseF using the same conditions as aforementioned. The samples were subsequently dimethyl labeled with 20 mM heavy (13CD2O) and light (CH2O) formaldehyde and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride. All samples were pre-cleaned using C18 stage tip. Peptides were separated on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.16) was used for identification and quantification of peptides; putative glycosylation sites were identified by screening for pairs of peptides (one longer peptide with a deamidated N anywhere but not at the end together with a shorter peptide where a deamidated N has to be at the C-terminus). Database used for the search was the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome including canonical + all isoform entries, downloaded on January 2018 from UniProt with 41350 entries (Bateman et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomics utilizes proteolytic enzymes with well characterized specificities to generate peptides amenable for identification by high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry. Trypsin, which cuts specifically after the basic residues lysine and arginine, is the predominant enzyme used for proteome digestion, although proteases with alternative specificities are required to detect sequences that are not accessible after tryptic digest. Here, we show that the human cysteine protease legumain exhibits a strict substrate specificity for cleavage after asparagine and aspartic acid residues during in-solution digestions of proteomes extracted from <i>Escherichia coli</i>, mouse embryonic fibroblast cell cultures, and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaves. Generating peptides highly complementary in sequence, yet similar in their biophysical properties, legumain (as compared to trypsin or GluC) enabled complementary proteome and protein sequence coverage. Importantly, legumain further enabled the identification and enrichment of protein N-termini not accessible in GluC- or trypsin-digested samples. Legumain cannot cleave after glycosylated Asn residues, which enabled the robust identification and orthogonal validation of N-glycosylation sites based on alternating sequential sample treatments with legumain and PNGaseF and vice versa. Taken together, we demonstrate that legumain is a practical, efficient protease for extending the proteome and sequence coverage achieved with trypsin, with unique possibilities for the characterization of post-translational modification sites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis glycosite legumain af proteome

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florien Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


