### Accession
PXD028300

### Title
Global proteome of neurite and soma isolated from primary cortical neurons

### Description
Proteome comparison of neurite and soma total protein extracts isolated from mouse cortical neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein lysates from neurites and soma of primary cortical neurons were prepared and LC-MS/MS performed as previously described {Zappulo, 2017 #6881}. Briefly, protein extracts were reduced and alkylated, digested with trypsin and desalted. Data acquisition was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an easy nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated over a 110 min gradient with a flow rate of 250 nL with increasing concentration of buffer B (up to 60%) on a 20 cm reversed-phase column packed in-house with 1.9 µm beads (ReproSil Pur, Dr. Maisch GmbH).

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4, using mouse Uniprot database 2019-07, with FDR of 1% for peptide and protein identification. Integrated IBAQ normalization and match between run option were activated. Unique peptides were used for quantitation. Only proteins detected in at least half (3 out of 6) samples and not marked as potential contaminant or reverse sequence were retained for analysis. Missing values were imputed using the ‘MinProb’ algorithm (random draws from a Gaussian distribution) with standard settings and values from each compartment were then normalized to the median Gapdh intensity. Enrichment between compartments was calculated using a generalized liner model (limma) and p-values were FDR corrected with BH method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurite, Mouse, Soma, Proteome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Core Unit Proteomics, BIH at Charite and MDC, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Core Unit Proteomics, BIH at Charite and MDC, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin


