### Accession
PXD045171

### Title
Identification of Plasma Biomarkers from Rheumatoid Arthritis Patients Using an Optimized SWATH Proteomics Workflow

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune and inflammatory disease. Plasma biomarkers are critical for understanding disease mechanisms, treatment effects, and diagnosis. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a powerful tool for unbiased biomarker discovery. However, plasma proteomics is significantly hampered by signal interference from high-abundance proteins, low overall protein coverage, and high levels of missing data from data-dependent acquisition (DDA). To achieve quantitative proteomic analysis for plasma samples with a balance of throughput, performance, and cost, we developed a workflow incorporating plate-based high abundance protein depletion and sample preparation, comprehensive peptide spectral library building, and data-independent acquisition (DIA) SWATH mass spectrometry-based methodology. In this study, we analyzed plasma samples from both RA patients and healthy donors. The results showed that the new workflow performance exceeded that of the current state-of-the-art depletion-based plasma proteomic platforms in terms of both data quality and proteome coverage. Proteins from biological processes related to the activation of systemic inflammation, suppression of platelet function, and loss of muscle mass were enriched and differentially expressed in RA. Some plasma proteins, particularly acute phase reactant proteins, showed great power to distinguish between RA patients and healthy donors. Moreover, protein isoforms in the plasma were also analyzed, providing even deeper proteome coverage. This workflow can serve as a basis for further application in discovering plasma biomarkers of other diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The high-abundance proteins in human plasma were depleted with Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin (Cat# A36372 Thermo Scientific) in a 96-well plate to improve the throughput of plasma processing. Resin (400 μL) was added to a 3M Empore 96-Well High-Performance Extraction Disk Filter Plate (#6065), which was fitted on top of a 1 mL deep-well plate. Plasma samples from RA patients and healthy controls were randomized during plate-based sample preparation to reduce any potential batch effects. Plasma (10 μL) was added to the wells, which were then incubated with depletion resins for 30 min. After centrifugation (3000 rpm, 4°C, 5 min), 100 μL lysis buffer (2.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 25 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in 250 mM Tris pH 8.5) was added to the flowthrough in the 1 mL deep well plate at the bottom of the setup and incubated at 37°C for 45 min. Free cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. 2.5 μg trypsin was added for protein digestion at 37°C overnight. To quench the digestion, 50 μL of 10% formic acid was added to the digested samples. After centrifugation at 2,000 × g for 5 min, the supernatant was further cleaned using a strong cation exchange Waters Oasis MCX 96-Well µElution Plate (Cat # 186001830BA). Briefly, the plate was equilibrated with MeOH followed by 0.1% FA in deionized water, the samples were loaded, and the flow-through was collected using a positive pressure plate manifold. The plate was washed with a solvent mixture of 32% acetonitrile, 32% MeOH, and 0.1% FA in water, followed by 5% ACN/0.1% FA in water. Peptides were eluted from the plate cartridge by applying freshly prepared 2% NH4OH (pH = 11)   in 55% ACN twice and collected in a 1 mL deep well plate. The eluted peptides were dried and reconstituted in 20 μL of 2% MeOH with 0.1% TFA for peptide concentration UV measurement (DropQuant, PerkinElmer). The injection quantity for the SWATH-MS analysis was normalized to ~3.5 µg based on the peptide concentration measurement. The LC/MS instrument hardware setup was the same as that described in Section 2.2.6, with a modification to shorten the LC gradient length to enable a higher throughput sample analysis. The resulting method could support a throughput of up to 16 samples/day. Briefly, a nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column (130 Å, 1.7 µm, 300 µm × 150 mm, Waters) was used on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (ThermoFisher). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 2% DMSO in deionized water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 2% DMSO in acetonitrile. A 73 min gradient method was used to separate the peptide samples from 1% to 7% of mobile phase B in the first 5 min at a flow rate of 3.1 µL/min, 7%-32.5% of mobile phase B from 5 to 62 min at 3.1 µL/min, 32.5%–57% B in 0.2 min at 3.1 µL/min, 57%-95% B in 3.8 min at 4.0 µL/min. The column was washed with 95% B for 3 min and equilibrated with 1% B for 4 min before the next injection. For SWATH-MS acquisition, a 3.5 µg digested peptide, containing iRT retention time reference peptides (Biognosys) at an iRT/sample ratio of 1/10 (v/v), was injected and analyzed in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode using the SWATH method [14]. MS1 scan was performed in the range of 360–1,500 m/z in the positive ion mode. A SWATH method with 200 variable precursor isolation windows was used in this study. The MS2 window was determined by MS1 data points extracted from a DDA LC/MS run of a pooled human plasma digest sample and analyzed using the “SWATH Variable Window Calculator” Excel plug-in tool provided by SCIEX. The consecutive precursor isolation windows had a 1 amu overlap. The maximum accumulation times were 33 ms for MS1 scans and 34 ms for MS2 scans, resulting in an MS cycle time of 6.6 secs. The rolling collision energy was used to determine the collision energy for each window. The mass spectrometer was calibrated using LC-MS injection of beta-galactosidase trypsin digest (SCIEX) after every two sample injections to maintain mass accuracy and resolution.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification of SWATH data were performed using DIA-NN version 1.8.1 [16] with an experiment-specific spectral library from deep fractionation. Default DIA-NN settings were adopted except match-between-runs (MBR) were enabled, and protein inference was set to “Protein names (from FASTA).” Protein abundances were extracted from the report.pg_matrix.tsv file from the output folder of the DIA-NN. Protein IDs with more than 50% missing values were removed from further analysis. Protein abundances were then log2-transformed and normalized based on sample medians using the “medianNormalization” function from the “NormalyzerDE” R package [17], and missing values were imputed using the “missForest” R package [18], which has been demonstrated as the most robust approach [19]. The same MS raw data files were analyzed with the in silico library built based on the human isoform protein database in DIA-NN using “Isoform IDs” for protein inference. An identified protein isoform should contain at least one unique peptide. The following data analysis followed the same procedure as the abovementioned experiment-specific spectral library:

### Publication Abstract
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune and inflammatory disease. Plasma biomarkers are critical for understanding disease mechanisms, treatment effects, and diagnosis. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a powerful tool for unbiased biomarker discovery. However, plasma proteomics is significantly hampered by signal interference from high-abundance proteins, low overall protein coverage, and high levels of missing data from data-dependent acquisition (DDA). To achieve quantitative proteomics analysis for plasma samples with a balance of throughput, performance, and cost, we developed a workflow incorporating plate-based high abundance protein depletion and sample preparation, comprehensive peptide spectral library building, and data-independent acquisition (DIA) SWATH mass spectrometry-based methodology. In this study, we analyzed plasma samples from both RA patients and healthy donors. The results showed that the new workflow performance exceeded that of the current state-of-the-art depletion-based plasma proteomic platforms in terms of both data quality and proteome coverage. Proteins from biological processes related to the activation of systemic inflammation, suppression of platelet function, and loss of muscle mass were enriched and differentially expressed in RA. Some plasma proteins, particularly acute-phase reactant proteins, showed great power to distinguish between RA patients and healthy donors. Moreover, protein isoforms in the plasma were also analyzed, providing even deeper proteome coverage. This workflow can serve as a basis for further application in discovering plasma biomarkers of other diseases.

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis; mass spectrometry; proteomics; swath; dia; plasma; biomarker; protein isoform

### Affiliations
AbbVie Bioresearch Center
Research & Development, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, 60064

### Submitter
Liang Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Tian
Research & Development, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, 60064


