### Accession
PXD001170

### Title
AML_profiling -  Integrated analysis of proteome, phosphotyrosine-proteome, tyrosine-kinome and tyrosine-phosphatome in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
LC-MS/MS was used to profile total phosphotyrosine phosphatase in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in order to find potential biomarkers, drug targets, signatures for AML classification, and its relationship with total phosphotyrosine amount in the samples.

### Sample Protocol
AML cells were lysed in 9M urea buffer first. 5 mg (protein) starting material were digested to peptide and the pY-containing peptides were enriched with anti-pY antibody (PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine mAB (p-Tyr-100) kit, Cell signaling Tech, Cat # 5636) according to Rush et al procedure ( Rush et al., 2005, Nat Biotechnol 23,94). The tryptic peptides with or without antibody enrichment were separated on a 50-cm Easy-Spray column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with 2 μm C18 resin (Thermo Scientific, Odense Denmark). The peptides were eluted over 120 min (250 nl/min) for pY-ome and PTPome, and 240 min for proteome.  A 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid was used with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system operating at 50 °C (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The LC was coupled to a Elite mass spectrometer by using a nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) for identification and quantification. For proteome and pY-ome data, the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, phospho-serine, -threonine and –tyrosine (pY-ome data only) as variable modifications. For PTPome data, cysteine converting to cysteic acid was added as variable and cysteine carbamidomethylation was changed from fixed to variable modification.  The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. For statistical evaluation of the data obtained, the posterior error probability and false discovery rate were used. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides was permitted. Two miscleavages were allowed, and a minimum of seven amino acids per identified peptide were required. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm.  To match identifications across different replicates and adjacent fractions, the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled within a time window of 2 min. For the determination of protein levels, at least two unmodified peptides were required for LFQ calculation.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein-tyrosine phosphorylation is catalyzed by the antagonistic actions of protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs), and represents a major form of cell regulation. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hematological malignancy that results from the acquisition of multiple genetic alterations, which in some instances are associated with deregulated protein-phosphotyrosine (pY) mediated signaling networks. However, although individual PTKs and PTPs have been linked to AML and other malignancies, analysis of protein-pY networks as a function of activated PTKs and PTPs has not been done. In this study, MS was used to characterize AML proteomes, and phospho-proteome-subsets including pY proteins, PTKs, and PTPs. AML proteomes resolved into two groups related to high or low degrees of maturation according to French-American-British classification, and reflecting differential expression of cell surface antigens. AML pY proteomes reflect canonical, spatially organized signaling networks, unrelated to maturation, with heterogeneous expression of activated receptor and nonreceptor PTKs. We present the first integrated analysis of the pY-proteome, activated PTKs, and PTPs. Every PTP and most PTKs have both positive and negative associations with the pY-proteome. pY proteins resolve into groups with shared PTK and PTP correlations. These findings highlight the importance of pY turnover and the PTP phosphatome in shaping the pY-proteome in AML.

### Keywords
Ptpome, Aml, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Acute myeloid leukemia, Pyome

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
The Hospital For Sick Children, Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Moran
The Hospital For Sick Children, Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada


