### Accession
PXD027602

### Title
proteomic landscape of urothelial tumor

### Description
Inverted papilloma (IP) of the urinary bladder is a relatively rare neoplasm that accounts for < 1% of bladder tumor. Although generally accepted as a benign lesion, occasional reports of IP admixed with urothelial carcinoma (UC) or IP patients with synchronous or metachronous UC have raised a concern in the biologic potential of IP.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free quantification based on BoxCar acqusition, 100 ug of proteins that extracted from FFPE tissue was precipitated by adding a 6-fold volume of ice-cold acetone prior to the digestion step. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-containing denaturation buffer. After being heated, the denatured proteins were digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, MS raw files were analyzed in a Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) environment. Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt sequence databasewith 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs and the spectral library were matched by enabling the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urothelial tumor, Label free quantification, Ffpe

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Biomedicial Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedicial Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


