### Accession
PXD015525

### Title
HipBA toxin-antitoxin system Caulobacter crescentus.

### Description
Antibiotic persistence is a transient phenotypic state during which a bacterium can withstand otherwise lethal antibiotic exposure or environmental stresses. In Escherichia coli, persistence is promoted by the HipBA toxin-antitoxin system. The HipA toxin functions as a serine/threonine kinase that inhibits cell growth, while the HipB antitoxin neutralizes the toxin. E. coli HipA inactivates the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase GltX, which inhibits translation and triggers the highly conserved stringent response. Although hipBA operons are widespread in bacterial genomes, it is unknown if this mechanism is conserved in other species. Here we describe the functions of three hipBA modules in the alpha-proteobacterium Caulobacter crescentus. The HipA toxins have different effects on growth and macromolecular syntheses, and they phosphorylate distinct substrates. HipA1 and HipA2 contribute to antibiotic persistence during stationary phase by phosphorylating the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases GltX and TrpS. The stringent response regulator SpoT is required for HipA-mediated antibiotic persistence, but persister cells can form in the absence of all hipBA operons or spoT, indicating that multiple pathways lead to persister cell formation in C. crescentus.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and growth conditions. Strains used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Caulobacter strains are derived from the laboratory strain NA1000. Caulobacter strains were grown at 30°C in rich (PYE) or in minimal (M2G) medium supplemented with antibiotics as appropriate. E. coli was grown in Luria broth at 37°C, supplemented with antibiotics as appropriate. Phosphoproteome was achieved after enrichment SCX-TiO2 or SCX IMAC. Acquisition were realiezd on a Qexactive plus

### Data Protocol
Sample were processed with X!tandemPipeline and MawQuant Data processing and phosphopeptide validation. Identifications were performed using the C. crescentus NA1000 genome database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/CP001340) supplemented by the contaminants  database (trypsin, keratins, etc.). To increase confidence in phosphopeptide identification and add a significant number of phosphopeptides, two search engines were used in combination: MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5, www.maxquant.org) and X!Tandem (version 2011.12.01.1 ,www.thegpm.org) with X!TandemPipeline v3.3.0, a bioinformatic tool developed by the PAPPSO platform (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/). The parameters for database searches were: one possible miscleavage, Cys carboxyamidomethylation set as a static modification, and Met oxidation and phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine and threonine residues set as variable modifications. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using the X! TandemPipeline. Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E value smaller than 0.05. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was assessed from searches against a decoy database (using the reversed amino acid sequence for each protein). For MaxQuant, peptides composed of at least six amino acids were accepted, whereas those with a posterior error probability score > 0.1 or an Andromeda score < 70 were ignored. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide levels as well as at the phosphorylation site level was set to 1%. All peptide sequences and phosphorylation sites showing a significant water regime effect were confirmed by manual inspection of the raw data to verify the peptide sequence and the phosphorylation site assignment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caulobacter crescentus, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
INRA, Micalis institute
INRAE

### Submitter
Celine Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Celine Henry
INRA, Micalis institute


