### Accession
PXD014994

### Title
Quantitative acetylome analysis reveals histone modifications that may predict prognosis in hepatitis B-related hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
The post-translational modification of lysine acetylation is related to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and understanding this relationship requires detailed knowledge about the acetylated proteome in HCC tissue and about differences in protein acetylation between cirrhosis and liver cancer. Here we characterized the acetylome in three paired sets of cirrhotic tissue and hepatitis B-related HCC tissue. Combining affinity-based enrichment of acetylated peptides with highly sensitive mass spectrometry, we identified 1493 acetylation sites in 777 proteins and quantified 1040 acetylation sites in 587 proteins. We discovered that the histone acetyltransferases p300 and CBP were hyperacetylated in HCC and cirrhosis but not in normal liver tissue. We also identified several proteins acetylated at more than 10 lysines in HCC and cirrhosis. In addition, our results revealed that HCC was associated with up-regulation of acetylation at 353 sites in 237 proteins and down-regulation of acetylation at 209 sites in 122 proteins. We validated our results using western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Validation with an independent set of clinical samples confirmed our initial screening result that acetylation of lysine 120 in histone H2B type 1-C/E/F/G/I and lysine 18 in histone H3.3 was significantly associated with survival of HCC patients. Acetylation of lysine 77 in histone H4 was associated with survival as well as recurrence. Our study provides numerous new leads to examine the role of acetylation in HCC and its potential as a prognostic marker as well as therapeutic target.


### Sample Protocol
Samples were ground up in liquid nitrogen, transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Ⅲ) three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein extract was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. The sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB until the urea concentration was below 2 M, then trypsin was added at a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first digestion overnight, and a ratio of 1:100 for a second, 4-h digestion.  Tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mmM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA (formic acid), directly loaded onto a reverse-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a reverse-phase analytical column EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was a linear increase from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) over 24 min, 20% to 35% for 8 min, then a linear increase to 80% over 3 min, then maintenance at 80% for the last 5 min. Flow rate was constant at 280 nl/min. The fractionated peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a human species database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and 4 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges were allowed. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmentions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, while oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. TMT-6-plex quantification was used, and all other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set at > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac) as an important posttranslational modification of histones is essential for the regulation of gene expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the atlas of whole acetylated proteins in HCC tissues and the difference in protein acetylation between normal human tissues and HCC tissues are unknown. In this report, we characterized the proteome and acetyl proteome (acetylome) profile of normal, paracancerous, and HCC liver tissues in human clinical samples by quantitative proteomics techniques. We identified 6781 acetylation sites of 2582 proteins and quantified 2492 acetylation sites of 1190 proteins in normal, paracancerous, and HCC liver tissues. Among them, 15 proteins were multiacetylated with more than 10 lysine residues. The histone acetyltransferases p300 and CBP were found to be hyperacetylated in hepatitis B virus pathway. Moreover, we found that 250 Kac sites of 214 proteins were upregulated and 662 Kac sites of 451 proteins were downregulated in HCC compared with normal liver tissues. Additionally, the acetylation levels of lysine 120 in histone H2B (H2BK120ac), lysine 18 in histone H3.3 (H3.3K18ac), and lysine 77 in histone H4 (H4K77ac) were increased in HCC. Interestingly, the higher levels of H2BK120ac, H3.3K18ac, and H4K77ac were significantly associated with worse prognosis, such as poorer survival and higher recurrence in an independent clinical cohort of HCC patients. Overall, this study lays a foundation for understanding the functions of acetylation in HCC and provides potential prognostic factors for the diagnosis and therapy of HCC.

### Keywords
Prognosis factor, Proteomics, Lysine acetylation, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Histone

### Affiliations
Fudan University
Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University; Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China

### Submitter
Xiaoqiang Chai

### Lab Head
Dr Jiabin Cai
Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University; Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China


