### Accession
PXD000041

### Title
Hrp3-TAP_Purification from Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Description
Hrp3_Purification from Schizosaccharomyces pombe 972h- Eukaryotic genome is composed of repeating units of nucleosomes to form chromatin arrays. A canonical gene is marked by nucleosome free region (NFR) at its 5’ end followed by uniformly spaced arrays of nucleosomes. In fission yeast we show both biochemically and in vivo that both Hrp1 and Hrp3 are key determinants of uniform spacing of genic arrays.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digests were performed as described in standard protocols. Briefly, following the SDS-PAGE and washing of the excised gel slices proteins were reduced by adding 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich) prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega) was added and proteins were digested overnight in 40 mM ammoniumbicarbonate at 37°C. For protein identification samples were directly used for nano-ESI-LC-MS/MS. Each sample was first desalted on-line by a C18 microcolumn (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, packed with C18 PepMap™, 5 µm, 100 Å by LC Packings). Peptides were then separated on a C18 reversed phase column via a linear acetonitrile gradient (UltiMate 3000 system (Dionex) and column (75 µm i.d. x 15 cm, packed with C18 PepMap™, 3 µm, 100 Å by LC Packings) before MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded on an Oribitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). 

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra where analyzed via Mascot™ (Matrix Science) and Scaffold (Proteome Software) using the NCBInr Protein Database.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleosome positioning governs access to eukaryotic genomes. Many genes show a stereotypic organisation at their 5'end: a nucleosome free region just upstream of the transcription start site (TSS) followed by a regular nucleosomal array over the coding region. The determinants for this pattern are unclear, but nucleosome remodelers are likely critical. Here we study the role of remodelers in global nucleosome positioning in S. pombe and the corresponding changes in expression. We find a striking evolutionary shift in remodeler usage between budding and fission yeast. The S. pombe RSC complex does not seem to be involved in nucleosome positioning, despite its prominent role in S. cerevisiae. While S. pombe lacks ISWI-type remodelers, it has two CHD1-type ATPases, Hrp1 and Hrp3. We demonstrate nucleosome spacing activity for Hrp1 and Hrp3 in vitro, and that together they are essential for linking regular genic arrays to most TSSs in vivo. Impaired arrays in the absence of either or both remodelers may lead to increased cryptic antisense transcription, but overall gene expression levels are only mildly affected.

### Keywords
Schizosaccharomyces pombe 972h- _hrp3

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head


