### Accession
PXD012040

### Title
VGLL3 Skeletal Muscle -  VGLL3 operates via TEAD1, TEAD3 and TEAD4 to influence myogenesis in skeletal muscle

### Description
Vestigial-like (Vgll) proteins are transcriptional co-factors that have been reported to bind Tead family transcription factors to regulate various functions ranging from wing development in the fly to muscle fibre composition and immune function in mice. Here, we characterise Vgll3 in the skeletal muscle lineage. Vgll3 is expressed at low levels in unchallenging muscle but its expression increases in mechanically stimulated and regenerating muscle. VGLL3 is also >3-fold more expressed in the muscles of Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients than in healthy controls and VGLL3 expression is highest in PAX3-FOXO1-associated alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma when compared to other rhabdomyosarcomas, related tumours and adult muscle. Immunoprecipitation of over expressed VGLL3-flag followed by proteomics reveals that VGLL3 binds Tead1,3,4 transcription factors in myoblasts and myotubes. However, unlike Yap, there is no evidence for interaction with a regulatory system such as a kinase cascade. VGLL3 overexpression affects reduces the expression of members of the Hippo negative feedback loop and affects the expression of genes with important functions in muscle or signalling such as Myf5, Pitx2/3 as well as genes that encode Wnt members and IGF-binding proteins. It mainly represses gene expression and regulates similar genes as YAP1 S127A and TAZ S89A but not in a clear agonistic or antagonistic fashion. A loss of Vgll3 almost completely blocks the proliferation of human myoblasts and VGLL3 overexpression promotes myoblasts differentiation. In vivo, the loss of Vgll3 does not prevent normal skeletal muscle development presumably due to feedback signalling and/or redundancy. Collectively, this work identifies Vgll3 as a disease-related transcriptional co-factor that competes with the Hippo effectors Yap and Taz to control myoblast proliferation and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
The preparation of samples and analysis was performed as described previously (Sun et al., 2017). Briefly, C2C12 cells were grown in DMEM with 10% FBS and 4 mM glutamine. For immunoprecipitation, 80,000 C2C12 cells were seeded per 10 cm dish. The following day, the cells were transduced with control or Vgll3 encoding retroviral supernatant. The next day, transduction confirmed by green fluorescent protein (GFP) and the cells were split either in proliferation or differentiation conditions (72 hours). Proliferating or differentiated cells were then washed on ice with PBS, and collected in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% Triton X100) with 1  mM  sodium  orthovanadate, protease  inhibitor  cocktail (Sigma, p8340), and Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) (Sigma-Aldrich). Lysates were incubated for 1 hour on ice and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 5 minutes and supernatant incubated at 4°C with anti-Flag M2 magnetic beads (Sigma Aldrich, M8823). Beads were washed three times with washing buffer (150 mM NaCl; 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5). Sample preparation/mass spectrometry were as described (Turriziani et al., 2014) with proteomics data deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Analysis. Proteins were identified and quantified by MaxLFQ17 by searching with the MaxQuant version 1.5 against the Mus Musculus reference proteome database (Uniprot). Modifications included C carbamlylation (fixed) and M oxidation (variable). Excel was employed to further analyse the MaxQuant data, using fold change cut off values of 1.000.000 and tests to determine significance. Pantherdb, String DB and cytoscape were utilised in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
VGLL proteins are transcriptional co-factors that bind TEAD family transcription factors to regulate events ranging from wing development in fly, to muscle fibre composition and immune function in mice. Here, we characterise <i>Vgll3</i> in skeletal muscle. We found that mouse <i>Vgll3</i> was expressed at low levels in healthy muscle but that its levels increased during hypertrophy or regeneration; in humans, <i>VGLL3</i> was highly expressed in tissues from patients with various muscle diseases, such as in dystrophic muscle and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Interaction proteomics revealed that VGLL3 bound TEAD1, TEAD3 and TEAD4 in myoblasts and/or myotubes. However, there was no interaction with proteins from major regulatory systems such as the Hippo kinase cascade, unlike what is found for the TEAD co-factors YAP (encoded by <i>YAP1</i>) and TAZ (encoded by <i>WWTR1</i>). <i>Vgll3</i> overexpression reduced the activity of the Hippo negative-feedback loop, affecting expression of muscle-regulating genes including <i>Myf5</i>, <i>Pitx2</i> and <i>Pitx3</i>, and genes encoding certain Wnts and IGFBPs. VGLL3 mainly repressed gene expression, regulating similar genes to those regulated by YAP and TAZ. siRNA-mediated <i>Vgll3</i> knockdown suppressed myoblast proliferation, whereas <i>Vgll3</i> overexpression strongly promoted myogenic differentiation. However, skeletal muscle was overtly normal in <i>Vgll3</i>-null mice, presumably due to feedback signalling and/or redundancy. This work identifies VGLL3 as a transcriptional co-factor operating with the Hippo signal transduction network to control myogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Immunoprecipitation, Ip, Vgll3

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Matallanas
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


