### Accession
PXD004988

### Title
Grape ASR-silencing sways nuclear proteome and histone marks

### Description
The biological roles of ASRs (Abscisic acid, Stress, Ripening proteins) involved in certain crucial  switches of plant development (grain and pollen germination, senescence, fruit ripening), and  responses to environmental cues (drought, salinity, cold, nutrient depletion, fungus infection,  heavy metal toxicity) remain still elusive. The functional duality of ASRs, as chaperones for direct  protection of biological macromolecules, and as transcriptional regulators of gene expression,  needs in-depth understanding of the underlying mechanisms. To further elucidate the biological  functions of ASRs a quantitative proteomic analysis (iTRAQ) was performed comparing the  nuclear proteins of grapevine embryogenic 41B cells: wild-type (WT) and genetically modified  VvMSA-RNAi cells, silenced for grape ASR. Among all identified proteins, thirty-one were  differentially expressed in WT and VvMSA-silenced cells and may be classified into five  functional groups: metabolism, stress responses, ribosome biogenesis, transcription and chromatin  architecture/remodeling. The impact of VvMSA silencing was also confirmed at the level of the  genes encoding the differentially expressed nuclear proteins, and the revealed most pronounced  effects at protein level suggest a more direct correlation to the putative biological function.  Remarkably, many of the thirty-one differentially expressed proteins are supposedly involved in  epigenetic events. To further corroborate this hypothesis immunoblot assay of Multiscreen type  was performed using twenty-one antibodies to different post-translational modifications (PTMs)  of histones H3 and H4 in both cell types, WT and VvMSA-RNAi. The subsequent ImageQuant  analysis revealed marked semi-quantitative differences in most PTMs of grape histones H3 and  H4, with sharp increase of H3K27ac, H3K36me3, H4K5ac and H4K12ac, as well as a strong  decrease of H3K27me3 in VvMSA-RNAi cells. These findings provide new insights on a plausible  role of VvMSA as an ASR protein involved in epigenetic mechanisms

### Sample Protocol
The grapevine embryogenic cell line 41B is obtained from the most commonly used rootstock in the vineyards of Champagne (a hybrid between Vitis vinifera L. cv. Chasselas x Vitis berlandieri P.).  The experiments of isolation of nuclei from grape embryogenic wild-type (WT) and VvMSA RNAi cells are carried out in four biological repetitions and performed according to the protocol of Muller et al. (25), with some modifications.  Differential extraction of nuclear proteins was performed according to the protocol of Murray and Key (26), with some modifications. In order to yield maximum proteins and preserve their integrity, the extraction is designed to produce three main fractions (NaCl-fraction, H2SO4-fraction, and SDS-fraction),and in all extraction buffers the protease inhibitors and ß-mercaptoethanol are at the same final concentrations as those described in the previous paragraph for nuclei. Protein concentration is determined by the method of Bearden (27) and the final protein concentrations of the samples used for the iTRAQ experiments are adjusted to 5 µg/µL (net amount used – 50 µg protein reconstituted directly in 50 µL of 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), pH 8.5.  iTRAQ 8-plex experiments are performed to analyze the three nuclear protein fractions (“NaCl”, “H2SO4”, “SDS”) from four biological replicates obtained in two conditions of the embryogenic grape cell line 41B: wild-type (WT) and VvMSA-RNAi. Fifty micrograms of protein per sample reconstituted in TEAB are used for each iTRAQ channel. Tryptic digestion (10% w/w, sequencing-grade modified trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and iTRAQ 8 plex labeling (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) are performed according to the manufacturers' instructions (16 h - trypsin digestion at 37°C and 2.5 h - incubation of samples with respective iTRAQ labels). The iTRAQ labels for WT are 113, 116, 117 and 121; those for VvMSA RNAi -114,115, 118 and 119. After iTRAQ labeling, the samples are combined, desalted on 500 mg SepPak C18 columns (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA), and subjected to peptide fractionation by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). The samples are injected by using an autosampler (Agilent 1100 series, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and directly loaded onto a 2.1 mm x 200 mm SCX-column (Poly-SULPHOETHYL A, 5 µm, 300 Å, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Peptides are eluted at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min by using the following gradient: 0–10 min, 0% solvent B, 10–50 min, 0–35% solvent B; and 50–65 min, 35–100% solvent B. Solvent A contains 10 mM KH2PO4 and 25% ACN and solvent B contains 10 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, and 0.5 M KCl; the pH of both buffers is adjusted to less than 3. In this way labeled peptides are separated into 54 fractions that are further pooled into 8 master fractions (according to the SCX spectrum) and purified using a C18 column (Sep-Pak cartridge, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA).  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry  Peptide samples of the pooled 8 master fractions from previous SCX chromatography (4 µl) are analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA). The solvent compositions are 0.2% formic acid and 1% acetonitrile for channel A and 0.2% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides are loaded onto an in-house made tip column (75 µm × 80 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (AQ, 3 µm, 200 A, Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany) and eluted (flow rate, 250 nL/min; solvent B gradient: from 3% to 30% in 62 min, from 30% to 45% in 70 min, and from 45% to 97% in 75 min). Full-scan MS spectra (300–1700 m/z) are acquired at a resolution setting of 30,000 at 400 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 1×106. For the eight most intense signals per cycle above a threshold of 1000, both collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher-energy collisional dissociation spectra are acquired in a data-dependent manner. CID scans are recorded in the ion trap (settings: normalized collision energy, 35%; maximum injection time, 50 ms; automatic gain control, 1×10E4 ions). For the higher-energy collisional dissociation scans, spectra are recorded at a resolution setting of 7500 at 400 m/z (normalized collision energy, 45%; maximum injection time, 125 ms; automatic gain control, 5×10E4 ions). Charge state screening is enabled and singly charged states are rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS are excluded from further selection for 60 s, and the exclusion window is set at 10 ppm. Most samples are analyzed in duplicate, and precursors selected in the first run are excluded from fragmentation in the second run. The exclusion list is set on a time window of 4 min and a mass width of 10 ppm. Orbitrap spectra are acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 429.088735 and 445.120025.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Distiller 2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) is used to generate Mascot generic format peak lists. De-isotoping and peak picking are not performed between 112.5 and 121.5 m/z (the range containing iTRAQ reporter ions), and the higher-energy collisional dissociation and collision-induced dissociation spectra are merged by summing the two scans from the same precursor (28). For each of the 11 experiments, the corresponding 24 Mascot generic format peak lists are concatenated and searched, with the aid of Mascot Server 2.3.02 (Matrix Science), against the grape protein database of Genoscope (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/externe/GenomeBrowser/Vitis/). That database was concatenated to its reversed decoyed FASTA database. The concatenated database contains a total of 162488 proteins with accessions in Gene Ontology-compatible format and 260 common MS contaminants. Methylthio (C), iTRAQ 8-plex labeling at the N terminus and lysine are set as fixed modifications, and variable modifications consisted of methionine oxidation and iTRAQ 8-plex labeling of tyrosine. We used the 114 iTRAQ 8-plex channel as denominator quantitation method (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). The isotope and impurity correction factors used for each iTRAQ label are those provided by the manufacturer. Precursor and fragment tolerances are set at 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. The enzyme specificity is set to trypsin with an allowance of up to one missed cleavage. Using Mascot internal export scripts, we transformed Mascot DAT files into XML files and parsed them with in-house scripts so that peptide sequences, scores, and intensities of the individual reporter ion channels are reported. Confidently identified and quantified peptides are selected with the following filters: rank 1 (best spectra assignment); ion score, > 15; and presence of iTRAQ intensity values for reporter channels 113 and 114.  Relative quantification of protein abundance and statistical testing  The procedure for protein quantification was similar to the one described in Ortea et al. (29). In brief, all peptide reporter channel intensities are summed (channel-wise) for each protein individually. This results in aggregated protein intensities. These protein intensities are (channel-wise) normalized to the same median value. The statistical significance of the differences between the means for each genotype (WT vs. VvMSA-RNAi) was determined on the transformed aggregated protein intensities (hyperbolic arcsine transformation) using the two-tailed t-test. The threshold for significance was set to p<0.05. The analysis was performed using in-house R-scripts.

### Publication Abstract
In order to unravel the functions of ASR (Abscisic acid, Stress, Ripening-induced) proteins in the nucleus, we created a new model of genetically transformed grape embryogenic cells by RNAi-knockdown of grape <i>ASR</i> (<i>VvMSA</i>). Nuclear proteomes of wild-type and <i>VvMSA</i>-RNAi grape cell lines were analyzed by quantitative isobaric tagging (iTRAQ 8-plex). The most significantly up- or down-regulated nuclear proteins were involved in epigenetic regulation, DNA replication/repair, transcription, mRNA splicing/stability/editing, rRNA processing/biogenesis, metabolism, cell division/differentiation and stress responses. The spectacular up-regulation in VvMSA-silenced cells was that of the stress response protein VvLEA D-29 (Late Embryogenesis Abundant). Both <i>VvMSA</i> and <i>VvLEA</i> D-29 genes displayed strong and contrasted responsiveness to auxin depletion, repression of <i>VvMSA</i> and induction of <i>VvLEA D-29</i>. In silico analysis of VvMSA and VvLEA D-29 proteins highlighted their intrinsically disordered nature and possible compensatory relationship. Semi-quantitative evaluation by medium-throughput immunoblotting of eighteen post-translational modifications of histones H3 and H4 in <i>VvMSA</i>-knockdown cells showed significant enrichment/depletion of the histone marks H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K9me1, H3K9me2, H3K36me2, H3K36me3 and H4K16ac. We demonstrate that grape ASR repression differentially affects members of complex nucleoprotein structures and may not only act as molecular chaperone/transcription factor, but also participates in plant responses to developmental and environmental cues through epigenetic mechanisms.

### Keywords
Grape, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
Université de Poitiers, UMR CNRS 7267 Écologie & Biologie des Interactions, Équipe Sucres &  Echanges Végétaux-Environnement, 3 rue Jacques Fort, 86073 Poitiers, France
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Bernd Roschitzki

### Lab Head
Dr Rossitza Atanassova
Université de Poitiers, UMR CNRS 7267 Écologie & Biologie des Interactions, Équipe Sucres &  Echanges Végétaux-Environnement, 3 rue Jacques Fort, 86073 Poitiers, France


