### Accession
PXD032030

### Title
Allosteric HSP70 inhibitors in Proteasome Inhibitor Resistant Multiple Myeloma

### Description
Proteasome inhibitor (PI) resistance remains a central challenge in multiple myeloma. To identify pathways mediating resistance, we first mapped proteasome-associated genetic co-dependencies. We identified cytosolic heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) chaperones as potential targets, consistent with proposed mechanisms of myeloma tumor cells overcoming PI-induced stress. These results led us to explore allosteric HSP70 inhibitors (JG compounds) as myeloma therapeutics. We showed these compounds exhibit increased efficacy against acquired and intrinsic PI-resistant myeloma models, unlike HSP90 inhibition. Surprisingly, shotgun and pulsed-SILAC mass spectrometry found that JGs have the most pronounced effect on the proteome not through inhibiting cytosolic HSP70s but instead through mitochondrial-localized HSP70, HSPA9/mortalin, destabilizing the 55S mitoribosome. Analysis of myeloma patient data further supports strong effects of global proteostasis capacity, and particularly HSPA9 expression, on PI response. Our results characterize myeloma proteostasis networks under therapeutic pressure while motivating further investigation of HSPA9 as a specific vulnerability in PI-resistant disease.

### Sample Protocol
AMO1-BtzR cells were treated with 800nM JG98, 400nM JG342, 200nM DMAG, 800nM CB-5083, or DMSO for 22 hours. Cell pellets were lysed in 6M GdnHCL, 0.1M Tris pH¬ 8.5, with 5mM TCEP and 10mM 2-chloro acetamide. Lysates were sonicated for 45 seconds at 1 Hz cycles on ice and cleared by centrifugation at 16000g for 10 minutes at 4C. Protein concentration was measured with 660 assay (Pierce 22660) and 100 µg protein was digested with 2 µg Trypsin (Pierce 90057) for 18-22 hours with digestion halted by addition of TFA to 1% vol/vol. Acidified samples were centrifuged at 17,200g for 5 minutes at RT to remove precipitate. Cleared samples were desalted on SOLA columns (Thermo 60109001) according to manufacturer instructions and eluted in 50% Acetonitrile with 0.1% FA and vacuum dried prior to storage at -80C. Miniaturized TMT labeling was performed based on modified protocol (Zecha et al., 2019). Briefly, peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce Peptide Colormetric Assay (Pierce 23275). 20 ug peptides were resuspended in 17.5 uL 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and labeled with 50 µg TMT reagent dissolved in 2.5 µL Acetonitrile for 1 hour at 25C and 500 rpm. Reactions were quenched by adding hydroxylamine to final concentration of 0.4% and incubation for 15 min at 500 rpm. TMT labeled samples were combined, acidified by addition of 0.1% TFA, vacuum dried, and stored at -80C. Peptides were fractionated using a High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation kit (Pierce, 84868). Briefly, columns were prepared with two acetonitrile washes, followed by two 0.1% TFA washes. Samples were loaded onto the column and washed with HPLC grade water. Peptides were eluted in 8 fractions – 10%, 12.5%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% triethylamine. Samples were then vacuum dried and resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for mass spec analysis. 1 µg of peptides were injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument with 15-cm Acclaim PEPMAP C18 (Thermo, 164534) reverse phase column coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. HPLC non-linear gradient was as follows with buffer A 0.1% FA and buffer B 0.1% FA in 80% Acetonitrile: 3-8% B for 11 minutes, 8-34% B for 80 minutes, 34-50% B for 15 minutes, 50-70% B for 5 minutes with hold at 70% for 3 minutes, and 99% B column wash for 4 minutes prior to re-equilibration for 13 minutes. For MS1 acquisition, spectra were collected in data dependent top 15 method with full MS scan resolution of 70,000, AGC target was set to 3e6, and maximum IT set to 50ms. For MS2 acquisition, resolution was set to 35,000, AGC set to 1e5, and maximum IT to 100ms with Normalized Collison energy of 32.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed in Maxquant (Tyanova et al., 2016a) version 1.6.2.1 with the following settings: PSM/Protein FDR were set to 0.01, Carbidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications,  minimum peptide length = 7, matching time window set to 0.7 min, alignment time window set to 20 min, and match between runs was used, along with other default settings.  Data was searched against the Uniprot Swiss-Prot human proteome (ID:9606, downloaded from Uniprot in 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp70, Proteasome inhibitor, Multiple myeloma

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Ian Ferguson

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Wiita
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco


