### Accession
PXD003976

### Title
Oceanic Synechococcus iron limitation

### Description
Synechococcus strain WH8102 grown with a range of iron concentrations to investigate acclimation to iron availability.

### Sample Protocol
WH8102 iron limited cells were grown in free iron concentrations of 100, 10, 1, 0.5, 0.3, 0.1, 0.03, and 0.004nM Fe.  Cultures for protein analysis were harvested during late log phase. Cells were sonicated and proteins in solution were precipitated with acetone. Isolated proteins were trypsin digested and analysed using nanospray LC interfaced with a Thermo Q-exactive with full MS scans at 70k resolution and data dependent MS2 scans at 17.5k resolution on the top 15 ions.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used to identify proteins against the WH8102 genome using SEQUEST. Scaffold (Proteome Software version 4.3.2) was used to generate normalized spectral counts using a protein identification probability of 99% and a peptide identification probability of 90% with a minimum of 2 identified peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Marine Synechococcus are some of the most diverse and ubiquitous phytoplankton, and iron (Fe) is an essential micronutrient that limits productivity in many parts of the ocean. To investigate how coastal and oceanic Atlantic Synechococcus strains acclimate to Fe availability, we compared the growth, photophysiology, and quantitative proteomics of two Synechococcus strains from different Fe regimes. Synechococcus strain WH8102, from a region in the southern Sargasso Sea that receives substantial dust deposition, showed impaired growth and photophysiology as Fe declined, yet used few acclimation responses. Coastal WH8020, from the dynamic, seasonally variable New England shelf, displayed a multitiered, hierarchical cascade of acclimation responses with different Fe thresholds. The multitiered response included changes in Fe acquisition, storage, and photosynthetic proteins, substitution of flavodoxin for ferredoxin, and modified photophysiology, all while maintaining remarkably stable growth rates over a range of Fe concentrations. Modulation of two distinct ferric uptake regulator (Fur) proteins that coincided with the multitiered proteome response was found, implying the coastal strain has different regulatory threshold responses to low Fe availability. Low nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) availability in the open ocean may favor the loss of Fe response genes when Fe availability is consistent over time, whereas these genes are retained in dynamic environments where Fe availability fluctuates and N and P are more abundant.

### Keywords
Synechococcus wh8102 iron limitation q-exactive

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr MAK ANDERSON SAITO
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


