### Accession
PXD027944

### Title
Analysing alpha4 and alpha9 integrin complex partners

### Description
Adhesion of basal keratinocytes to the underlying extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in the control of skin homeostasis and response to injury. Integrin receptors indirectly link the ECM to the cell cytoskeleton through large protein complexes called focal adhesions (FA). FA also function as intracellular biochemical signaling platforms to enable cells to respond to changing extracellular cues. The α4β1 and α9β1 integrins are both expressed in basal keratinocytes, share some common ECM ligands, and have been shown to promote wound healing in vitro and in vivo. However, their roles in maintaining epidermal homeostasis and relative contributions to pathological processes in the skin remain unclear. We found that α4β1 and α9β1 occupied distinct regions in monolayers of a basal keratinocyte cell line (NEB-1). During collective cell migration (CCM), α4 and α9 integrins co-localized along the leading edge. Pharmacological inhibition of α4β1 and α9β1 integrins increased keratinocyte proliferation and induced a dramatic change in cytoskeletal remodeling and FA rearrangement, detrimentally affecting collective cell migration (CCM). Further analysis revealed that α4β1/α9β1 integrins suppress ERK1/2 activity to control migration through the regulation of downstream kinases including Mitogen and Stress Activated Kinase 1 (MSK1). We performed LC-MS/MS analysis of α4β1/α9β1 adhesion complexes to identify partners that could regulate ERK activity.

### Sample Protocol
The keratinocytes were transiently transfected (via electroporation) with GFP-tagged integrins for GFP trap; cells lysed in 50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 15mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton-X, 5mM EDTA prior to being fully resolved on a 1D SDS PAGE gel. Selected bands of interest which contained possible binding partners, were excised for enzymatic digestion with trypsin prior to peptide/protein identification by LC-MS/MS analysis.   In-gel reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin was performed on the gel samples prior to subsequent analysis by mass spectrometry. Cysteine residues were reduced with dithiothreitol and derivatised by treatment with iodoacetamide to form stable carbamidomethyl derivatives. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at room temperature after initial incubation at 37oC for 2 hours. The protocol for this process was as follows: The peptide sample was resuspended in 30μl of resuspension buffer (2% ACN in 0.05% FA), 10μl of which was injected to be analysed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separation was performed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK). Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75μm C18 column (50cm length) using a three-step linear gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 60 min. The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.1.5. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using a “Universal_CID” method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation. This method takes advantage of multiple analyzers on Orbitrap-Fusion-Lumos and drives the system to use all available parallelizable time, resulting in decreasing the dependence on method parameters (such as data dependent acquisition (DDA)). The instrument was programmed to acquire in automated data-dependent switching mode, selecting precursor ions based on their intensity for sequencing by collision-induced fragmentation using a TopN CID method. The MS/MS analyses were conducted using collision energy profiles that were chosen based on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the charge state of the peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific; v2.2). The raw data file was processed and searched using the Mascot search algorithm (v2.6.0; www.matrixscience.com) and the Sequest search algorithm (Eng et al; PMID 24226387) against the Uniprot Human Taxonomy database (49,806 entries). Processed LC-MS/MS data files produced database generated files which were uploaded into Scaffold 4 (v4.10.0) software (www.proteomesoftware.com) to create a .sfd file. The raw data was searched at a stringency threshold of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and a minimum of one peptide per protein as determined by Mascot and Sequest in the Proteome Discoverer method. The peptide threshold was set to 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion of basal keratinocytes to the underlying extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in the control of skin homeostasis and response to injury. Integrin receptors indirectly link the ECM to the cell cytoskeleton through large protein complexes called focal adhesions (FA). FA also function as intracellular biochemical signaling platforms to enable cells to respond to changing extracellular cues. The &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1 and &#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 integrins are both expressed in basal keratinocytes, share some common ECM ligands, and have been shown to promote wound healing <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo.</i> However, their roles in maintaining epidermal homeostasis and relative contributions to pathological processes in the skin remain unclear. We found that &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1 and &#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 occupied distinct regions in monolayers of a basal keratinocyte cell line (NEB-1). During collective cell migration (CCM), &#x3b1;4 and &#x3b1;9 integrins co-localized along the leading edge. Pharmacological inhibition of &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1 and &#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 integrins increased keratinocyte proliferation and induced a dramatic change in cytoskeletal remodeling and FA rearrangement, detrimentally affecting CCM. Further analysis revealed that &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1/&#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 integrins suppress extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) activity to control migration through the regulation of downstream kinases including Mitogen and Stress Activated Kinase 1 (MSK1). This work demonstrates the roles of &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1 and &#x3b1;9&#x3b2;1 in regulating migration in response to damage cues.

### Keywords
Human, Keratinocytes, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Parsons Group Randall Centre for Cell & Molecular Biophysics King's College London UK
King's College London

### Submitter
Willow Hight-Warburton

### Lab Head
Dr Maddy Parsons
Parsons Group Randall Centre for Cell & Molecular Biophysics King's College London UK


