### Accession
PXD036914

### Title
Identification of substrates of ZDHHC20 in a mouse pancreatic carcinoma cell line

### Description
An shRNA screen to search for the mediators of pancreatic cancer metastasis identified palmitoyl transferase ZDHHC20 as a protein that mediates this process by promoting the outgrowth of metastatic cells in vivo. We sought to identify the substrates of ZDHHC20 by using an engineered mutant of ZDHHC20 with a Y181G substitution, which can selectively accommodate a synthetic lipid probe and transfer it to a protein substrate.

### Sample Protocol
PDA530 Met cells (mouse pancreatic cancer cell line derived from a KPC liver metastasis) with overexpressed ZDHHC20 WT or ZDHHC20 Y181G  were incubated with 15 µM C18-Bz palmitate probe in DMEM (0.5% FBS) for 8 hours, after which the cells were lysed with the lysis buffer (HEPES (50 mM, pH 7.4), 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% SDS, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail, 0.20 µL/mL Benzonase). The Click reaction was carried out using biotin-PEG-azide. The proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol, and pellets resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4 with 1% SDS, then diluted to 0.2%). Biotin-click-tagged proteins were then pulled-down using NeutrAvidin beads. Following the washing steps, a solution containing triethanolamine (TEA, pH 7.5, 50 mM), 4 mM EDTA, and 0.5% ProteaseMAX was added. Then, 2.25 M neutralized hydroxylamine (HA) in 50 mM TEA (pH 7.5) with 4 mM EDTA was added and incubated for 2 hours. Chloroacetamide (CAA) was added to the supernatant at a final concentration of 15 mM, incubated for 15 minutes, and diluted with HEPES (50 mM, pH 8.0). The samples were then digested with 0.3-0.5 µg of trypsin at 37°C overnight, and prepared for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were uploaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0) and searched against Uniprot curated mouse proteome (as of 2019) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme, up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a false discovery rate of 0.01 was set for peptides, proteins and sites. Data was quantified using LFQ with a minimum ratio count = 2. Data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.1). MaxQuant proteingroups.txt output files were uploaded and filtered against contaminants, reverse and proteins identified by site and a base 2 logarithm was applied to all LFQ intensities. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3, downshift = 1.8) or by imputation of the lowest intensity for individual samples. A two-sample Student t-test was performed comparing WT zDHHC20 with mutant Y181G zDHHC20 (S0 = 0.1/0.5, FDR = 0.01/0.05) for all proteins remaining in the dataset and the results analysed according to their statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Palmitoylation, Pancreatic cancer, Zdhhc20

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Goran Tomic

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Downward
The Francis Crick Institute


