### Accession
PXD016473

### Title
Proteomic analysis of serum small extracellular vesicles of individual mice for longitudinal investigations

### Description
Characterization of small extracellular vesicles (sEV) from individual mice for the longitudinal investigation of proteome changes in a mouse model of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM). We first compared precipitation and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) for sEV purification from 100ul of mouse serum. We then optimized SEC-based procedure for the isolation of sEV’s from 50ul of mouse serum. The optimized procedure was then applied to compare the sEV proteomes for the longitudinal analysis of the GBM-mouse model.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 70ul of serum were prepared from each blood sample. Serum was pre-treated by centrifugation (4000 xg) and filtration (0.22um), small extracellular vesicles (sEV) were isolated by precipitation or size exclusion chromatography. sEV were lysed (1% SDS lysis buffer) and concentrated on 3KDa spin filters. Protein digestion was performed by using a modified SP3 protocol. Briefly, the lysate was mixed with paramagnetic beads, proteins denatured by incubation at 95°C, then reduced (DTT), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and washed. Protein concentration was determined using a modified micro BCA assay. In this study three different proteolytic digestion conditions were investigated. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Procedure optimization raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. MaxQuant software (1.6.3.4) was used for the longitudinal label-free comparison of GBM mice. The LC-MS/MS data was searched against the UniProt Mus Musculus protein database (January 2018, 16,945 entries), supplemented with a home-made common contaminant database (250 sequences). Common settings were: up to 2 missed cleavages; methionine oxidation and acetylation as dynamic modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. MS/MS spectra were searched by SequestHT using the following setting of Proteome Discoverer: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance. The search engine results were then filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm and additionally filtered for a minimum peptide Xcorr score of 1.8. At least one unique peptide was required for definitive protein identification. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred between runs by using Max Quant software to replace missing values for quantification using 0.7-min retention-time alignment. Peptides were filtered to a minimum length of 7 amino acids and 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Longitudinal analysis of disease models enables the molecular changes due to disease progression or therapeutic intervention to be better resolved. Approximately 75&#xa0;&#xb5;l of serum can be drawn from a mouse every 14&#xa0;days. To date no methods have been reported that are able to analyze the proteome of small extracellular vesicles (sEV's) from such low serum volumes. Here we report a method for the proteomics analysis of sEV's from 50&#xa0;&#xb5;l of serum. Two sEV isolation procedures were first compared; precipitation based purification (PPT) and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). The methodological comparison confirmed that SEC led to purer sEV's both in terms of size and identified proteins. The procedure was then scaled down and the proteolytic digestion further optimized. The method was then applied to a longitudinal study of serum-sEV proteome changes in a glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) mouse model. Serum was collected at multiple time points, sEV's isolated and their proteins analyzed. The protocol enabled 274 protein groups to be identified and quantified. The longitudinal analysis revealed 25 deregulated proteins in GBM serum sEV's including proteins previously shown to be associated with GBM progression and metastasis (Myh9, Tln-1, Angpt1, Thbs1).

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Size exclusion chromatography, Small extracellular vesicles, Mouse, Glioblastoma, Proteomics, Serum

### Affiliations
Scuola Normale Superiore 
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme, Pisa, Italy Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Federica Anastasi

### Lab Head
Dr Liam A. McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme, Pisa, Italy Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


