### Accession
PXD004253

### Title
Nano-liquid chromatography-orbitrap MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics reveals differences between the mechanisms of action of carnosic acid and carnosol in colon cancer cells

### Description
A shotgun proteomics study based on stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) and nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) has been performed to identify the relative changes in proteins and to gain some light on the specific molecular targets and mechanisms of action of CA and CS in HT-29 colon cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
After the treatment with rosemary polyphenols, cells were trypsinized and washed with 1 mL of cold PBS, and 1 × 106 cells were lysed with 300 μL of lysis buffer (6 M urea, 1% BOG, 0.15 M NaCl, 1.3 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaVO4, 5 mM NaF, 2.5 mM sodium-pyrophospate and 5 mM β-Glycerophosphate in PBS) supplemented with 10 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail. The samples were incubated for 60 min at 4 ºC during mild agitation, sonicated for 30 min at 0 ºC in water bath (Elma, Germany) and centrifuged at 10,000 x g at 4 ºC for 15 min (Sigma, Germany). Protein concentration was measured using Bio-rad DCTM assay and 10 μg of proteins were incubated at 4 ºC for 90 min in 500 μL of ice-cold tributylphosphate:acetone:methanol mixture (1:12:1, v/v/v). The precipitate was centrifuged for 15 min (3,000 x g at 4 ºC), washed with 1 mL cold acetone and finally air-dried. The resultant pellets were dissolved in 20 μL of 1% (w/v) BOG with 20% (v/v) ACN in 0.1 M TEAB, and the proteins were reduced with 10 μL of 45 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 15 min and alkylated with 10 μL of 100 mM IAA for 15 min in the dark. For protein digestion, samples were incubated at 37 ºC overnight in darkness with 0.5 μg of LysC/trypsin solution (5% w/w, of total protein content). Samples were dried in SpeedVac to remove ACN, resuspended in 70 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and water saturated ethyl-acetate was used to extract BOG. The tryptic peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 70 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and dimethyl labeling was performed as previously described by Boersema et al. (2009). Briefly, 4 μL of regular formaldehyde CH2O (4%, v/v) was added to control samples and 4 μL of deuterated formaldehyde CD2O (4%, v/v) was added to treated samples, marking them as light and medium respectively. After vortexing, 4 μL of freshly prepared 0.6 M NaBH3CN solution was added to each sample and incubated for 60 min at room temperature with mild agitation. The reaction was finished by adding 16 μL of 1% (v/v) ammonia solution (Merck, Germany) and 8 μL of 5% (v/v) FA (Merck, Germany) was added to consume the excess labeling reagents. Finally, light and medium samples were mixed together and desalted on Isolute C18 solid phase extraction columns (1 mL, 50 mg capacity, Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). After desalting, peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA to a concentration of 1 μg/μL prior to nano-LC−MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were collectively processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) applying the Andromeda search engine with the following adaptions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. MaxQuant scored peptides for identification based on a search with a maximal mass deviation of precursor and fragment masses of up to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against a concatenated forward and reversed version of the Uniprot human database (downloaded 226 on February 11, 2015, containing 89,909 entries and 245 frequently detected contaminants) for quantitative study. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine and protein N-acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. For dimethyl labeling, DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, and DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels. A minimum peptide ratio count of two and at least one “razor peptide” was required for quantification. After protein quantification, each data set was normalized to the median of the ratios to correct for mixing of medium and light labeled cells at 1:1 ratios, and to enable a better comparison between the different conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Carnosic acid (CA) and carnosol (CS) are two structurally related diterpenes present in rosemary herb (Rosmarinus officinalis). Although several studies have demonstrated that both diterpenes can scavenge free radicals and interfere in cellular processes such as cell proliferation, they may not necessarily exert the same effects at the molecular level. In this work, a shotgun proteomics study based on stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) and nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) has been performed to identify the relative changes in proteins and to gain some light on the specific molecular targets and mechanisms of action of CA and CS in HT-29 colon cancer cells. Protein profiles revealed that CA and CS induce different Nrf2-mediated response. Furthermore, examination of our data revealed that each diterpene affects protein homeostasis by different mechanisms. CA treatment induces the expression of proteins involved in the unfolded protein response in a concentration dependent manner reflecting ER stress, whereas CS directly inhibits chymotrypsin-like activity of the 20S proteasome. In conclusion, the unbiased proteomics-wide method applied in the present study has demonstrated to be a powerful tool to reveal differences on the mechanisms of action of two related bioactive compounds in the same biological model.

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Quantitative proteomics, Antiproliferative activity, Ht-29 cells, Carnosic acid, 16 foodomics, Mass spectrometry, Carnosol, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049, Madrid, Spain
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr Alejandro Cifuentes
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049, Madrid, Spain


