### Accession
PXD041573

### Title
Molecular basis for recognition and deubiquitination of 40S ribosomes by Otu2

### Description
Otu2-driven deubiquitylation of ribosomal protein eS7 impacts translational efficiency. Here, authors provide the molecular basis for recognition of monoubiquitinated eS7 on 40S and give mechanistic insights into Otu2’s role in translation reset. In this context quantitative mass spectrometry analyses of OTU2 and UBP3 pulldowns were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purified samples (n=3 per group prepared individually) were transferred to a Nu-PAGE gel and run for 6 min at 200V until the gel pockets were empty. Gels were stained for 60 min using SimplyBlue Safestain and protein-containing areas were excised. To reduce proteins, gel bands were treated with 45 mM dithioerythritol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 55 °C. Free sulfhydryl groups were carbamidomethylated by 2 x 15 min incubation in a solution of 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature. Prior to digestion, gel slices were minced. Digestion was performed for 8 h at 37°C using 70 ng modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA). Tryptic peptides were extracted using 70% acetonitrile and dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Peptides were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online-coupled to a Q Exactive HF X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were diluted in 15 µl 0.1% formic acid and injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (nanoViper C18, 2 cm length, 100 μM ID, Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed with an analytical EasySpray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm length, 75 μm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile was used as solvent B. As chromatography method a 30 min gradient from 3% to 25% solvent B followed by a 5 min gradient from 25% to 40% B was used. Data dependent mass spectrometry was performed using cycles of one full MS scan (350 to 1600 m/z) at 60k resolution and up to 12 MS/MS scans at 15k resolution.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae subset of the UniProt database. LFQ values were used for label-free quantification. Data analysis and statistics was done using Perseus (1.5.3.2). To handle missing values, the imputation feature of Perseus was used. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width, 0.3; down-shift, 1.8). For statistical evaluation, a two-sided Students T-test including a permutation-based FDR correction was performed. Significant hits (FDR < 0.05) with log2-fold changes < -0.6 and > 0.6 were regarded as relevant.

### Publication Abstract
In actively translating 80S ribosomes the ribosomal protein eS7 of the 40S subunit is monoubiquitinated by the E3 ligase Not4 and deubiquitinated by Otu2 upon ribosomal subunit recycling. Despite its importance for translation efficiency the exact role and structural basis for this translational reset is poorly understood. Here, structural analysis by cryo-electron microscopy of native and reconstituted Otu2-bound ribosomal complexes reveals that Otu2 engages 40S subunits mainly between ribosome recycling and initiation stages. Otu2 binds to several sites on the intersubunit surface of the 40S that are not occupied by any other 40S-binding factors. This binding mode explains the discrimination against 80S ribosomes via the largely helical N-terminal domain of Otu2 as well as the specificity for mono-ubiquitinated eS7 on 40S. Collectively, this study reveals mechanistic insights into the Otu2-driven deubiquitination steps for translational reset during ribosome recycling/(re)initiation.

### Keywords
Translation, Ubiquitination, Pulldown, Otu2, Ubp3

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Gene Center Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Gene Center Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25


