### Accession
PXD022907

### Title
Identification of interactors of AtNRG1B after treatment with Pfo carrying avrRps4 effector

### Description
NRG1.2 is a helper NLR required for RRS1 RPS4 mediated immunity. RPS4 recognizes effector avrRps4 from pathogen P. syringae leading to hypersensitive response and immunity. here we co-immunoprecipitate NRG1.2-HF to identify interacting proteins upon effector recognition

### Sample Protocol
NRG1.2-HF was co-IP from Arabidopsis leaf extracts infiltrated with Pfo carrying empty vector or Pfo carrying avrRps4

### Data Protocol
Raw files were peak picked with MS-convert to generate mgf files. MGF files were used in Mascot Deamonand searched against Arapaort 11 fasta file and contanminant fasta files as database. Mascot files were imported into Scaffold to visualize and valide MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications

### Publication Abstract
Plants utilise intracellular nucleotide-binding, leucine-rich repeat (NLR) immune receptors to detect pathogen effectors and activate local and systemic defence. NRG1 and ADR1 "helper" NLRs (RNLs) cooperate with enhanced disease susceptibility 1 (EDS1), senescence-associated gene 101 (SAG101) and phytoalexin-deficient 4 (PAD4) lipase-like proteins to mediate signalling from TIR domain NLR receptors (TNLs). The mechanism of RNL/EDS1 family protein cooperation is not understood. Here, we present genetic and molecular evidence for exclusive EDS1/SAG101/NRG1 and EDS1/PAD4/ADR1 co-functions in TNL immunity. Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we show effector recognition-dependent interaction of NRG1 with EDS1 and SAG101, but not PAD4. An EDS1-SAG101 complex interacts with NRG1, and EDS1-PAD4 with ADR1, in an immune-activated state. NRG1 requires an intact nucleotide-binding P-loop motif, and EDS1 a functional EP domain and its partner SAG101, for induced association and immunity. Thus, two distinct modules (NRG1/EDS1/SAG101 and ADR1/EDS1/PAD4) mediate TNL receptor defence signalling.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Arabidopsis, Nlr, Immunity, Effector

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank L.H. Menke
the Sainsbury laboratory


