### Accession
PXD005517

### Title
Phylointeractomics reconstructs functional evolution of protein binding

### Description
Molecular phylogenomics investigates evolutionary relationships based on genomic data. However, despite genomic sequence conservation, changes in protein interactions can occur relatively rapidly and may cause strong functional diversification. To investigate such functional evolution, we here combine phylogenomics with interaction proteomics. We develop this concept by investigating the molecular evolution of the shelterin complex, which protects telomeres, across 16 vertebrate species from zebrafish to humans covering 450 million years of evolution. Our phylointeractomics screen discovers previously unknown telomere-associated proteins and reveals how homologous proteins undergo functional evolution. For instance, we show that TERF1 evolved as a telomere-binding protein in the common stem lineage of marsupial and placental mammals. Phylointeractomics is a versatile and scalable approach to investigate evolutionary changes in protein function and thus can provide experimental evidence for phylogenomic relationships.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion and MS analysis was performed essentially as previously described (Kappei et al., 2013). Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase capillary (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. We used a 90 min gradient from 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 200 nl/min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated with a Top10 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.8) against the ENSEMBL annotated protein and the genescan databases of the respective species (duck: BGI1.0.74; dog: CanFam3.1.71; guinea pig: cavPor3.75; zebrafish: Zv9.71; human: GRCh37.71; wallaby: Meug_1.0.74; opossum: BROADO5.71; mouse: GRCm38.71; rabbit: oryCun2.71; medaka: MEDAKA1.7; rat: Rnor_5.0.71; Tasmanian devil: DEVIL7.0.74; pig: Sscrofa10.2.71; zebrafinch: taeGut3.2.4.71; xenopus: JGI_4.2.71; rabbit: oryCun 2.71) with the exception of axolotl where the Am2.0 database was used. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The search was performed with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm mass accuracy for the precursor ion and 20 ppm for the MS/MS spectra in the HCD fragmentation mode. Search results were processed with MaxQuant and filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. The match between run option and the LFQ quantitation were activated.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular phylogenomics investigates evolutionary relationships based on genomic data. However, despite genomic sequence conservation, changes in protein interactions can occur relatively rapidly and may cause strong functional diversification. To investigate such functional evolution, we here combine phylogenomics with interaction proteomics. We develop this concept by investigating the molecular evolution of the shelterin complex, which protects telomeres, across 16 vertebrate species from zebrafish to humans covering 450 million years of evolution. Our phylointeractomics screen discovers previously unknown telomere-associated proteins and reveals how homologous proteins undergo functional evolution. For instance, we show that TERF1 evolved as a telomere-binding protein in the common stem lineage of marsupial and placental mammals. Phylointeractomics is a versatile and scalable approach to investigate evolutionary changes in protein function and thus can provide experimental evidence for phylogenomic relationships.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Interactomics, Telosome

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


