### Accession
PXD000007

### Title
Comprehensive mapping of the bull sperm surface proteome

### Description
Nitrogen cavitation of bovine sperm to isolate plasma membrane. FASP digestion using trypsin.  Data acquired using 5 workflows: (1) Unfractionated on a 5600 TripleTOF; (2) SCX-ESI-LC-MS/MS on a QSTAR Elite; (3) 1D Gel-LC-ESI-LC-MS/MS on a QSTAR Elite; (4) SCX-LC-MALDI-MS/MS on a UltrafleXtreme; (5) 1D Gel-LC-MALDI-MS/MS on a UltrafleXtreme

### Sample Protocol
Semen used in this study was obtained from electroejacula-tion of five Brahman (Bos indicus) bulls in accordance withAustralian Animal Ethics Guidelines and with approval fromthe Faculty of Veterinary Science Animal Ethics Committee,University of Queensland. Semen (n=8 replicates) was col-lected from the University of Queensland Veterinary School(Pullenvale, Brisbane, Australia), pooled between bulls andtransported to the laboratory where it was filtered through a 70m nylon cell strainer (BD Biosciences, Bedford, USA) to re-move gelatinous material. Sperm were washed on a discontin-uous Percoll (GE Healthcare, Castle Hill, Australia) gradientas described previously [35]. All solutions were supplementedwith protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free; Roche Diag-nostics, Mannheim, Germany). Sperm were maintained atroom temperature (22C) prior to cavitation to minimise theeffect of cold shock, and PM and acrosome deterioration. For membrane vesicle isolations, a standard nitrogen cav-itation and differential centrifugation protocol [35, 36] wasfollowed, with slight modifications (Supporting InformationMaterials and Methods). Briefly, approximately 1×109Per-coll, washed sperm cells in TBSS (Tris-buffered sucrose so-lution; 5 mM Tris, 250 mM sucrose, pH 7.4) were subjectedto nitrogen cavitation at 650 psi for 15 min at 22Cinacelldisruption device (Parr Instruments, Moline, USA) and thecavitate was slowly extruded. Membrane material was pelletedby differential ultracentrifugation (232 000×g) and the finalpellet of PMs resuspended in Hepes-buffered saline (HBS; 5mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4). The PM isolates were fur-ther subfractionated by sucrose density centrifugation [37,38]using a three-step discontinuous sucrose gradient. Threefractions were collected:Band IandBand II, respectivelycontaining the plasma membrane vesicles (PMV) and theresidual pellet (Supporting Information Fig. S1). The relativepurity of the membrane isolates was evaluated by measur-ing marker enzymes, alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) andacrosin (EC 3.4.21.10) using techniques well established inmammalian species [19, 35, 39–42]. Lectin binding was as-sessed using an enzyme-linked lectin-binding assay (ELLBA)[35]. Epitopes for WGA (wheat germ agglutinin:Triticumvulgaris) specific forN-acetylglucosamine and sialic acid;and epitopes for PNA (peanut agglutinin:Arachis hypogaea) specific for galactose/N-acetylgalactoseamine (T-antigen); aswell as ConA (Concanavalin A agglutinin:Canavalia en-siformis), specific for mannose glycoproteins were quan-titated (details in Supporting Information Materials andMethods). Protein concentration was determined by bicin-choninic acid assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) using BSA asastandard.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilotTM4.0.1 software (AB/Sciex), with the ParagonAlgorithm and integrated FDR analysis [47], was used for theidentification of proteins. The MS/MS spectra were searchedinitially against all bovine proteins present in the UniProtdatabase (Bos: version 20110718; 70,452 proteins) and thenwidened to include all mammalian proteins present in theUniProt database (Mammalian: version 20110325: 744,256proteins), as described previously [44]. The criteria for pos-itive protein identification were proteins with≥99% confi-dence (ProteinPilotTMScore≥2.0), with one or more uniquepeptides≥95% confidence (ProteinPilotTMScore≥1.3). In ad-dition, the only protein identifications that were accepted hada ’Global’ FDR estimation of no higher than 1% (p<0.01confidence level). High-confidence positive proteins identi-fied from the five MS approaches were confirmed by man-ual inspection of the spectra and search results. All peptideswith variable modifications and/or missed/unusual cleavageswere inspected for correct product ion assignments. Onlyspectra that passed the criteria: (i) were of significant qual-ity (intensity); (ii) all major peaks were assigned; (iii) greaterthan 70% of the peptides sequence was explained by frag-ment ions; were accepted. Identified proteins from the fiveMS workflows were combined and manually curated for an-notation redundancy in the UniProt databases.

### Publication Abstract
While the mechanisms that underpin maturation, capacitation, and sperm-egg interactions remain elusive it is known that these essential fertilisation events are driven by the protein complement of the sperm surface. Understanding these processes is critical to the regulation of animal reproduction, but few studies have attempted to define the full repertoire of sperm surface proteins in animals of agricultural importance. Recent developments in proteomics technologies, subcellular fractionation, and optimised solubilisation strategies have enhanced the potential for the comprehensive characterisation of the sperm surface proteome. Here we report the identification of 419 proteins from a mature bull sperm plasma membrane fraction. Protein domain enrichment analyses indicate that 67% of all the proteins identified may be membrane associated. A large number of the proteins identified are conserved between mammalian species and are reported to play key roles in sperm-egg communication, capacitation and fertility. The major functional pathways identified were related to protein catabolism (26S proteasome complex), chaperonin-containing TCP-1 (CCT) complex and fundamental metabolic processes such as glycolysis and energy production. We have also identified 118 predicted transmembrane proteins, some of which are implicated in cell adhesion, acrosomal exocytosis, vesicle transport and immunity and fertilisation events, while others have not been reported in mammalian LC-MS-derived sperm proteomes to date. Comparative proteomics and functional network analyses of these proteins expand our system's level of understanding of the bull sperm proteome and provide important clues toward finding the essential conserved function of these proteins.

### Keywords
Ultraflextreme, Bovine, Qstar elite, Sperm, Plasma membrane, 5600 tripletof

### Affiliations
CSIRO Agriculture and Food
CSIRO Food Futures National Research Flagship, Division of Livestock Industries, Queensland Biosciences Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Michelle Colgrave

### Lab Head
Dr Michael K. Holland
CSIRO Food Futures National Research Flagship, Division of Livestock Industries, Queensland Biosciences Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia


