### Accession
PXD046083

### Title
Global proteome-wide analysis of cysteine S-nitrosylation in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii transmitted via various route and rapidly duplicated during the acute infection, which caused the important zoonosis regarding to medicine and veterinary, toxoplasmosis. T. gondii possessed innate capability of producing nitric oxide (NO) and nitric oxide derivatives and S-nitrosylation not only participated in their signaling transduction, but also was a regulatory mechanism of protein post-translation. To date, S-nitrosylation proteome of T .gondii remains a mystery. In present study, we reported the first S-nitrosylated proteomic profile in T. gondii using mass spectrometry in combination with resin-assisted enrichment. 637 proteins were found to be S-nitrosylated and more than half of these S-nitrosylated proteins were localized in nucleus or cy-toplasm. Motif analysis identified seven motifs including five motifs containing lysine and two motif harboring isoleucine. GO enrichment revealed that S-nitrosylated proteins were mainly lo-cated in the mitochondrial inner membrane and organelle inner membrane in the cell. Those S-nitrosylated proteins were related with diverse biological and metabolic processes including or-ganic acid binding, carboxylic acid binding ribose and phosphate biosynthetic process. Glycoly-sis/gluconeogenesis and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis were two remarkable pathways in which T. gondii S-nitrosylated proteins engaged. Twenty seven ribosomal proteins and eleven microneme proteins out of 22 secretory proteins were identified as S-nitrosylated proteins, which suggested that proteins in ribosome and microneme were S-nitrosylated with high proportion. PPI analysis identified three subnetworks with high relevancy ribosome, RNA transport and chaperonin com-plex component. These results implied  that S-nitrosylated proteins in T. gondii were associated with protein translation in ribosome, gene transcription, invasion and proliferation of T. gondii. Our research firstly identified the S-nitrosylated proteomic profile of T. gondii and will provide a valuable resource for deep-going investigation of the functions of S-nitrosylation in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
Tachyzoites of T. gondii RH strain was maintained by serial passage in human fore-skin fibroblast (HFF) monolayers. HFF monolayers were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco, United States) added with 10% fetal calf serum (FBS, Gibco, United States) and 100 U/ml penicillin–streptomycin in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator at 37°C. Two culture flasks containing the HFF monolayer was infected with 1 × 106 tachyzoites.Lysed by T. gondii tachyzoites were harvested and washed several times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The culture mixture was passed through a 25 gauge needle and the parasites were filtrated through a 3 μm membrane filters (Millipore) to eliminate the HFF cell debris. Finally, the pured parasite was pelleted using 3000 rpm for 15 minute and was stored at −80°C for use. The tachyzoite pellets were lysed using appropriate volume of lysis buffer containing 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 1% protease inhibitor followed by ultrasonic dis-cruption on ice for 5 min. Afterwards, samples were submitted to centrifugation at 20000×g for 15 min at 4 ℃. Finally, the supernatant was gathered and the protein concentration was measured by the Bradford protein assay. For digestion, six volumes of pre-chilled acetone was applied to precipitate the pro-tein at -20 ℃ for 2 h and trypsin was mixed with protein at trypsin to protein mass ratio of 1:50 to digest at 37 ℃ for overnight. Then, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added into the protein solution at the terminal concentration of 5 mM to reduce the solution for 30 min at 56 ℃, and iodoacetamide (IAA) was blended into the reduced protein solution at the final con-centration of 11 mM to alkylate the solution for 15 min at 25 ℃ in the dark. Following a second digestion using 1:100 trypsin-to- protein mass ratio for 4 h at 37 ℃, a Sep-Pac 18 column was applied to desalt the digested peptides and the digested peptides was finally was vacuum-dried. Enrichment of S-nitrosylated peptides was conducted as previously described [21, 3063] by applying an iodoacetyl tamdem mass tagTM (iodoTMTTM) reagents (90103, Thermo Scientific, USA). The redissolved peptides was transferred into 50 μl of an-ti-TMT resin slurry and the mixture was incubated in the dark at 4 ℃, under rotation. After overnight of incubation, the resin was washed with HENS buffer for five times followed by washing with sterilized H2O for one time. Afterwards, S-nitrosated peptides was eluted and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were finally de-salted on C18 disks according to the manufacturer's instructions and then were dried down for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Tryptic peptides dissolved with buffer A (2% (acetonitrile) ACN, 0.1% (formic acid) FA) were separated by an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system and EASYSpray source (Thermo Sci-entific) with EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 25 cm × 75 μm ID column (Thermo Scientific). The linear gradient of buffer B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) running at a flow rate of 500 nL/min was applied to elute the samples. The elution started from 9% buffer B and increased into 23% buffer B. Then, the concentration of buffer B gradually rose into 35% within 5 min and the linearizing gradient of buffer B ascending into 80% for 5 min was following. Further-more, the concentration of buffer B was held at 80% for 2 min and then was returned into 5% within 1 min, followed by a maintenance of 5% buffer B for 10 min. Finally, the spectra of first-grade MS were acquired during the scan scope of 350 to 1600 m/z in the resolution of 1.2×106. The spectra of second-grade MS were obtained with the parameter set up as fol-lows: resolution = 1.5×105; maximum injection time = 100 ms; AGC target = 1e5. The mode of second-grade MS spectra was HCD (high-energy collisional dissociation) and the nor-malized collision energy of which was set as 30eV.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides and proteins were conducted by Proteome Discoverer soft-ware version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) combined with  Mascot 2.3 search engines (Matrix Science). The MS/MS spectra were queried against the Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain da-tabase (http://www.toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/TgondiiME49/fasta/data/). Pa-rameters of the search included: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm; enzyme = trypsin; frag-ment mass tolerance = 0.05 Da. Dynamic modifications harbored carbamidomethylation (C), iodoTMTsixplex (C), and methionine oxidation. The creteria applied to filter resulting peptides were false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 and the confidence level of 95% were maximum 5%. To obtain the probable S-nitrosylation motifs of S-nitrosylated peptides characterized in our research, the Motif-X algorithm [64] was utilized to analyze the bias of amino acid residues approximating S-nitrosylation sites and investigate motif consensus sequences for protein S-nitrosylation. The logo-like representation was used to graphically display motifs created in the alignment. Subcellular localization of nitrosylated proteins were pre-dicted by using the WoLF PSORT (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp). Subsequently, Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was conducted by applying the UniProt-GOA (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goa/) database. The InterProScan software were also employed to annotate protein’s GO func-tion stemed from protein sequence alignment method in case of absence of annotation by UniProt-GOA database. Using Gene Ontology (GO) (http://www.geneontology.org) analy-sis, S-nitrosylated proteins were categoried into three classes including molecular function, biological process and cell component. The The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Ge-nomes (KEGG) (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) analysis was performed to annotate S-nitrosylated proteins to KEGG pathways. Meanwhile, InterProScan software and In-terPro domain database were applied to annotate the protein domains based on protein sequence alignment. The GO/KEGG/Domain enrichment analysis of all identified proteins were analysis employing a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. The interaction network S-nitrosylated proteins involved were predicted using the Search Tool of the Retrieval of Interaction Genes/Proteins (STRING) database and the protein-protein interactions (PPI) network was represented by Cytoscape software. The PPI whose combined score was > 0.9 were subjected to further interaction network analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> transmits through various routes, rapidly proliferates during acute infection and causes toxoplasmosis, which is an important zoonotic disease in human and veterinary medicine. <i>T. gondii</i> can produce nitric oxide and derivatives, and S-nitrosylation contributes to their signaling transduction and post-translation regulation. To date, the S-nitrosylation proteome of <i>T. gondii</i> remains mystery. In this study, we reported the first S-nitrosylated proteome of <i>T. gondii</i> using mass spectrometry in combination with resin-assisted enrichment. We found that 637 proteins were S-nitrosylated, more than half of which were localized in the nucleus or cytoplasm. Motif analysis identified seven motifs. Of these motifs, five and two contained lysine and isoleucine, respectively. Gene Ontology enrichment revealed that S-nitrosylated proteins were primarily located in the inner membrane of mitochondria and other organelles. These S-nitrosylated proteins participated in diverse biological and metabolic processes, including organic acid binding, carboxylic acid binding ribose and phosphate biosynthesis. <i>T. gondii</i> S-nitrosylated proteins significantly contributed to glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis. Moreover, 27 ribosomal proteins and 11 microneme proteins were identified as S-nitrosylated proteins, suggesting that proteins in the ribosome and microneme were predominantly S-nitrosylated. Protein-protein interaction analysis identified three subnetworks with high-relevancy ribosome, RNA transport and chaperonin complex components. These results imply that S-nitrosylated proteins of <i>T. gondii</i> are associated with protein translation in the ribosome, gene transcription, invasion and proliferation of <i>T. gondii</i>. Our research is the first to identify the S-nitrosylated proteomic profile of <i>T. gondii</i> and will provide direction to the ongoing investigation of the functions of S-nitrosylated proteins in <i>T. gondii</i>.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii; post-translational modifications; cysteine s-nitrosylation; s-nitrosylated pro-teome

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
Ze-Xiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr ZeXiang Wang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University


