### Accession
PXD020474

### Title
Systems biology of blood and tissue for comprehensive analysis of immune response to hepatitis B vaccine in adults

### Description
Protein concentrations of both lysed WBC and plasma samples were measured by the PierceTM Bradford Assay and normalized to contain 10 μg per sample before proceeding with sample digestion using the procedure as previously described44. Peptides were desalted using STop-And-Go Extraction tips (STAGE tips)45, dried using the Vacufuge Plus (Eppendorf) for 45 minutes, then chemically dimethylated with light, medium, and heavy formaldehyde46 for triplex analysis of each timepoint per individual (i.e. two triplex samples were prepared for each individual, with sample from one of the timepoints spiked into both triplexed samples to use a reference). After labeling, samples for each triplex was combined and desalted and dried again using STAGE tips and the Vacufuge Plus. Peptides were resuspended in 30μl of 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS). A total of 2 μg per sample was injected into the EasynLC-1000 chromatography system (Thermo) with a 50 cm analytical column, packed in-house with C18, coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), with detailed parameters as previously described47. Data was analysed using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) with default values and “Match Between Runs” activated, searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 15 July, 2017).

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations of both lysed WBC and plasma samples were measured by the PierceTM Bradford Assay and normalized to contain 10 μg per sample before proceeding with sample digestion using the procedure as previously described. Peptides were desalted using STop-And-Go Extraction tips (STAGE tips), dried using the Vacufuge Plus (Eppendorf) for 45 minutes, then chemically dimethylated with light, medium, and heavy formaldehyde46 for triplex analysis of each timepoint per individual (i.e. two triplex samples were prepared for each individual, with sample from one of the timepoints spiked into both triplexed samples to use a reference). After labeling, samples for each triplex was combined and desalted and dried again using STAGE tips and the Vacufuge Plus. Peptides were resuspended in 30μl of 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS). A total of 2 μg per sample was injected into the EasynLC-1000 chromatography system (Thermo) with a 50 cm analytical column, packed in-house with C18, coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), with detailed parameters as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) with default values and “Match Between Runs” activated, searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 15 July, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Conventional vaccine design has been based on trial-and-error approaches, which have been generally successful. However, there have been some major failures in vaccine development and we still do not have highly effective licensed vaccines for tuberculosis, HIV, respiratory syncytial virus, and other major infections of global significance. Approaches at rational vaccine design have been limited by our understanding of the immune response to vaccination at the molecular level. Tools now exist to undertake in-depth analysis using systems biology approaches, but to be fully realized, studies are required in humans with intensive blood and tissue sampling. Methods that support this intensive sampling need to be developed and validated as feasible. To this end, we describe here a detailed approach that was applied in a study of 15 healthy adults, who were immunized with hepatitis B vaccine. Sampling included ~350 mL of blood, 12 microbiome samples, and lymph node fine needle aspirates obtained over a ~7-month period, enabling comprehensive analysis of the immune response at the molecular level, including single cell and tissue sample analysis. Samples were collected for analysis of immune phenotyping, whole blood and single cell gene expression, proteomics, lipidomics, epigenetics, whole blood response to key immune stimuli, cytokine responses, <i>in vitro</i> T cell responses, antibody repertoire analysis and the microbiome. Data integration was undertaken using different approaches-NetworkAnalyst and DIABLO. Our results demonstrate that such intensive sampling studies are feasible in healthy adults, and data integration tools exist to analyze the vast amount of data generated from a multi-omics systems biology approach. This will provide the basis for a better understanding of vaccine-induced immunity and accelerate future rational vaccine design.

### Keywords
Tissue, Hepatitis b vaccone, Systems biology, Blood

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Queenie Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia


