### Accession
PXD001399

### Title
Protein Quantification and Identification from River Bank Grape, Vitis riparia: Comparing SDS-PAGE and FASP-GPF techniques for shotgun proteomic analysis.

### Description
The aim of this quantitative label-free shotgun proteomic experiment is to perform a comparative study of two different sample preparation methods which employ two different pre-fractionation techniques (SDS-PAGE and FASP-GPF) for use in shotgun proteomic analysis of Vitis riparia leaf material with concurrent label-free quantitation in order to optimise a technique that would facilitate identification of most number of proteins and produce useful biological information, when searched against the Vitis vinifera database.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves were harvested from spur-pruned, potted, 2-6 year old Vitis riparia Michx plants. Proteins were extracted using guanidine hydrochloric acid and methanol-chloroform precipitation and digested by two different methods: in-gel digestion using SDS-PAGE and filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Proteins were identified using LC-MS/MS spectra acquired in the mass range of 400-1600 amu for SDS-PAGE samples and for FASP, by gas phase fractionation (GPF) in four mass ranges with m/z values of 400 – 506, 501 – 658, 653 – 913 and 908 – 1600 from a Velos Pro linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome. Protein were quantified using spectral counting.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from the nanoLC-MS/MS were converted to mzXML files and searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome (65,328 entries, March 2013) using the global proteome machine (GPM) software, Version 2.1.1 (http://www.thegpm.org) and the X!Tandem algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Protein sample preparation optimisation is critical for establishing reproducible high throughput proteomic analysis. In this study, two different fractionation sample preparation techniques (in-gel digestion and in-solution digestion) for shotgun proteomics were used to quantitatively compare proteins identified in Vitis riparia leaf samples. The total number of proteins and peptides identified were compared between filter aided sample preparation (FASP) coupled with gas phase fractionation (GPF) and SDS-PAGE methods. There was a 24% increase in the total number of reproducibly identified proteins when FASP-GPF was used. FASP-GPF is more reproducible, less expensive and a better method than SDS-PAGE for shotgun proteomics of grapevine samples as it significantly increases protein identification across biological replicates. Total peptide and protein information from the two fractionation techniques is available in PRIDE with the identifier PXD001399 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001399).

### Keywords
Sds-page, Grapevine, Fasp

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW 2109

### Submitter
Iniga George

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A Haynes
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW 2109


