### Accession
PXD004246

### Title
iMixPro: intelligent Mixing of Proteomes for elimination of false positives in affinity purification-mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein complexes are essential in most organizational and functional aspects of the cell. Different strategies currently exist to analyze such protein complexes by mass spectrometry, including affinity purification (AP-MS) and proximal labeling based strategies. However, the high sensitivity of current mass spectrometers typically results in extensive protein lists mainly consisting out of non-specifically co-purified proteins. Finding the true positive interactors in these lists thus remains highly challenging with proposed solutions on all levels of such experiments. Here, we report an intelligent experimental design based on differential isotopic labeling combined with non-equal mixing of control and experimental samples to discover bona fide interaction partners in AP-MS experiments. We apply this intelligent Mixing of Proteomes (iMixPro) concept to overexpression experiments where we investigate the interactomes of RAF1, RNF41 and TANK, and also to engineered cell lines expressing epitope-tagged endogenous PTPN14, JIP3 and IQGAP1.  For all baits, we observed both known and novel interactions. The results for RNF41 and TANK were compared to a classical affinity purification design which clearly underscores the efficiency and the specificity of the iMixPro approach.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T were cultured using standard conditions in DMEM (GIBCO, Life Technologies) complemented with 10% FBS in an 8% CO2 humidified atmosphere. For SILAC labeling, cells were grown in either light medium or heavy medium containing respectively 12C6 Lys and 12C6 Arg, or 13C6 Lys and 13C6 Arg at concentrations that prevent proline conversion. For transient transfections, 2.2x107 HEK293T cells were seeded in a 145 cm2 dish (PD145) the day before transfection. The seeded cells were transfected early morning using linear polyethylene imine (PEI) with 14.5 g bait expression vector or mock plasmid. The bait expression plasmid is transfected in 1 PD145 dish which was light labeled and 1 PD145 dish expressing heavy labeled proteins. The mock plasmid is transfected in cells cultured in 3 additional light-labeled PD145 dishes. Cell lysis and pull down conditions were based on the protocol described by Kean and colleagues (15). The cells were lysed after 32 h using lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0; 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail tablet [Complete™, Roche], 0.25 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM glycerophosphate and 10 mM NaF) (15). One additional freeze-thaw treatment was performed to ensure complete homogenization. After centrifugation, insoluble material was removed and the supernatant was incubated for 2 h at 4°C with 20 l paramagnetic MyOne beads™ (Dynal, Thermo) loaded with 2 g biotinylated anti-FLAG antibody (clone M2, Sigma Aldrich) for each of the samples (5 samples for each iMixPro analysis). All samples were washed once with 1 ml lysis buffer, and 200 l FLAG magnetic rinsing buffer (20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 and 2 mM CaCl2) was added to each of the samples. Samples were then combined in a single reaction tube. The total supernatant was removed from the beads, and 750 ng sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 5 l TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 was added to digest the protein complexes on the matrix. Another 3 h incubation with an additional 250 ng trypsin was performed after removal of the beads. After acidification of the samples by 2% formic acid, samples were directly analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (PTPN14, JIP3 and IQGAP1), or were further fractionated using capillary HPLC (RAF1, RNF41 and TANK) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant searches (version 1.5.3.30) were performed against the human SwissProt database (March 2016) with trypsin/P settings allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and pyroglutamate formation as variable modifications. Arg6 and Lys6 setting was used for labels. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. PSM FDR and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Min. peptides and Min. razor +unique peptides were 1. Contaminants and identifications against the REVERSE database were removed in the PERSEUS (version 1.5.3.2) analysis before the log2 transformation of the non-normalized protein and peptide ratios. When repeat experiments were available, the searches were performed together with the original sample to allow matching of MS spectra between runs. All raw data and MaxQuant combined files were uploaded to PRIDE through ProteomExchange (30). Candidate proteins were obtained by evaluating the peptide ratios of all peptides attributed to a protein. Proteins were only retained if at least two peptides were quantified, and if the majority of the peptides (75%) have a Heavy over Light (H/L) Log2 ratio surpassing -1.

### Publication Abstract
Protein complexes are essential in all organizational and functional aspects of the cell. Different strategies currently exist for analyzing such protein complexes by mass spectrometry, including affinity purification (AP-MS) and proximal labeling-based strategies. However, the high sensitivity of current mass spectrometers typically results in extensive protein lists mainly consisting of nonspecifically copurified proteins. Finding the true positive interactors in these lists remains highly challenging. Here, we report a powerful design based on differential labeling with stable isotopes combined with nonequal mixing of control and experimental samples to discover bona fide interaction partners in AP-MS experiments. We apply this intelligent mixing of proteomes (iMixPro) concept to overexpression experiments for RAF1, RNF41, and TANK and also to engineered cell lines expressing epitope-tagged endogenous PTPN14, JIP3, and IQGAP1. For all baits, we confirmed known interactions and found a number of novel interactions. The results for RNF41 and TANK were compared to a classical affinity purification experiment, which demonstrated the efficiency and specificity of the iMixPro approach.

### Keywords
Human overexpression cell lines ap-ms silac

### Affiliations
VIB Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Ghent, Belgium Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sven Eyckerman

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Ghent, Belgium Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


