### Accession
PXD026624

### Title
SLC13A5/NaCT overexpression causes disrupted white matter integrity, synaptic dysfunction, and an autistic-like phenotype in the mouse

### Description
Endoplasmic-reticulum (ER)-based N-lysine acetylation is a positive selection marker for properly folded glycoproteins in the early secretory pathway, serving as an important protein quality control system. Excessive N-lysine acetylation within the ER via overexpression of the acetyl-CoA transporter AT-1 results in altered glycoprotein flux through the secretory pathway, which dramatically impacts dendritic branching and spine formation causing an autistic-like phenotype in the mouse. AT-1 works in concert with SLC25A1, the citrate/malate antiporter in the mitochondria, SLC13A5, the plasma membrane sodium/citrate synporter, and ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), the cytosolic enzyme that converts citrate into acetyl-CoA, in order to maintain the cytosolic-to-ER flux of acetyl-CoA. As such, we generated the SLC13A5 neuron transgenic (nTg) mouse with the hypothesis that increasing cytosolic citrate would impact acetyl-CoA flux into the ER and recapitulate the autistic-like AT-1 nTg model. Here, we demonstrated the SLC13A5 nTg mouse exhibits autistic-like behaviors with a jumping stereotypy. The mice displayed disrupted white matter integrity and altered synaptic structure and function. Finally, analysis of both the proteome and acetylome revealed unique adaptations in the hippocampus and cortex to SLC13A5 overexpression, implicating the importance of metabolic consequences of altered cytosolic citrate/acetyl-CoA availability in the neuron. Overall, our results corroborate the mechanistic link between aberrant intracellular citrate/acetyl-CoA flux and the development of an autistic-like phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Cortical and hippocampal tissues were lysed in 8 M urea buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher) followed by a minute of sonication. The lysate was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 minutes, then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for an additional 15 minutes. Approximately 100 μg of protein was then digested with trypsin with a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted and dried (SpeedVac; Eppendorf), and concentrations of the peptide mixture were measured. Samples were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further processing. Dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) tags were synthesized as previously described.29 DiLeu tags were activated in anhydrous DMF combined with DMTMM and NMM at 0.7× molar ratio and vortexed at room temperature for 45 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatant was used immediately for peptide labeling. DiLeu labeling was performed by addition of labeling solution at a 20:1 tag to digested peptide ratio by weight and vortexed at room temperature for 2 hours. The labeling reactions were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a concentration of 0.25%, and the labeled peptide samples were dried in vacuo. The samples were combined and cleaned with SCX SpinTips (Protea Biosciences) and desalted with Omix C18 pipet tips (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) detection system consisted of a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) instrument (Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system; Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher). In brief, 0.5 μg of peptide mixture dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) was loaded onto a 75 μm x 15 cm fabricated column filled with 1.7 μm Bridged Ethylene Hybrid packing materials (130 Å; Waters) over a 126-min linear gradient of 3-45% Mobile Phase B (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in ACN) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner using an Orbitrap mass analyzer. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 1 × 105, and the scan ranged from 300 to 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, up to 15 of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS and detected by the Orbitrap at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400. Only precursor ions with charge states of 2-6 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The automatic gain control for MS/MS was set to 8e3, with maximum ion injection times of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion time was 45 seconds, and the window for isolating the precursors was 1.4 m/z.  Protein and peptide identification and quantification were conducted through MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8.30 Raw files were searched against the Uniprot mouse reviewed database (August, 2019) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 1% at the peptide and protein level. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with at most two missed cleavages. A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin/p’, with a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. Static modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) and DiLeu labeling on N-terminus and lysine residues (+145.12801 Da). Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.98402 Da). The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The false discovery rates of the peptide-spectrum matches and proteins were set to less than 1%. Quantitation was performed using Perseus software.31 Briefly, the raw reporter ion intensity in each DiLeu channel was corrected for isotope impurities29 and normalized for mixing differences by equalizing the total signal in each channel. In cases where no signal was detected in a channel, the missing value was assigned with the noise level of the original spectrum (noise-band capping of missing channels), and the resultant intensity was not corrected for impurities or normalized for uneven mixing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Slc13a5;acetyl-coa;mouse;lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UW madison
PHARM/PHARMACY, UW Madison

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
PHARM/PHARMACY, UW Madison


