### Accession
PXD006814

### Title
Optimization of quantitative proteomic analysis of clots

### Description
The aim of our study was to optimize quantitative proteomic analysis of  fibrin clots prepared ex vivo from citrated plasma of the peripheral blood drawn from patients with prior venous thromboembolism. We used a multiple enzyme digestion filter aided sample preparation (MED FASP) method combined with LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Proxeon Easy-nLC System coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. We also evaluated the impact of peptide fractionation with pipet-tip strong anion exchange (SAX) method on the obtained results. Our proteomic approach revealed >500 proteins repeatedly identified in the plasma fibrin clots from patients with venous thromboembolism. The multienzyme digestion (MED) FASP method using three different enzymes: LysC, trypsin and chymotrypsin increased the number of identified peptides and proteins and their sequence coverage as compared to a single and double step digestion. Peptide fractionation with SAX protocol slightly increased the depth of proteomic analyses, but also extended the time needed for sample analysis with LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 70 µg total protein were processed using the MED FASP method.. Briefly, proteins were subsequently cleaved overnight with endoproteinase LysC (Wako, Germany), trypsin (Promega, USA) and chymotrypsin (Roche, Switzerland) for 18h, 3h and 3h, respectively. Peptide containing fractions were collected after each digestion step. The enzyme to protein ration was 1:50. Digestions were carried out in 50 mM Tris-HCl for LysC and trypsin and in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 and 10 mM CaCl2 for chymotrypsin. All reactions were conducted at 37 °C. Aliquots containing a 10 µg of total peptides were desalted on C18-StageTips  and concentrated to a volume of ~5µL and were stored frozen at -20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched using MaxQuant software. All raw files were searched together in single MaxQuant run using separate parameter options for MS-files from analyses of LysC, trypsin and chymotrypsin. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 7 amino acids. The initial maximal mass tolerance in MS mode was set to 7 ppm, whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data. The “matching between the runs“-option was used. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Protein abundances were calculated using the “Total Protein Approach” (TPA) method

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Med fasp, Venous thromboembolism, Clot

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Biochemical Proteomics Group, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Biochemical Proteomics Group, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


