### Accession
PXD000454

### Title
Drosophila melanogaster iTRAQ HCD dataset

### Description
Quantitative comparation of the tagmata of body and head using iTRAQ based on HCD Fragmentation. The 8-plex iTRAQ Multiplex Buffer Kit (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) was used to label different peptide fractions, in which iTRAQ reagents dissolved in isopropyl alcohol. Another internal standard of D.melanogaster body and head mixed with 1:1 (B+H) was also used when doing iTRAQ labeling. Therefore the same amount of B (body), H1 (head), H2 (head), B+H (internal standard) peptide fractions prepared as described above were labeled by equal but different iTRAQ reagents and incubated for 5 h at room temperature. The four different labeled peptide fractions (B:113, H1:114, H2:115, B+H:116 ) were then mixed with 1:1 and dried in a speedvac followed by desalting purification using stage tip. All prepared peptides were further analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) coupled with UPLC (nano Acquity Ultra Performance LC, Waters). For HCD raw files, the profile data was firstly centralized by ReAdW.exe in TPP and then deisotoped and deconvoluted using in-house made scripts to improve the identification rate of spectra. All MGF files were searched using Mascot 2.3 against a Drosophila melanogaster database with 24,043 entries (http://flybase.org/, release 5.4, 24,043 entries). The target-decoy based strategy was used to control the peptide false discovery rate (FDR).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Drosophila melanogaster is one of the most widely used model organisms in life sciences. Mapping its proteome is of great significance for understanding the biological characteristics and tissue functions of this species. However, the comprehensive coverage of its proteome remains a challenge. Here, we describe a high-coverage analysis of whole fly through a 1D gel electrophoresis and LC-MS/MS approach. By combining the datasets of two types of SDS-PAGE and two kinds of tagmata, the high-coverage analysis resulted in the identification of 5262 genes, which correspond to 38.23% of the entire coding genes. Moreover, we found that the fly head and body have different molecular weight distributions of their proteomes when the proteins were resolved with SDS-PAGE and image analysis of the stained gel. This phenomenon was further confirmed by both label-free and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation-based quantitative approaches. The consistent results of the two different quantitation methods also demonstrated the stability and accuracy of the LC-MS/MS platform. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000454 and PXD000455 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000454; (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000455).

### Keywords
Hcd, Itraq

### Affiliations
Beijing proteome research center

### Submitter
Zhang Chengpu Zhang Chengpu

### Lab Head


