### Accession
PXD006708

### Title
The transcriptome, extracellular proteome and active secretome of agroinfiltrated N. benthamiana uncover an expanded protease repertoire

### Description
Background: The infiltration of disarmed Agrobacterium tumefaciens into leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana (agroinfiltration) is a widely-adopted procedure to produce and study proteins in plant science, for instance to determine subcellular localization and protein-protein interactions. Agroinfiltration also facilitates quick and safe production of biopharmaceuticals. However, the agroinfiltration expression platform is hampered by unintended proteolysis, some of which might be associated with an elevated immune response. Results: Here, we studied the transcriptome, extracellular proteome and active secretome of agroinfiltrated leaves over a time course, with and without the p19 silencing inhibitor. Remarkably, p19 expression had little effect on the leaf transcriptome and no effect on the extracellular proteome. 25% of the detected transcripts changed in abundance upon agroinfiltration, associated with a gradual upregulation of immunity and a downregulation of photosynthesis. By contrast, 70% of the extracellular proteins increase in abundance and for some proteins this coincides with increased efficiency of extracellular delivery. The protease repertoire of N. benthamiana is expanded compared to other model plants and consists of 1245 proteases and protease homologs. We detect transcripts encoding for 975 proteases, identified extracellular peptides from 196 proteases and monitored 17 active extracellular Ser and Cys proteases in agroinfiltrated leaves. Conclusions: Analysis of agroinfiltrated leaves at transcript, protein and activity levels uncover transcriptional and post-transcriptional/translational reprogramming upon agroinfiltration, associated with substantial increase of the extracellular proteome, and a complex, expanded protease repertoire. This dataset increases our understanding of the plant response to agroinfiltration and indicates ways to improve a key expression platform for both plant science and molecular farming.

### Sample Protocol
Sample clean-up for LC-MS. Acidified tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described [1]. We used a 2 disc StageTips for each sample and passed the solution over the tips in 150 µL aliquots by centrifugation (600 – 1200 ×g). Bound peptides were washed with 0.1% FA and subsequently eluted with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution.  LC-MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, [2]) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 20 (ISD) or 32 cm(OBD)) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140-min gradient of solvent A and solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (gradient ISD: start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Gradient OBD: start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 80% B for 10 min and 80% B for 10 min). The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) [3]. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the Fourier transform mass spectrometer (FTMS, the orbitrap), monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda [4] search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings [5]. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated [6]. MS/MS spectra data were searched against our in house N. benthamiana (DB05_representative_proteins_curated.fasta; 74091 entries) and the Uniprot Agrobacterium fabrum (strain C58) (UP000000813_176299.fasta; 5376 entries) databases. All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences) and the p19_vector_proteins.fasta database (3 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination, the p19 Database contains all proteins encoded by the p19 vector. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) and Carbamylation on protein N-terminus and Lysin (K) (43 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3 [7].

### Publication Abstract
Infiltration of disarmed Agrobacterium tumefaciens into leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana (agroinfiltration) facilitates quick and safe production of antibodies, vaccines, enzymes and metabolites for industrial use (molecular farming). However, yield and purity of proteins produced by agroinfiltration are hampered by unintended proteolysis, restricting industrial viability of the agroinfiltration platform. Proteolysis may be linked to an immune response to agroinfiltration, but understanding of the response to agroinfiltration is limited. To identify the proteases, we studied the transcriptome, extracellular proteome and active secretome of agroinfiltrated leaves over a time course, with and without the P19 silencing inhibitor. Remarkably, the P19 expression had little effect on the leaf transcriptome and no effect on the extracellular proteome. 25% of the detected transcripts changed in abundance upon agroinfiltration, associated with a gradual up-regulation of immunity at the expense of photosynthesis. By contrast, 70% of the extracellular proteins increased in abundance, in many cases associated with increased efficiency of extracellular delivery. We detect a dynamic reprogramming of the proteolytic machinery upon agroinfiltration by detecting transcripts encoding for 975 different proteases and protease homologs. The extracellular proteome contains peptides derived from 196 proteases and protease homologs, and activity-based proteomics displayed 17 active extracellular Ser and Cys proteases in agroinfiltrated leaves. We discuss unique features of the N.&#xa0;benthamiana protease repertoire and highlight abundant extracellular proteases in agroinfiltrated leaves, being targets for reverse genetics. This data set increases our understanding of the plant response to agroinfiltration and indicates ways to improve a key expression platform for both plant science and molecular farming.

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Plant protease family, Activity-based protein profiling (abpp), Silencing inhibitor p19, Plant immunity, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Activity-based proteomics, Chlorosis, Rnaseq, Extracellular proteome, Agroinfiltration, Plant protease annotation, Post-translational activation

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


