### Accession
PXD023073

### Title
NeissLock: an inducible protein anhydride for covalent targeting of endogenous proteins

### Description
Effective and convenient covalent protein conjugation could benefit diverse biological systems, stabilizing key protein protein interactions which are otherwise reversible. Neisseria meningitidis contains a protein which undergoes autoproteolysis via an anhydride. Here, we harness this spontaneously generated electrophile for covalent targeting of unmodified endogenous proteins. In ‘NeissLock’, a binding protein genetically fused to the self-processing module (SPM) docks to its target protein. Upon triggering with calcium, the aspartic anhydride generated at the C-terminus of the binding protein allows nucleophilic attack by nearby residues on the target protein, so ligating the proteins. We established a computational tool to search the Protein Data Bank, assessing proximity of amines to C-termini. We validated and optimized the NeissLock concept using the Ornithine Decarboxylase/Antizyme complex. A range of nucleophiles on the target (α-amine or ε-amines) could rapidly react with the anhydride, but reaction was blocked if the partner protein did not dock. Surprisingly, the optimal pH for covalent ligation was 7.0. We then armed Transforming Growth Factor-α with SPM and established covalent targeting to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor at the surface of living cells. NeissLock harnesses exceptional protein chemistry to allow covalent targeting of endogenous proteins under mild conditions with up to 80% yield, allowing new possibilities for molecular engineering.

### Sample Protocol
Conjugated protein samples were resolved on 18% SDS-PAGE to separate different conjugate species. Bands were cut from the gel. For in-gel tryptic digest, gel slices were fragmented and transferred to LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). Gel pieces were covered with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) + 50% (v/v) 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and destained at 37 °C. Samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 25 °C, before drying the gel slices with ACN. Subsequently, samples were incubated for 30 min at 25 °C with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark (leading to carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines). Gel slices were washed twice with ACN and rehydrated with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM acetic acid at 100 ng trypsin per band. After overnight digestion, supernatant was collected in LoBind tubes and tryptic digestion inhibited upon wash of gel pieces with 10% (v/v) formic acid. Finally, remaining (cross-linked) peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with ACN. After transfer to a new LoBind tube, the solvent was removed by vacuum evaporation. Extracted peptides were resuspended with 5% (v/v) formic acid and 5% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in water and combined with the previous supernatant. Alternatively, initial digestion and subsequent extraction were combined before vacuum evaporation and resuspended together.  Samples were stored at 4 °C or frozen until analysis.  Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC (Marino et al., 2014) 1000 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Proxeon) and electrosprayed directly into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher) using solvent A [0.1% (v/v) formic acid  in water] at 500 bar and then separated on an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm inner diameter packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a linear gradient from 10% to 55% (v/v) solvent B [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN] in 45 min at 200 nL/min. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-2000 m/z, resolution 70,000, Automatic Gain Control  target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms). After the MS scans, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17,500, Automatic Gain Control target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 100 m/z. Charge states 1+ and 2+ were excluded from HCD fragmentation. MS data were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) using pParse and searched using the pLink software (Yang et al., 2012). The database contained the target proteins and common contaminants. Search parameters were as follows: maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable modification 1 = Oxidation-Met, variable modification 2 = Glu to pyro-Glu. Crosslinking from D to K, S, T or N-terminus was considered. Data were initially filtered to a False-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Crosslinks were further filtered/inspected with specific emphasis on fragmentation patterns.

### Data Protocol
The crosslinking software was pLink 2.3.9. The software performed all steps from RAW to crosslinking identification. Parameter file is provided with the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
The Neisseria meningitidis protein FrpC contains a self-processing module (SPM) undergoing autoproteolysis via an aspartic anhydride. Herein, we establish NeissLock, using a binding protein genetically fused to SPM. Upon calcium triggering of SPM, the anhydride at the C-terminus of the binding protein allows nucleophilic attack by its target protein, ligating the complex. We establish a computational tool to search the Protein Data Bank, assessing proximity of amines to C-termini. We optimize NeissLock using the Ornithine Decarboxylase/Antizyme complex. Various sites on the target (&#x3b1;-amine or &#x3b5;-amines) react with the anhydride, but reaction is blocked if the partner does not dock. Ligation is efficient at pH 7.0, with half-time less than 2&#x2009;min. We arm Transforming Growth Factor-&#x3b1; with SPM, enabling specific covalent coupling to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor at the cell-surface. NeissLock harnesses distinctive protein chemistry for high-yield covalent targeting of endogenous proteins, advancing the possibilities for molecular engineering.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Protein engineering, Protein conjugation, Synthetic biology, Nanoassembly, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 7 UK.

### Submitter
Shabaz Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Howarth
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, 7 UK.


