### Accession
PXD011161

### Title
Iron regulation in Clostridioides difficile

### Description
The response to iron limitation of several bacteria is regulated by the ferric uptake regulator (Fur). The Fur-regulated transcriptional, translational and metabolic networks of the Gram-positive, pathogen Clostridioides difficile were investigated by a combined RNA sequencing, proteomic, metabolomic and electron microscopy approach. At high iron conditions (760 g/l) the C. difficile fur mutant displayed a growth deficiency compared to wild type C. difficile cells. Several iron transporters were found induced by Fur regulation during low iron (11 g/l) conditions. The major adaptation to low iron conditions was observed for the central energy metabolism. Most ferredoxin-dependent amino acid fermentations were found significantly down regulated (had, etf, acd, grd, trx, bdc, hbd). The substrates of these pathways phenylalanine, leucine, glycine and some initial intermediates (phenylpyruvate, oxo-isocaproate, 3-hydroxy-butanoyl-CoA, crotonyl-CoA) were found accumulated, while some end product like isocaproate and butanoate were found reduced. Flavodoxin (fldX) formation and riboflavin biosynthesis (rib) were found enhanced, most likely to replace the missing ferredoxins. Proline reductase (prd), the corresponding ion pumping RNF complex (rnf) and the reaction product 5-aminovalerate were significantly enhanced. An ATP forming ATPase (atpCDGAHFEB,) of the F0F1-type was found induced while the formation of a V-type, mostly proton-pumping, ATP-consuming ATPase (atpDBAFCEKI, was decreased. The [Fe-S] enzyme-dependent pyruvate formate lyase (pfl), formate dehydrogenase (fdh) and hydrogenase (hyd) branch of glucose utilization and glycogen biosynthesis (glg) were significantly reduced, leading to an accumulation of glucose and pyruvate. The formation of [Fe-S] enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (coo) was inhibited. An intensive remodeling of the cell wall was observed most likely to increase antibiotic resistance. Polyamine biosynthesis (spe) was found induced leading to an accumulation of spermine, spermidine and putrescine. The fur mutant lost most of its flagella. Finally, the CRISPR/Cas and a prophage encoding operon were downregulated. Fur binding sites were found upstream of 20 of the regulated genes. Overall, adaptation to low iron conditions in C. difficile focused on an increase of iron import, significant decrease in metabolic iron utilization and protection during the complex transition.

### Sample Protocol
Growth and Omics experiments were performed in Clostridium difficile minimal medium (CDMM) (Neumann-Schaal et al., 2015) under anaerobic conditions. Cells were harvested (10 min, 8000 x g) anaerobically using gas-tight polypropylene tubes (TPP, Trasadingen, Switzerland) and harvested cells and/or supernatant were used for transcriptome, proteome and metabolome analyses. Cell pellets were suspended in 700 µl of ice-cold urea-containing buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), 4 % (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 50 mM Tris-HCl). Cell lysis was performed by sonication in six cycles of 60 s (probe MS73, amplitude 60 %, 0.1 s pulse every 0.5 s) on ice (Sonoplus, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 6,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Proteins of cell free resulting lysates were precipitated by addition of ice-cold acetone (in a 1:7 ratio (v/v)) for 20 h at -20 °C. Subsequently, samples were allowed to warm to room temperature and were centrifuged at 22,000 g for 45 min at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and the pellets were dried. The protein pellets were solubilized in SDS-containing urea-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 % (v/v) SDS). For protein concentration determination, 10 µl of each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX Precast Gels 4-20 %, Biorad, Hercules, California). Resulting SDS-gels were fixed for 1 hour in 40 % (v/v) EtOH, 10 % (v/v) glacial acidic acid, washed in H2O and stained by the Flamingo fluorescent dye (Biorad, Hercules, California) for 1 hour. Comparable protein amounts (~30 µg of protein per sample) for each analyzed condition were separated by SDS-PAGE as described above and stained overnight with Colloidal Coomassie. Gel lanes were cut into 10 slices and proteins subjected to in-gel trypsinization as described previously (Lassek et al, 2015). The eluted peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses performed on a Proxeon nLC 1000 coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). In-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 μm, o.d. 360 μm, length 150 mm; packed with 1.7 µm Aeris XB-C18 reversed-phase material (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) were loaded and washed with 10 μl of buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid) at a maximum pressure of 750 bar. For coupled LC-MS/MS analysis, elution of peptides took place with a nonlinear 80 min gradient from 1 to 99 % buffer B (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were recorded with a mass spectrometer at a resolution of R = 60,000 with lockmass correction activated. After acquisition of the full MS spectra, up to 20 dependent scans (MS/MS) were performed according to precursor intensity by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID) in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed as previously described(Lassek et al., 2015). For this purpose, Sequest HT database searches were performed with raw files against a C. difficile 630 protein database containing common contaminations (3804 entries). The following search parameters were used: enzyme typ = trypsin (KR), peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, tolerance for fragment ions = 0.6 Da, b- and y-ion series, variable modification = methionine (15.99 Da); a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a false discovery rate (FDR) of at most 1 %, requiring a minimum of at least two unique peptides for protein identification and quantification. Moreover, only proteins that were at least identified in two out of three biological replicates were taken into account. Relative protein quantification was achieved by calculating the normalized area under the curve (NAUC). Identification of statistical differences in relative protein amounts was performed using t-test (p-value < 0.05) including adjusted Bonferroni correction and all possible permutations.

### Publication Abstract
The response to iron limitation of several bacteria is regulated by the ferric uptake regulator (Fur). The Fur-regulated transcriptional, translational and metabolic networks of the Gram-positive, pathogen <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> were investigated by a combined RNA sequencing, proteomic, metabolomic and electron microscopy approach. At high iron conditions (15 &#x3bc;M) the <i>C. difficile fur</i> mutant displayed a growth deficiency compared to wild type <i>C. difficile</i> cells. Several iron and siderophore transporter genes were induced by Fur during low iron (0.2 &#x3bc;M) conditions. The major adaptation to low iron conditions was observed for the central energy metabolism. Most ferredoxin-dependent amino acid fermentations were significantly down regulated (<i>had, etf, acd, grd, trx, bdc, hbd</i>). The substrates of these pathways phenylalanine, leucine, glycine and some intermediates (phenylpyruvate, 2-oxo-isocaproate, 3-hydroxy-butyryl-CoA, crotonyl-CoA) accumulated, while end products like isocaproate and butyrate were found reduced. Flavodoxin (<i>fldX</i>) formation and riboflavin biosynthesis (<i>rib</i>) were enhanced, most likely to replace the missing ferredoxins. Proline reductase (<i>prd</i>), the corresponding ion pumping RNF complex (<i>rnf</i>) and the reaction product 5-aminovalerate were significantly enhanced. An ATP forming ATPase (<i>atpCDGAHFEB</i>) of the F<sub>0</sub>F<sub>1</sub>-type was induced while the formation of a ATP-consuming, proton-pumping V-type ATPase (<i>atpDBAFCEKI</i>) was decreased. The [Fe-S] enzyme-dependent pyruvate formate lyase (<i>pfl</i>), formate dehydrogenase (<i>fdh</i>) and hydrogenase (<i>hyd</i>) branch of glucose utilization and glycogen biosynthesis (glg) were significantly reduced, leading to an accumulation of glucose and pyruvate. The formation of [Fe-S] enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (<i>coo</i>) was inhibited. The <i>fur</i> mutant showed an increased sensitivity to vancomycin and polymyxin B. An intensive remodeling of the cell wall was observed, Polyamine biosynthesis (<i>spe</i>) was induced leading to an accumulation of spermine, spermidine, and putrescine. The <i>fur</i> mutant lost most of its flagella and motility. Finally, the CRISPR/Cas and a prophage encoding operon were downregulated. Fur binding sites were found upstream of around 20 of the regulated genes. Overall, adaptation to low iron conditions in <i>C. difficile</i> focused on an increase of iron import, a significant replacement of iron requiring metabolic pathways and the restructuring of the cell surface for protection during the complex adaptation phase and was only partly directly regulated by Fur.

### Keywords
Fur, Polyamine, Metabolism, Iron transport. cell wall, Iron regulation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald Institute for Microbiology Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald Institute for Microbiology Department for Microbial Proteomics


