### Accession
PXD020078

### Title
Urinary Glycoproteomic profiling of Non-Muscle Invasive and Muscle Invasive Bladder Carcinoma Patients reveals distinct N-glycosylation pattern of CD44, MGAM and GINM1

### Description
Clinical management of bladder carcinomas (BC) remains a major challenge and demands comprehensive multi-omics analysis for better stratification of the disease. Identification of patients on risk requires identification of signatures predicting prognosis risk of the patients. Understanding the molecular alterations associated with the disease onset and progression could improve the routinely used diagnostic and therapy procedures. In this study, we investigated the aberrant changes in N-glycosylation pattern of proteins associated with tumorigenesis as well as disease progression in bladder cancer. We integrated and compared global N-glycoproteomic and proteomic profile of urine samples from bladder cancer patients at different clinicopathological stages (non-muscle invasive and muscle-invasive patients (n=5 and 4 in each cohort)) with healthy subjects (n=5) using SPEG method. We identified 635 N-glycopeptides corresponding to 381 proteins and 543 N-glycopeptides corresponding to 326 proteins in NMIBC and MIBC patients respectively. Moreover, we identified altered glycosylation in 41 NMIBC and 21 MIBC proteins without any significant change in protein abundance levels. In concordance with the previously published bladder cancer cell line N-glycoproteomic data, we also observed dysregulated glycosylation in ECM related proteins. Further, we identified distinct N-glycosylation pattern of CD44, MGAM and GINM1 between NMIBC and MIBC patients, which may be associated with disease progression in bladder cancer. These aberrant protein glycosylation events would provide a novel approach for bladder carcinoma diagnosis and further define novel mechanisms of tumor initiation and progression.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were collected from patients confirmed with bladder carcinoma enrolled in All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), Delhi. The urine for the control group is collected from healthy volunteers with consent. The study was conducted in accordance with the ethical requirements and the project was approved by the Ethics Committee (Project identification code: IEC-372/07.07.2017). For the initial screening, voided urine was collected from healthy subjects and bladder carcinoma patients in 50 ml centrifuge tubes. The voided urine was clean catch, midstream urine, and the samples did not contain squamous cells or microbes. The samples collected from the healthy individuals (the control group), were confirmed with no previous history of urothelial cell carcinoma, gross hematuria, active urinary tract infection or urolithiasis. After collection, 15ml urine from each sample was centrifuged at 7000 g for 15 minutes at 4⁰C to remove the cell debris. Supernatant was collected, concentrated to 500 µl in 3 kDa filters. Protein amount was estimated using BCA (Bicinchoninic Acid) protein assay. From all samples 100µg of protein from each sample were reduced, alkylated and precipitated with 10mM (dithiothreitol) DTT, 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and ice-cold acetone. The precipitated samples were then resuspended in 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and digested with trypsin (1:20, Promega) 12-16 h at 37⁰C. Resulting peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 material (Waters, Catalog # WAT023501).  Peptides from corresponding samples were labeled with 10 plex TMT labels according to manufacturer’s protocol. Then N-deglycopeptides were enriched directly by employing solid-phase extraction of N-glycopeptides method as described previously [39] . Glycopeptides from the tryptic peptide digest were enriched using solid-phase extraction of glycosite-containing peptides (SPEG). Briefly, 90% of the TMT-labeled tryptic peptides (1 mg) were dissolved in 5% ACN in 0.1% TFA followed by adding 1/10 of the final volume of 100 mM sodium periodate to the samples. The samples were incubated with hydrazide beads for one hour at room temperature in the dark with gentle shaking. Beads were then washed to remove any nonspecific binding. PNGaseF (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) was used to detach glycosite-containing peptides from glycans conjugated on the beads. The peptides and enriched glycopeptides were analyzed on Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoﬂow liquid chromatography system. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (75 µm×50 cm, RSLC C18) at a ﬂow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient of 8%–35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) for 105 min. The total run time was set to 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The precursor scan MS scan (from m/z 350–1600) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set as 3 × 106 and ion ﬁlling time set at 50 ms. The most intense ions with charge state≥2 was isolated and fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 32% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 45,000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target for MS/MS was set as 5×105 and ion ﬁlling time set at 150 ms, while dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10-ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data were searched against Human RefSeq protein database (version 81, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using SEQUEST search algorithm through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Following search parameters were used: two missed cleavages allowed, trypsin as cleavage enzyme, a tolerance of 10 ppm on precursors and 0.02 Daltons on the fragment ions. Fixed modification includes: carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 10‐plex (+229.163) modification at N‐terminus of peptide and lysine and variable modification as oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine. Data was also searched against a decoy database and filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Glycopeptides were further filtered for consensus sequence of N-linked glycosylation motif NXS/T. Protein centric glycosylation site were inferred using in house PERL script. The relative abundance of N-glycoproteins was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urothelial carcinoma; n-linked glycoproteomics; urine proteomics; nmibc; mibc

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics
Reserch Scientist, Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore

### Submitter
Gajanan Sathe

### Lab Head
Dr Gajanan Sathe
Reserch Scientist, Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore


