### Accession
PXD002798

### Title
Hb Oxidation in stored RBCs and Vesicles

### Description
We used a state of the art proteomics workflow, based upon nano-UPLC-MS\MS and advanced database searching to identify oxidative modifications to functional residues of hemoglobin subunit beta . Progressive accumulation of oxidized residues in stored erythrocytes and selective removal in vesicles was observed, further substantiating the hypothesis about vesiculation as a self-protecting mechanism in aging erthrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was collected from five healthy donors and stored in CP2D-AS-3. Units were sterily sampled at stroage days 0, 21, and 42. Cells, supernatants, adn vesicles were sorted through centrifugation or ultra-centrifugation and prepared for proteomics analysis. Proteins were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE, visualized, and twelve bands per sample were in-gel digested with trypsin. The samples were then run through nano-UPLC-MS/MS (Easy-nLC 1000 and LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to peak lists and searched against the human uniprotKB (release date 2015.01.08) using Mascot (v. 2.4). Error tolerant searches were initially performed to identify modifications, followed by searches with set variable modifications based upon prominant IDs from the error tolerant searches. Search parameters included: Trypsin specificity, two missed cleavages, 15ppm precursor ion error, and 0.6Da fragment ion error. Variable modifications for post-error tolerant searches included: Carbamidomethylation(C), mono-, di-, and tri- oxidation(C), His->Asp, and Oxidation(H). Spectral matches with an expectation value >0.05 were excluded from analysis and semi-quantitation of specific modifications was performed. Using only spectral matches to fully tryptic peptides, no. of matches to oxidized vs. non-oxidized forms of the peptide were compared.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms\ms, Hemoglobin, Oxidation, Rbc transfusion

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Denver - Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
University of Colorado Denver

### Submitter
Matthew Wither

### Lab Head
Dr Angelo D'Alessandro
University of Colorado Denver - Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics


