### Accession
PXD042009

### Title
Structural insights into Siglec-15 reveal glycosylation dependency for its interaction with T cells through integrin CD11b

### Description
Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 15 (Siglec-15) is emerging as an immune modulator and target for cancer immunotherapy. However, limited knowledge regarding its mechanism of action and structure, or its binding partners with T cells, restrains the development of drug candidates that could unleash its full therapeutic potential. Here, we determine the crystal structure of Siglec-15 and delineate its binding epitope by co-crystallization with an anti-Siglec-15 blocking antibody. Saturation transfer-difference nuclear magnetic resonance (STD-NMR) spectroscopy assisted with molecular dynamics simulations reveals the binding mode of Siglec-15 to (2,3)- and 2,6)- linked sialic acids and to the cancer-associated sialyl-Tn (STn) glycoform. Binding of Siglec-15 to T cells, which lack STn expression, depends on the presence of (2,3)- and 2,6)- linked sialoglycans. We identify  the leukocyte integrin CD11b as a binding partner of Siglec-15 on human T cells. Collectively, these data provide an integrative understanding of the structural features of Siglec-15 and underscore glycosylation as an additional layer of control of T cell responses.

### Sample Protocol
Activated T cell samples from two different donors were analyzed. Siglec-15-Fc WT or Siglec-15-Fc R143A was firstly preincubated with anti-hFc HRP (A01854 200, GenScript) for 30 min at 4 °C, forming the complex A, then mixed with T cells and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h. After washing steps, the labelling solution (TBS + 10 mM H2O2 + 95 µM Biotin Tyramide (LS-3500, Iris Biotech)) was added to samples and incubated for 7 min with shaking, and the reaction was stopped by adding the quenching buffer (TBS + 100 µM ascorbic acid). Samples were then incubated with 30 μL Protein A agarose nanobeads (29200, Thermofisher) for 60 min. The non-bound material was removed by washing the beads on microcentrifuge. The beads were eluted from the beads using 300 μL labelling buffer (5 mM TCEP, 100 mM TRIS pH 8, 1% SDS, 0.1 mg/mL PMSF, Mammalian protease inhibitor, 0.1 M Sodium Thiocyanate). and an SDS-PAGE gel was performed. SDS-PAGE gel lanes were sliced into pieces as accurately as possible to guarantee reproducibility. The slices were subsequently washed in milli-Q water and reduction and alkylation were performed using dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 °C for 20 min, followed by iodoacetamide (50 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 min in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 µg/mL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded. Gel pieces were hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were further desalted, resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore), and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis. Samples were analyzed in a timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to an Evosep ONE liquid chromatograph (Evosep). 200 ng were directly loaded onto the Evosep ENDURANCE column (15 cm vs 150 µm, 1.9 µm) and resolved using the 30 samples-per-day standard protocol defined by the manufacturer (approximately 44 min runs). timsTOF mass spectrometer was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition mode (DDA) using the standard 1.1. second acquisition cycle method.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using Byonic software (Protein Metrics) through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). Searches were carried out against a database consisting of Homo sapiens (Uniprot/Swissprot, version 2020_04), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was considered as fixed modification whereas oxidation of Methionine was considered as variable modification. A decoy search was carried out to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) of the searches. Only proteins with at least one peptide identified at FDR <1% were considered for further analysis. Spectral counts (SpC, the number of spectra that identifies peptides for a certain protein 73 were used for the comparison of protein presence and abundance between conditions. Proteins with a SpC WT/Mut ratio>2, including those exclusively identified in the WT sample, were considered for further analysis and discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 15 (Siglec-15) is an immune modulator and emerging cancer immunotherapy target. However, limited understanding of its structure and mechanism of action restrains the development of drug candidates that unleash its full therapeutic potential. In this study, we elucidate the crystal structure of Siglec-15 and its binding epitope via co-crystallization with an anti-Siglec-15 blocking antibody. Using saturation transfer-difference nuclear magnetic resonance (STD-NMR) spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations, we reveal Siglec-15 binding mode to &#x3b1;(2,3)- and &#x3b1;(2,6)-linked sialic acids and the cancer-associated sialyl-Tn (STn) glycoform. We demonstrate that binding of Siglec-15 to T cells, which lack STn expression, depends on the presence of &#x3b1;(2,3)- and &#x3b1;(2,6)-linked sialoglycans. Furthermore, we identify the leukocyte integrin CD11b as a Siglec-15 binding partner on human T cells. Collectively, our findings provide an integrated understanding of the structural features of Siglec-15&#xa0;and emphasize glycosylation as a crucial factor in controlling T cell responses.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Sialic acid, Nmr, Antibody, T cells, Siglec-15, Molecular recognition., Cancer, Cd11b

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tec. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tec. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)


