### Accession
PXD031928

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of MEN1 missense mutations identifies disruption of menin-MLL and menin-JunD interactions as critical requirements for molecular pathogenicity

### Description
Loss-of-function mutations of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene are causal to the MEN1 tumor syndrome, but they are also commonly found in sporadic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and other types of cancers. The MEN1 gene product, menin, is involved in transcriptional and chromatin regulation, most prominently as an integral component of KMT2A/MLL1 and KMT2B/MLL2 containing COMPASS-like histone H3K4 methyltransferase complexes. In a mutually exclusive fashion, menin also interacts with the JunD subunit of the AP-1 and ATF/CREB transcription factors. After in silico screening of 253 disease-related MEN1 missense mutations, we selected a set of nine menin mutations in surface-exposed residues. The protein interactomes of these mutants were assessed by quantitative mass spectrometry, which indicated that seven of the nine mutants disrupt interactions with both MLL1/2 and JunD complexes in the nucleus. We identified three missense mutations, R52G, E255K and E359K, which display predominant reduction in interaction with MLL1 compared to JunD. This observation was supported by a pronounced loss of binding of the R52G, E255K and E359K mutant proteins at unique MLL1 genomic binding sites with less effect on unique JunD sites. These findings support the general importance of the menin-MLL1 and menin-JunD interactions in MEN1 gene-associated pathogenic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-affinity purification, sample preparation and data analysis were performed as reported (Nizamuddin et al, 2021; Spruijt et al, 2013; van Nuland et al., 2013). Briefly, HeLa cell harboring menin-GFP cDNAs were grown in 15 15-cm dishes until reach confluency (approximately 300 million cells) and induced with 1 ug/mL doxycycline for 24h. Cells were harvested by dislodging with trypsin and cell pellets washed with cold PBS (Gibco, #10010-015). Cell pellet was re-suspended in 5 packed-cell volumes (PCVs) of ice-cold Buffer A (10 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl), incubated for 10 min on ice and then centrifuged at 400 g and 4°C for 5 min. Supernatants was aspirated and cells were lysed in 2 PCVs Buffer A containing 1x CPI (Roche, #11836145001), 0.5 mM DTT and 0.15 % NP40. The suspension was homogenized in Dounce homogenizer followed by centrifugation at 3,200 g and 4°C for 15 min. Supernatant and pellet contain cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions, respectively. The nuclear pellet was washed gently with 10 volumes of Buffer A containing 1x CPI (Roche, #11836145001), 0.5 mM DTT and 0.15 % NP40 and centrifuged for 5 min at 3,200 g at 4°C min. Nuclear proteins were extracted by 2 PCVs volumes of high salt Buffer B (420 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1 % NP40, 1x CPI, 0.5 mM DTT) during gentle agitation at 4°C for 1.5 h. Both the nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were centrifuged at 3,200 g and 4°C for 60 min. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. 1 mg of nuclear or 3 mg of cytoplasmic extract was used for GFP-affinity purification as described(Spruijt et al., 2013). In short, protein lysates were incubated in binding buffer (20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 300 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT and 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail) on a rotating wheel at 4˚ C for 1 h in triplicates with GBP-coated agarose beads (Chromotek) or control agarose beads (Chromotek). The beads were washed two times with binding buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, two times with PBS containing 0.5% NP-40, and two times with PBS. On-bead digestion of bound proteins was performed overnight in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT) with 0.1 µg/ml of trypsin at RT and eluted tryptic peptides were bound to C18 stage tips (ThermoFischer, USA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  Tryptic peptides were eluted from the C18 stage tips in H2O:acetonitrile (35:65) and dried prior to resuspension in 10 % formic acid. A third of this elution was analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nano-LC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate was 300 nl/min, buffer A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used in combination with a reversed phase C18 separating column (2 µm particle size, 100 Ǻ pore size, 25 cm length, 50 µm i.d., Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS can was followed by a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans in the data dependent mode with 90 min total analysis time. Blank samples consisting of 10% formic acid were run for 45 min between GFP and non-GFP samples, to avoid carry-over between runs.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) using Uniprot human FASTA database (Spruijt et al., 2013; Tyanova et al, 2016). Label-free quantification values (LFQ) and match between run options were selected. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was also activated for subsequent relative protein abundance estimation (Schwanhäusser et al, 2011). The obtained protein files were analyzed by Perseus software (MQ package, version 1.6.12), in which contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein identification based on non-unique peptides as well as proteins identified by only one peptide in the different triplicates were excluded to increase protein prediction accuracy. For identification of the bait interactors LFQ intensity-based values were transformed on the logarithmic scale (log2) to generate Gaussian distribution of the data. This allows for imputation of missing values based on the normal distribution of the overall data (in Perseus, width = 0.3; shift = 1.8). The normalized LFQ intensities were compared between grouped GFP triplicates and non-GFP triplicates, using 1% and 5% in permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) in a two-tailed t-test for NFYA and FOS, respectively. The threshold for significance (S0), based on the FDR and the ratio between GFP and non-GFP, samples was kept at the constant value of 1. Relative abundance plots were obtained by comparison of the iBAQ values of GFP interactors. The values of the non-GFP iBAQ values were subtracted from the corresponding proteins in the GFP pull-down and were next normalized on the menin-GFP bait protein for scaling and data representation purposes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Greencut&run

### Affiliations
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Freiburg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Foundation under Public Law
c/o Department of Urology
Zentrale Klinische Forschung (ZKF)
Medical Center-University of Freiburg
Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany
DKFZ, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Timmers

### Lab Head
Dr H.Th. Marc Timmers
DKFZ, Germany


