### Accession
PXD015717

### Title
Glycolytic profile shift and antioxidant triggering in symbiont-free and H2O2-resistant Strigomonas culicis

### Description
During their life cycle, trypanosomatids are exposed to stress conditions and adapt their energy and antioxidant metabolism to colonize their hosts. Strigomonas culicis is a monoxenous protist found in invertebrates with an endosymbiotic bacterium that completes essential biosynthetic pathways for the trypanosomatid. Our research group previously generated a wild-type H2O2-resistant (WTR) strain that showed improved mitochondrial metabolism and antioxidant defenses, which led to higher rates of Aedes aegypti infection. Here, we assess the biological contribution of the S. culicis endosymbiont and reactive oxygen species (ROS) resistance to oxidative and energy metabolism processes. Using high-throughput proteomics, several proteins involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, the pentose phosphate pathway and glutathione metabolism were identified. The results suggest that ROS resistance decreases glucose consumption and indicate that the metabolic products from gluconeogenesis are key to supplying the protist with high-energy and reducing intermediates. Our hypothesis was confirmed by biochemical assays showing opposite profiles for glucose uptake and hexokinase and pyruvate kinase activity levels in the WTR and aposymbiotic strains, while the enzyme glucose-6P 1-dehydrogenase was more active in both strains. Regarding the antioxidant system, ascorbate peroxidase has an important role in H2O2 resistance and may be responsible for the high infection rates previously described for A. aegypti. In conclusion, our data indicate that the energy-related and antioxidant metabolic processes of S. culicis are modulated in response to oxidative stress conditions, providing new perspectives on the biology of the trypanosomatid-insect interaction as well as on the possible impact of resistant parasites in accidental human infection.

### Sample Protocol
Epimastigotes (10E8 protists/mL) of each of five biological replicates were washed three times in PBS (10 mM, pH 7.4) and resuspended in 100 μL of sample lysis solution [60 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 2% SDS, and 10% glycerol]. Subsequently, 10 freeze-thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen were conducted and parasite homogenates were boiled at 100 °C for 5 min, precluding the need for protease inhibitor cocktail addition. The lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min and the supernatants stored at -80 °C until use. For protein concentration determination, 20 μL of each lysate supernatant were precipitated using an ethanol/acetone protocol, followed by quantitation using 2D Quant kit. One hundred micrograms of protein from each lysate supernatant were processed according to the FASP protocol, using only trypsin for protein enzymatic digestion. The final peptide solution was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to approximately 50 µL and TFA was added to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were then desalted (Poros R2 homemade tip columns), dried under vacuum, ressuspended in 1% formic acid to a final peptide concentration (Nanodrop - 280 nm) of 0.05 µg/µL, and stored at -20 °C until use. For each sample, 4 µL (0.05 µg/µL) of desalted tryptic peptide digest was injected into a 2-cm long (100 µm internal diameter) trap column packed with 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ matrix, followed by separation on a 12-cm long (75 µm internal diameter) column packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ matrix directly onto a self-pack empty column. Chromatography was carried out on an EASY-nLC II instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the trap column at 2.000 nL/min while chromatographic separation occurred at 200 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile, and the peptides were separated using 2-40% B gradient over 52 min. The eluted peptides were directly introduced to an LTQ XL/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for analysis. The source voltage was set to 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature was set to 200 ºC, and the tube lens voltage was set to 100 V. The ion trap full and MSn AGC target values were 30,000 and 10,000, respectively, while the FTMS full AGC target was set to 1x105. MS1 spectra were acquired on the Orbitrap analyzer (300 to 1,700 m/z) at 60,000 resolution (for m/z 400). For each spectrum, the 7 most intense ions were submitted to CID fragmentation (minimum signal of 10,000 required; isolation width of 2.0; normalized collision energy of 35.0; activation Q of 0.25, and activation time of 30 ms) followed by MS2 acquisition on a linear trap analyzer. The dynamic exclusion option was selected for a duration of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide-spectrum matching was performed using the Comet search engine (version 2016.01), which is available as part of the computational environment of PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0, http://patternlabforproteomics.org). Searches were performed against sequences for S. culicis and Candidatus Kinetoplastibacterium blastocrithidii, which had been downloaded from the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank (PRJNA170971 and CP003733, respectively). The final search database, constructed by the PatternLab search database generator tool, included a reverse decoy for each target sequence and sequences from 127 common contaminants (19,452 entries - final number). The following parameters were used: fully tryptic and semitryptic peptide candidates with a mass between 550 and 5,500 Da; peptide sequences with up to two missed cleavages; 20 ppm for the precursor mass and bins of 1.0005 m/z for the MS/MS; methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. The statistical validation was performed by the Search Engine Processor (SEPRO). For each result, the XCorr, DeltaCN, and the spectral count score values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator, and a 1% FDR for the protein level was considered acceptable. The spectral count approach was used for semi-quantification according to the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
During their life cycle, trypanosomatids are exposed to stress conditions and adapt their energy and antioxidant metabolism to colonize their hosts. Strigomonas culicis is a monoxenous protist found in invertebrates with an endosymbiotic bacterium that completes essential biosynthetic pathways for the trypanosomatid. Our research group previously generated a wild-type H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-resistant (WTR) strain that showed improved mitochondrial metabolism and antioxidant defenses, which led to higher rates of Aedes aegypti infection. Here, we assess the biological contribution of the S. culicis endosymbiont and reactive oxygen species (ROS) resistance to oxidative and energy metabolism processes. Using high-throughput proteomics, several proteins involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, the pentose phosphate pathway and glutathione metabolism were identified. The results suggest that ROS resistance decreases glucose consumption and indicate that the metabolic products from gluconeogenesis are key to supplying the protist with high-energy and reducing intermediates. Our hypothesis was confirmed by biochemical assays showing opposite profiles for glucose uptake and hexokinase and pyruvate kinase activity levels in the WTR and aposymbiotic strains, while the enzyme glucose-6P 1-dehydrogenase was more active in both strains. Regarding the antioxidant system, ascorbate peroxidase has an important role in H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> resistance and may be responsible for the high infection rates previously described for A. aegypti. In conclusion, our data indicate that the energy-related and antioxidant metabolic processes of S. culicis are modulated in response to oxidative stress conditions, providing new perspectives on the biology of the trypanosomatid-insect interaction as well as on the possible impact of resistant parasites in accidental human infection.

### Keywords
Antioxidant system, Oxidative stress, Pentose phosphate pathway, Ascorbate peroxidase, Energetic metabolism

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Toxinology, FIOCRUZ, Brazil
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz

### Submitter
Richard Hemmi Valente

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Hemmi Valente
Laboratory of Toxinology, FIOCRUZ, Brazil


