### Accession
PXD013629

### Title
Plasma Proteome for Hepatobiliary Carcinomas

### Description
This project is to identify plasma glycoprotein markers for hepatobiliary cancers

### Sample Protocol
Five microliters of plasma in 100 μL of 1× phosphate-buffered saline were incubated with 100 μL of CaptureSelect™ Human Albumin Affinity Matrix (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and 50 μL of Protein G-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) at room temperature for 2 hours with gentle inversion. After centrifugation, the unbound proteins in supernatants were collected and kept on ice. The beads were washed with 200 μL of 1× phosphate-buffered saline three times. All washes and the unbound proteins were combined together as the albumin-IgG depleted fraction. Proteins were both denatured using 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate plus 10 mM dithiothreitol at 95 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C in dark for 1 hour. Salt removal and protein concentration were conducted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 ml centrifugal filter (molecular weight cut off 3,000 daltons) device (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Devices were washed with 500 μL of deionized water three times. Concentrated proteins were quantified and half of them were treated with Peptide-N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F; New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) at 37 °C overnight to remove N-glycans. De-glycosylated proteins were then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) in an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -80 °C until they were used. Peptides from 1.5 μg of protein samples were analyzed using Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex) coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For the protein identification, raw data of LC-MS/MS were processed into peak lists by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for Mascot database (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) search against the Swiss-Prot_2015_07 database (548872 sequences; 195617763 residues) with the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; peptide mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.05 Da; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification, oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ).

### Publication Abstract
Hepatobiliary cancer is the third leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Appropriate markers for early diagnosis, monitoring of disease progression, and prediction of postsurgical outcome are still lacking. As the majority of circulating N-glycoproteins are originated from the hepatobiliary system, we sought to explore new markers by assessing the dynamics of N-glycoproteome in plasma samples from patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), or combined HCC and CCA (cHCC-CCA). Using a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic approach, we found that 57 of 5358 identified plasma proteins were differentially expressed in hepatobiliary cancers. The levels of four essential proteins, including complement C3 and apolipoprotein C-III in HCC, galectin-3-binding protein in CCA, and 72&#x2009;kDa inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase in cHCC-CCA, were highly correlated with tumor stage, tumor grade, recurrence-free survival, and overall survival. Postproteomic site-specific N-glycan analyses showed that human complement C3 bears high-mannose and hybrid glycoforms rather than complex glycoforms at Asn85. The abundance of complement C3 with mannose-5 or mannose-6 glycoform at Asn85 was associated with HCC tumor grade. Furthermore, stepwise Cox regression analyses revealed that HCC patients with a hybrid glycoform at Asn85 of complement C3 had a lower postsurgery tumor recurrence rate or mortality rate than those with a low amount of complement C3 protein. In conclusion, our data show that particular plasma N-glycoproteins with specific N-glycan compositions could be potential noninvasive markers to evaluate oncological status and prognosis of hepatobiliary cancers.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Liver

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, I-Shou University
Department of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung city, Taiwan

### Submitter
ChengHsun Ho

### Lab Head
Dr ChengHsun Ho
Department of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung city, Taiwan


