### Accession
PXD014844

### Title
Time-resolved proteomic profile of Amblyomma americanum tick saliva during feeding Running Title: Proteins in tick saliva every 24 h during feeding

### Description
Pioneering studies (PXD014844) have identified many interesting molecules by LC-MS/MS proteomics, but the protein databases used to assign mass spectra were based on short Illumina reads of the Amblyomma americanum transcriptome and may not have captured the diversity and complexity of longer transcripts. Here we apply long-read Pacific Bioscience technologies to complement the previously reported short-read Illumina transcriptome-based proteome in an effort to increase spectrum assignments. Our dataset reveals a small increase in assignable spectra to supplement previously released short-read transcriptome-based proteome.

### Sample Protocol
For the in-solution digestion method, ~4.5 g of total tick saliva proteins (in triplicate runs using ~1.5 g per run) per feeding time point (24, 36, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, 168, 192, BD, and SD). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Easy NanoLC II and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Buffer A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. H. longicornis digested saliva samples (1.5 μg per injection) were separated in 155 min chromatographic runs, with linear gradient from 1 to 10 % of buffer B for 10 min followed by an increase to 40 % of buffer B in 100 min, an increase to 50 % of buffer B in 10 min and finally an increase to 90 % of buffer B for additional 10 min. Column was held at 90 % of buffer B for 10 min, reduced to 1 % of buffer B and re-equilibrated prior to the next injection.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 × 106. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution and AGC target of 2 × 105 and an underfill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by first extracting the tandem mass spectra from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 (51) and then searching against the protein database (described above) using ProLuCID in the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Ver.5.0.1 (52). At least two peptide matches were required to be considered a protein hit. A cutoff score was established to accept a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post processed to only accept PSMs with <10ppm precursor mass error. Finally, the protein matches from each sampled time points were concatenated into one file using Identification Compare (IDcompare) program on IP2- Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Ver.5.0.1 (52).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tick-feeding, Ticks, Proteome, Saliva

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

### Submitter
Albert Mulenga

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Mulenga
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA


