### Accession
PXD023401

### Title
Unbiased characterization and systematic profiling of metabolically labeled RNA-binding sites

### Description
Here we introduce pRBS-ID, an amenable platform that enables robust profiling of PAR-crosslinked RBSs. Using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) approaches, we unbiasedly characterize the PAR adducts on peptides, to develop an optimal MS/MS search pipeline that enables robust identification and quantification. Using pRBS-ID, we systematically profile RBSs crosslinked to U or G in PAR-labeled mRNA, which can serve as a rich resource for studying RNA-protein interactions. Especially, pRBS-ID is widely applicable to studies on time-course RNP remodelling, host-virus interactions, and RNP structure prediction.

### Sample Protocol
UV-crosslinked peptide-RNA conjugates were treated with HF. Then, the sample was dried up and reconstituted with water. Finally, the sample was cleaned up using C18 Ziptip and injected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with mPE-MMR. Then, the resulting MXFiltered.mgf files were searched with MS-GF+. Followingly, the search results were further processed for robust RBS localization and quantification. Note that files related to GlobalRBS_dTTE_HF_150x10_1.raw and GlobalRBS_dTTE_HF_150x10_2.raw are a re-analysis of previously deposited dataset in PRIDE (PXD016254)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Seoul National University
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science

### Submitter
Jong Woo Bae

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Seo Kim
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science


