### Accession
PXD004014

### Title
Polyesterase discovery in Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes secretome

### Description
By screening the secretomes of polymer induced Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes we identify a new enzyme PpEst that can degrade the co-aliphatic-aromatic polyester poly(1,4-butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT). The discovered enzyme has predicted arylesterase activity and is induced by PBAT added to the growth medium

### Sample Protocol
Organism was cultured with polymer (cellulose, PBAT or PBAT mimicking oligomer)  for 3 days and supernatant was collected. Individually 2 mL supernatant from each culture condition spun in a 10 kDa cut-off spin filter, washed with 4 mL 8 M Urea and 4 mL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate before the retentate was precipitated,  pelleted  and washed with cold acetone. Proteins were reduced and alkylated  buffer containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM iodoacetamide, 4 M Urea, 2 % SDS, 0.25 M NaCl. To remove small contaminant samples were run on a SDS-PAGE gel, stained with coomassie brilliant blue, the entire lanes were cut out and  cut into seven pieces. The pieces were destained using repeated incubations in 25 % acetonitrile and the proteins were digested in-gel by dimethylated trypsin. The sample was injected and separated by nano-HPLC on an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex) after enrichment on a PepMap-100 C18, 5 μm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm pre-column (Thermo Scientific, USA) on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC-C18, 2 μm, 50 cm × 75 µm nanoviper nano-column (Thermo Scientific, USA) using the following gradient: solvent A: water, 0.1 % formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid; 0-5 min: 5 % B; 5-90 min 5-30 % B, 90-90.1 min 30-95 % B, 90-105 min 95 % B, 105-105.1 min 95-5 % B, 105-120 min re-equilibration at 5 % B. Flow was 250 µL/min. The separated peptides were directly analysed in an OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA) in positive ion mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300–2000, 60,000 resolution at m/z 200) and MS/MS by CID in the iontrap of the 20 most intense peaks with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were analysed by searching a custom database. The database contained all protein entries for Pseudomonas in the NCBi database (1805231 entries downloaded on Jan. 25th, 2015), a publically available list of common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and a custom protein entry (GI: 012345) for dimethylated trypsin where all lysines were replaced with the custom amino acid J to avoid false positives resulting from autolysis of modified trypsin (Schittmayer et al. 2016). Searches were performed in Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The spectra from the seven gel pieces originating from a single supernatant were analysed together resulting in one protein list per supernatant. Detailed settings; Enzyme: trypsin (with the added specificity of J equal to K) (Schittmayer et al. 2016); max. missed cleavage sites: 2; N-terminus: hydrogen; C-terminus: free acid; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; oxidized methionine, acetylation of N-terminus, demonomethylation of J and dedimethylation of J as variable modifications (Schittmayer et al. 2016); maximum precursor charge 3; precursor mass tolerance +/− 10 ppm; product mass tolerance +/− 0.7 Da; acceptance parameters were 1 or more identified distinct peptides after automatic validation; percolator active (decoy search, with a false discovery rate set below 5 %)

### Publication Abstract
A novel esterase, PpEst, that hydrolyses the co-aromatic-aliphatic polyester poly(1,4-butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) was identified by proteomic screening of the Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes secretome. PpEst was induced by the presence of PBAT in the growth media and had predicted arylesterase (EC 3.1.1.2) activity. PpEst showed polyesterase activity on both whole and milled PBAT film releasing terephthalic acid and 4-(4-hydroxybutoxycarbonyl)benzoic acid while end product inhibition by 4-(4-hydroxybutoxycarbonyl)benzoic acid was observed. Modelling of an aromatic polyester mimicking oligomer into the PpEst active site indicated that the binding pocket could be big enough to accommodate large polymers. This is the first report of a PBAT degrading enzyme being identified by proteomic screening and shows that this approach can contribute to the discovery of new polymer hydrolysing enzymes. Moreover, these results indicate that arylesterases could be an interesting enzyme class for identifications of polyesterases.

### Keywords
Pbat, Polyester, Arylesterase, Polyesterase, Polymer, Secretome, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
Research unit "Functional proteomics and metabolic pathways", Institute of Pathology, medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria
Medical University of Graz

### Submitter
Paal William Wallace

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-gruenberger
Research unit "Functional proteomics and metabolic pathways", Institute of Pathology, medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria


