### Accession
PXD033815

### Title
Evidence for a unique RNA motif in orchestrating 2 Orthomyxoviridae splicing

### Description
Despite lacking a DNA intermediate, orthomyxoviruses complete their replication cycle in the nucleus and generate multiple transcripts through noncanonical splicing. This biology enables the slow accumulation of a subset of viral transcripts which serve as a timer to coordinate the later phases of the life cycle. Here we demonstrate that splicing is mediated by a unique structure in the RNA as revealed by Archaean L7Ae-mediated inhibition. We demonstrate that L7Ae expression inhibits influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and Salmon isavirus revealing a common strategy utilized by Orthomyxoviridae members. L7Ae-mediated inhibition of influenza A virus was lost with the generation of a splicing-independent recombinant strain and attempts to select for an escape mutant resulted in variants with significant fitness cost. As L7Ae recognizes conventional kink  turns in various RNAs, these data implicate the formation of a similar structure as a shared strategy adopted by orthomyxoviruses to coordinate their replication cycle.

### Sample Protocol
. L7Ae-inducible A549 cells, both stimulated and unstimulated, 421 were infected with A/Puerto Rico/8/34 for 10 hours at an MOI of 1.0. Cell pellets were 422 lysed in a buffer containing 8M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 150 mM NaCl, and a 423 protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). Lysates were sonicated 4 times with a 424 probe tip sonicator at 50% amplitude for 1s to shear genomic DNA and aid cell lysis. 425 Lysate debris was cleared by centrifugation at 21,100 x g for 1 hour at 4°C. Samples 426 were reduced with 4 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 30 min at 427 room temperature, followed by alkylation of free cysteines with 10 mM iodoacetamide 428 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Free iodoacetamide was quenched by the 429 addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were diluted 1:4 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reduce 430 the concentration of urea to <2 M, then trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was 431 added at a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio. Samples were digested at room temperature 432 for 18 h. Following trypsin digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was add to 0.1% and samples 433 were desalted on BioPureSPN mini C18 columns (Nest Group) according to the 434 manufacturer’s specifications. Desalted samples were vacuum concentrated to dryness 435 and rehydrated in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were 436 analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system with an 437 Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system interfaced to the 438 mass spectrometer via a NanoSpray Flex nanoelectrospray source and a FAIMS Pro 439 ion mobility interface. Samples were injected onto a 75 µm inner diameter x 30 cm 440 column packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm particles. Buffers for C18 441 separation were 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% 442 acetonitrile (Buffer B). Sample concentrations were adjusted based on the signal 443 intensities from pilot runs to equalize the median sample intensities across all samples. 444 A gradient was delivered from 5% to 35% Buffer B over 120 min at a flowrate of 300 445 nl/min followed by a 10 min 100% Buffer B hold. The mass spectrometer collected data 446 in a data-dependent fashion, collecting a full scan in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution 447 from 400 – 1300 m/z, followed by MS/MS scans at 15,000 resolution in the Orbitrap with 448 HCD collision energy at 28% for as many scans as could be collected in 3 s. Standard 449 AGC targets and automatic injection times were implemented for both full and MS/MS 450 scans. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, peaks were required to have an 451 intensity threshold of 5000 and charge states 2-6, and dynamic exclusion was enabled 452 for an exclusion duration of 30 s and with exclusion tolerances of +/- 10 ppm. All 453 samples were analyzed by two runs at FAIMS Pro compensation voltages (CVs) of -65V 454 for the first run and -45V for the second run.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were matched to peptide and protein sequences and intensities calculated by MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0)50 455 . Data 456 were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome (downloaded on Oct. 457 10, 2019) and the UniProt Influenza A virus strain A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 H1N1 reference 458 proteome (downloaded on Sept. 11, 2020) sequences, reviewed entries and canonical 459 isoforms only. Runs from different FAIMS CVs were indicated as separate fractions. 460 The match between runs feature was enabled with a match time window of 2 min. All 461 other MaxQuant parameters were used at default settings. The data were subsequently analyzed by the MSstats package in R (version 3.16.2)51 462 . Data were normalized by 463 equalizing medians, the summary method was tukey’s median polish (TMP), the cutoff 464 value for the model was the minimum value for each feature across runs (minFeature),

### Publication Abstract
Despite lacking a DNA intermediate, orthomyxoviruses complete their replication cycle in the nucleus and generate multiple transcripts by usurping the host splicing machinery. This biology results in dynamic changes of relative viral transcripts over time and dictates the replicative phase of the infection. Here, we demonstrate that the family of archaeal L7Ae proteins uniquely inhibit the splicing biology of influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and Salmon isavirus, revealing a common strategy utilized by <i>Orthomyxoviridae</i> members to achieve this dynamic. L7Ae-mediated inhibition of virus biology was lost with the generation of a splicing-independent strain of influenza A virus and attempts to select for an escape mutant resulted in variants that conformed to host splicing biology at significant cost to their overall fitness. As L7Ae recognizes conventional kink turns in various RNAs, these data implicate the formation of a similar structure as a shared strategy adopted by this virus family to coordinate their replication cycle. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Here, we demonstrate that a family of proteins from archaea specifically inhibit this splicing biology of all tested members of the <i>Orthomyxoviridae</i> family. We show that this inhibition extends to influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and isavirus genera, while having no significant impact on the mammalian transcriptome or proteome. Attempts to generate an escape mutant against L7Ae-mediated inhibition resulted in mutations surrounding the viral splice sites and a significant loss of viral fitness. Together, these findings reveal a unique biology shared among diverse members of the <i>Orthomyxoviridae</i> family that may serve as a means to generate future universal therapeutics.

### Keywords
Orthomyxoviridae, L7ae

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology at NYU Grossman School of Medicine.
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Tenoever
Department of Microbiology at NYU Grossman School of Medicine.


