### Accession
PXD035068

### Title
Vesicle proteomics during fungal biofilm development in Candida

### Description
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles from four different Candida strains (tropicalis, parapsilosis, auris and glabrata).

### Sample Protocol
Candida albicans extracellular vesicles were prepared using a large scale rolling bottle biofilm model system. The culture media was removed from the polystyrene bottles, filter sterilized, and concentrated using a Vivaflow 200 unit (Sartorius AG) equipped with a Hydrosart 30 kDa cut-off membrane. Extracellular vesicles were isolated by sequential centrifugation first at 10,000 × g for 1 h followed by a spin at 100,000 × g for 1.5 h Next, the supernatant was discarded, the pellet was resuspended in PBS and the sample was filter sterilized. Extracellular vesicles were then subjected to protein quantitation, trypsin digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed Candida databases (albicans, tropicalis, parapsilosis, auris and glabrata) with a list of common lab contaminants (available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP ) to establish False Discovery Rates using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at 2east 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles mediate community interactions among cells ranging from unicellular microbes to complex vertebrates. Extracellular vesicles of the fungal pathogen <i>Candida albicans</i> are vital for biofilm communities to produce matrix, which confers environmental protection and modulates community dispersion. Infections are increasingly due to diverse <i>Candida</i> species, such as the emerging pathogen <i>Candida auris</i>, as well as mixed <i>Candida</i> communities. Here, we define the composition and function of biofilm-associated vesicles among five species across the <i>Candida</i> genus. We find similarities in vesicle size and release over the biofilm lifespan. Whereas overall cargo proteomes differ dramatically among species, a group of 36 common proteins is enriched for orthologs of <i>C. albicans</i> biofilm mediators. To understand the function of this set of proteins, we asked whether mutants in select components were important for key biofilm processes, including drug tolerance and dispersion. We found that the majority of these cargo components impact one or both biofilm processes across all five species. Exogenous delivery of wild-type vesicle cargo returned mutant phenotypes toward wild type. To assess the impact of vesicle cargo on interspecies interactions, we performed cross-species vesicle addition and observed functional complementation for both biofilm phenotypes. We explored the biologic relevance of this cross-species biofilm interaction in mixed species and mutant studies examining the drug-resistance phenotype. We found a majority of biofilm interactions among species restored the community's wild-type behavior. Our studies indicate that vesicles influence the development of protective monomicrobial and mixed microbial biofilm communities.

### Keywords
Candida, Extracellular vesicles, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Infectious Disease
University of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. David Andes
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Infectious Disease


