### Accession
PXD031628

### Title
People with HIV have higher percentages of circulating CCR5+ CD8+ T cells and lower percentages of CCR5+ regulatory T cells

### Description
CCR5 is the main HIV co-receptor. We aimed to (1) compare CCR5 expression on immune cells between people living with HIV (PLHIV) using combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) and HIV-uninfected controls, (2) relate CCR5 expression to viral reservoir size and (3) assess detereminants of CCR5 expression. Percentages of CCR5 positive cells (%) and CCR5 mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) assessed by flow cytometry in monocytes and lymphocyte subsets were correlated to host factors, HIV-1 cell-associated (CA)-RNA and CA-DNA, plasma inflammation markers and metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
EDTA plasma samples from PLHIV and healthy controls were subjected to proteome analysis using the Olink Inflammation Panel that includes 92 inflammatory proteins (Olink Bioscience AB, Uppsala, Sweden). The experiment type is PCR-based targeted proteomics (instead of top-down proteomics as stated at "Experiment type"). Also the instrument is not "Thermo Finnigan LTQ". Olink applied their instruments for the targeted proteomics analysis. Details can be found on: wwww.olink.com. The quantification method is not "Absolute Protein Expression" as given in the additional details, but normalized protein expression (NPX).

### Data Protocol
Detected proteins are measured on a log2 scale as normalized expression values (NPX). Target proteins detected in >70% of the samples of both PLHIV and controls were included in follow-up analysis, resulting in sixty-nine proteins. Samples that did not pass the quality controls performed by Olink were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
CCR5 is the main HIV co-receptor. We aimed to (1) compare CCR5 expression on immune cells between people living with HIV (PLHIV) using combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) and HIV-uninfected controls, (2) relate CCR5 expression to viral reservoir size and (3) assess determinants of CCR5 expression. This cross-sectional study included 209 PLHIV and 323 controls. Percentages of CCR5+ cells (%) and CCR5 mean fluorescence intensity assessed by flow cytometry in monocytes and lymphocyte subsets were correlated to host factors, HIV-1 cell-associated (CA)-RNA and CA-DNA, plasma inflammation markers and metabolites. Metabolic pathways were identified. PLHIV displayed higher percentages of CCR5+ monocytes and several CD8+ T cell subsets, but lower percentages of CCR5+ naive CD4+ T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs). HIV-1 CA-DNA and CA-RNA correlated positively with percentages of CCR5+ lymphocytes. Metabolome analysis revealed three pathways involved in energy metabolism associated with percentage of CCR5+ CD8+ T cells in PLHIV. Our results indicate that CCR5 is differently expressed on various circulating immune cells in PLHIV. Hence, cell-trafficking of CD8+ T cells and Tregs may be altered in PLHIV. Associations between energy pathways and percentage of CCR5+ CD8+ T cells in PLHIV suggest higher energy demand of these cells in PLHIV.

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Persistent infection, Inflammation, Ccr5

### Affiliations
RadboudUMC
Department of General Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Louise Van Eekeren

### Lab Head
Dr Mihai Netea
Department of General Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


