### Accession
PXD030036

### Title
prostate cancer cell LNCaP_cell glycosylation_GDF15 glycosylation inducing CRPC

### Description
we examined the glycoproteomics of N-glycosylation in untreated LNCaP (NC), ST-EPI, LT-EPI, ST-ENZ, and LT-ENZ groups using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labels by nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS).LNCaP-NC, SP-EPI, SP-ENZ, LP-EPI, and LP-ENZ cells each with two biological replicates were used for glycoproteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lytic and the supernatant proteins were quantitative by BCA kit. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and followed with alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM) in darkness. Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added for the digestion overnight. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted and reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT10 plexTM kit (Thermo Scientific, 90110, San Jose, CA). The glycopeptides were enriched by a one-step-in-house-method of enriching intact glycopeptides as we described previously. The global-peptides and glycopeptides were resuspended in 2% CAN and 0.1% FA solution and ten analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a high-resolution Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrum (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The samples were first separated with an RSLC C18 column (1.9 µm x 100 µm X 20 cm) packed in house. The LC conditions and MS parameters for glycol-depleted global peptides and intact glycopeptides (IGPs) were described previously. The results were filtered based on the following criteria: (1) a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% for glycoproteins and (2) each peptide spectra matches (PSM) annotated by at least one N-linked glycan.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against homo_Uniprot-organism database concatenated with reverse decoy database. For IGPs identification, the data were searched using GPQuest 2.0. The parameters for analysis were described previously.

### Publication Abstract
Castration-resistance of prostate cancer is one of the most challenging clinical problems. In the present study, we have performed proteomics and glycomics using LNCaP model. Growth differentiation factor-15 (GDF15) level is increased in androgen receptor (AR) inhibitor-resistant cells and the inhibitory effect of GDF15 on epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway is relieved by GDF15 N70 glycosylation. Interference of GDF15 (siRNA or N70Q dominant negative) or EGFR pathway (inhibitor or siRNA for EGFR, SRC or ERK) decreases the resistant-cell survival in culture and tumor growth in mice. Our study reveals a novel regulatory mechanism of prostate cancer AR inhibitor resistance, raises the possibility of AR/SRC dual-targeting of castration-resistance of prostate cancer, and lays foundation for the future development of selective inhibitors of GDF15 glycosylation.

### Keywords
Human, Glycosylation, Tnt10

### Affiliations
Jiangnan University

### Submitter
荣 王

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Wang
Jiangnan University


