### Accession
PXD015937

### Title
The small ORF trpM stimulates growth and actinorhodin production in Streptomyces coelicolor

### Description
In actinomycetes, antibiotic production is often associated with a morpho-physiological differentiation program that is regulated by complex molecular and metabolic networks.  Many aspects of these regulatory circuits have been already elucidated and many others  still deserve further investigations. In this regard, the possible role of many small  open-reading frames(smORFs) in actinomycete morpho-physiological differentiation is still  elusive. In Streptomyces coelicolor, inactivation of the smORF trpM (SCO2038) - whose  product modulates L-tryptophan metabolism - impairs production of antibiotics and  morphological differentiation. Indeed, it was demonstrated that TrpM is able to interact  with PepA (SCO2179), a putative cytosol aminopeptidase playing a key role in antibiotic  production and sporulation. In this work, a S. coelicolor trpM knock-in (Sco-trpMKI)  mutant strain was generated by cloning trpM into overexpressing vector to further  investigate the role of trpM in actinomycete growth and morpho-physiological  differentiation. Results highlighted that trpM: i) stimulates growth and actinorhodin production; ii) decreases calcium-dependent antibiotic production; iii) has no effect on undecylprodigiosin production. Metabolic pathways influenced by trpM knock-in were  investigated by combining two-difference in gel electrophoresis/nanoliquid chromatography  coupled to electrospray linear ion trap tandem mass spectrometry (2D-DIGE/nanoLC-ESI-LIT- MS/MS) and by LC-ESI-MS/MS procedures, respectively. These analyses demonstrated that  over-expression of trpM causes an over-representation of factors involved in protein  synthesis and nucleotide metabolism as well as a down-representation of proteins involved  in central carbon and amino acid metabolism. At the metabolic level, this corresponded to  a differential accumulation pattern of different amino acids - including aromatic ones but tryptophan – and central carbon intermediates. PepA was also down-represented in Sco-trpMKI. The latter was produced as recombinant His- tagged protein and was originally proven having the predicted aminopeptidase activity.  Altogether, these results highlight the stimulatory effect of trpM in S. coelicolor growth and actinorhodin biosynthesis, which are elicited through the modulation of various  metabolic pathways and PepA representation, further confirming the complexity of  regulatory networks that control antibiotic production in actinomycetes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the mycelium of Sco-trpMKI and Sco-EV according to Puglia et  al. (1995), and proteomic investigation was conducted by 2D-DIGE as described by  Palazzotto et al. (2016), except that 1.3 was chosen as threshold value for the  identification of differentially represented proteins. Identification of protein material  present in each differentially represented spot was performed by nanoLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS  analysis, which was performed with a LTQ XL mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) equipped with  a Proxeon nanospray source connected to an Easy nanoLC (Thermo, USA) (Lirussi et al.,  2012).  Peptide mixtures were resolved on an Easy C18 column (10 – 0.075 mm, 3 µm) (Thermo, USA)  as previously reported (Palazzotto et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
MASCOT search engine version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, UK) was used to identify protein  spots from an updated NCBI non-redundant database (downloaded January 2018) also  containing protein sequences for S. coelicolor A3(2), using mass spectrometric data.  Database searching was performed selecting trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, a missed  cleavages maximum value of 2, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Met  oxidation and N-terminal Gln conversion to pyro-Glu as variable modifications,  respectively. Candidates with at least 2 assigned peptides with an individual peptide  expectation value less than 0.05, which corresponds to a confidence level for peptide  attribution greater than 95%, were further evaluated by the comparison with their  calculated mass and pI values, using the experimental data obtained from electrophoresis.  Protein assignment was always associated with manual verification. Identified proteins  were further filtered according to an emPAI ratio criterion (emPAI 1st/emPAI 2nd > 1.50)  (Shinoda et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
In actinomycetes, antibiotic production is often associated with a morpho-physiological differentiation program that is regulated by complex molecular and metabolic networks. Many aspects of these regulatory circuits have been already elucidated and many others still deserve further investigations. In this regard, the possible role of many small open reading frames (smORFs) in actinomycete morpho-physiological differentiation is still elusive. In <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i>, inactivation of the smORF <i>trpM</i> (SCO2038) - whose product modulates L-tryptophan biosynthesis - impairs production of antibiotics and morphological differentiation. Indeed, it was demonstrated that TrpM is able to interact with PepA (SCO2179), a putative cytosol aminopeptidase playing a key role in antibiotic production and sporulation. In this work, a <i>S. coelicolor trpM</i> knock-in (Sco-<i>trpM</i>KI) mutant strain was generated by cloning <i>trpM</i> into overexpressing vector to further investigate the role of <i>trpM</i> in actinomycete growth and morpho-physiological differentiation. Results highlighted that <i>trpM</i>: (i) stimulates growth and actinorhodin (ACT) production; (ii) decreases calcium-dependent antibiotic (CDA) production; (iii) has no effect on undecylprodigiosin production. Metabolic pathways influenced by <i>trpM</i> knock-in were investigated by combining two-difference in gel electrophoresis/nanoliquid chromatography coupled to electrospray linear ion trap tandem mass spectrometry (2D-DIGE/nanoLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS) and by LC-ESI-MS/MS procedures, respectively. These analyses demonstrated that over-expression of <i>trpM</i> causes an over-representation of factors involved in protein synthesis and nucleotide metabolism as well as a down-representation of proteins involved in central carbon and amino acid metabolism. At the metabolic level, this corresponded to a differential accumulation pattern of different amino acids - including aromatic ones but tryptophan - and central carbon intermediates. PepA was also down-represented in Sco-<i>trpM</i>KI. The latter was produced as recombinant His-tagged protein and was originally proven having the predicted aminopeptidase activity. Altogether, these results highlight the stimulatory effect of <i>trpM</i> in <i>S. coelicolor</i> growth and ACT biosynthesis, which are elicited through the modulation of various metabolic pathways and PepA representation, further confirming the complexity of regulatory networks that control antibiotic production in actinomycetes.

### Keywords
Small orf, Streptomyces coelicolor, Primary and secondary metabolism, Actinorhodin production, Calcium-dependent  antibiotic (cda), Cytosol aminopeptidase

### Affiliations
ISPAAM-CNR
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, STEBICEF Department, University of 8 Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

### Submitter
Giovanni Renzone

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Maria Puglia
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, STEBICEF Department, University of 8 Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.


