### Accession
PXD037182

### Title
The E3 ligase TRIM25 impairs apoptotic cell death in colon carcinoma cells through hnRNPH1-triggered destabilization of caspase-7 mRNA

### Description
Therapy resistance is still a major reason for treatment failure in colorectal cancer (CRC). Previously, we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 as a novel suppressor of caspase-2 translation, thereby contributing to apoptosis resistance of CRC cells towards chemotherapeutic drugs. We herein report the executioner caspase-7 being a further target of TRIM25. Results from gain and loss-of-function approaches and actinomycin D experiments indicate that TRIM25 attenuates caspase-7 expression mainly through a decrease in mRNA stability. Data from RNA pull-down assays with immunoprecipitated TRIM25 truncations indicate a direct TRIM25 binding to caspase-7 mRNA which is mediated by the PRY/SPRY domain which is also known to be highly relevant for protein-protein interactions. By employing TRIM25 immunoprecipitation, we identified the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1 (hnRNPH1) as a novel TRIM25 binding protein involved in the control of caspase-7 mRNA stability. Notably, the interaction of both proteins was highly sensitive to RNase A treatment and again depended on the PRY/SPRY domain, thus indicating an indirect interaction of both proteins which is achieved through a common RNA binding. Ubiquitin affinity chromatography showed that hnRNPH1 and TRIM25 are targets of ubiquitin modification. Functionally, the ectopic expression of caspase-7 in CRC cells caused an increase in poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage concomitant with a significant increase in apoptosis. Collectively, the negative regulation of caspase-7 by TRIM25 via hnRNPH1 implies a novel survival mechanism underlying chemotherapeutic drug resistance of CRC cells. Targeting of TRIM25 could therefore offer a promising strategy for reducing therapy resistance in CRC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry RKO cell line was transfected with siTRIM25 or siControl for 2 days in three independent experiments. After 48 hours cells were detached from the surface by trypsinization and washed 3 times with PBS. Further sample preparation was performed as described previously (1). The cells were lysed and denatured with 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (EDTA-free, Roche) at 95oC for 10 min, then sonicated for 1 min (1s ON/ 1s OFF pulse, 45% amplitude) and boiled again for 5 min at 95°C. Pure proteins were obtained with methanol/chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were then resuspended in Urea. 100 μg of protein per samples were digested overnight at 37oC. with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digested peptides are purified using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters, WAT054955). Peptide concentrations were determined with a μBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, 23235) and 10 μg of peptide per sample was labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific, A34808). TMT labeled samples were adjusted to equal amounts and pooled. Then the pool was fractionated into eight fractions using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried.  Mass spectrometry (LC-MS3) Fractions were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 μm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and kept at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Assuming equal amounts in each fraction, 1µg of peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient adapted for each fraction (F1: 3-24, F2: 4-26, F3: 5-28, F4: 6-30, F5: 7-32, F6: 8-34, F7: 9-36, F8: 10-38 % B) over 150 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 75% ACN in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. After that, peptides directly sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Sprayed peptides were analysed Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT method in order to minimize ratio compression and ion interference as previously described (2) for total proteomics. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 p.p.m and advanced peak determination was deactivated. 1- https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35364627/ 2- https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24927332/

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). SequenceHT node was selected for database searches of MS2-spectra. Human trypsin digested proteome (Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 12 March 2020)) was used for protein identifications. Contaminants (MaxQuant “contamination.fasta”) were determined for quality control. TMT6 (+229.163) at the N-terminus, TMT6 (K, +229.163) at lysine and carbamidomethyl (+57.021), and cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation (M, +15.995) and acetylation (+42.011) at the protein N-terminus were set for dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Default percolator settings in PD were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantification was achieved with default settings in consensus workflow. Protein file from PD was then exported to Excel for further processing. Normalized abundances from protein file were used for statistical analysis after contaminations and complete empty values were removed. Significantly altered proteins were determined by a two-sided, unpaired Student’s t-tests (p-value < 0.05), adding minimum fold-change cut-off (≥0.5) with R version 4.0.2 (3) in RStudio (4). EnhancedVolcano version 1.6.0 (5) was used for volcano plot. Figures were later edited with Adobe Illustrator CS5 (6).   4- RStudio Team (2020). RStudio: Integrated Development for R. RStudio, PBC, Boston, MA URL http://www.rstudio.com/. 5- Kevin Blighe and Sharmila Rana and Myles Lewis (2020). EnhancedVolcano: Publication-ready volcano plots with en-hanced colouring and labeling. R package version 1.6.0. https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano. 6- Adobe Inc. (2010). Adobe Illustrator. Version 5. https://adobe.com/products/illustrator.

### Publication Abstract
Therapy resistance is still a major reason for treatment failure in colorectal cancer (CRC). Previously, we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 as a novel suppressor of caspase-2 translation which contributes to the apoptosis resistance of CRC cells towards chemotherapeutic drugs. Here, we report the executioner caspase-7 as being a further target of TRIM25. The results from the gain- and loss-of-function approaches and the actinomycin D experiments indicate that TRIM25 attenuates caspase-7 expression mainly through a decrease in mRNA stability. The data from the RNA pulldown assays with immunoprecipitated TRIM25 truncations indicate a direct TRIM25 binding to caspase-7 mRNA, which is mediated by the PRY/SPRY domain, which is also known to be highly relevant for protein-protein interactions. By employing TRIM25 immunoprecipitation, we identified the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1 (hnRNPH1) as a novel TRIM25 binding protein with a functional impact on caspase-7 mRNA stability. Notably, the interaction of both proteins was highly sensitive to RNase A treatment and again depended on the PRY/SPRY domain, thus indicating an indirect interaction of both proteins which is achieved through a common RNA binding. Ubiquitin affinity chromatography showed that both proteins are targets of ubiquitin modification. Functionally, the ectopic expression of caspase-7 in CRC cells caused an increase in poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage concomitant with a significant increase in apoptosis. Collectively, the negative regulation of caspase-7 by TRIM25, which is possibly executed by hnRNPH1, implies a novel survival mechanism underlying the chemotherapeutic drug resistance of CRC cells. The targeting of TRIM25 could therefore offer a promising strategy for the reduction in therapy resistance in CRC patients.

### Keywords
Caspase-7, Rna binding proteins, Hnrnph1, Trim25, Colon carcinoma cells, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Christian Münch

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


