### Accession
PXD013542

### Title
BMP2K is an inhibitor of erythroid differentiation that restricts endocytosis and SEC16A-dependent autophagy

### Description
Coordination of membrane-related processes inside the cells is facilitated by proteins regulating multiple vesicular trafficking pathways. Bone morphogenetic protein 2-inducible kinase (BMP2K) is a poorly studied ubiquitous protein with the highest expression in the erythroid lineage. We hypothesized that this kinase, potentially implicated in endocytosis and autophagy, could integrate various trafficking routes. By proximity biotinylation (BioID), we revealed differential association of two BMP2K splicing variants with regulators of clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) and with components of early secretory pathway (ESP). We found the longer variant (BMP2K-L) to interact with markers of clathrin-coated pits, REPS1 and phosphorylated μ2 adaptin, and the shorter variant (BMP2K-S) to associate with early secretory compartments positive for ARFGAP1 and SEC16A proteins. Splicing variant-specific RNAi approach in K562 erythroleukemia cells showed that BMP2K-L controls μ2 phosphorylation while BMP2K-S post-transcriptionally maintains SEC16A protein levels. Depleting all BMP2K splicing variants promoted autophagic degradation via a functional crosstalk with SEC16A, enhanced transferrin endocytosis, and erythroid differentiation. We propose that, owing to alternative splicing, BMP2K gene products restrict erythroid differentiation coordinating endocytosis and SEC16A-dependent autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins biotinylated in BioID were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (for 60 minutes at 60°C). To block reduced cysteines, 200 mM MMTS at a final concentration of 10 mM was added and the sample was incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 vol./vol. ratio and incubated at 37˚C overnight. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was used to inactivate trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using Nano-Acquity (Waters Corporation) UPLC system and LTQ-FT-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Measurements were carried out in the positive polarity mode, with capillary voltage set to 2.5 kV. A sample was first applied to the Nano-ACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column using water containing 0.1% formic acid as a mobile phase. Next, the peptide mixture was transferred to Nano-ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column using an acetonitrile gradient (5–35% acetonitrile over 160 minutes) in the presence of 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were eluted directly to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. Each LC run was preceded by a blank run to ensure that there was no carry-over of material from previous analysis. HCD fragmentation was used. Up to 10 MS/MS events were allowed per each MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed by Mascot Distiller followed by Mascot Search (Matrix Science, London, UK, on-site license) against SwissProt database restricted to human sequences. Search parameters for precursor and product ions mass tolerance were 30 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, enzyme specificity: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 1, fixed modification of cysteine by methylthio and variable modification of methionine oxidation. Peptides with Mascot score exceeding the threshold value corresponding to <5% expectation value, calculated by Mascot procedure, were considered to be positively identified.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular transport undergoes remodeling upon cell differentiation, which involves cell type-specific regulators. Bone morphogenetic protein 2-inducible kinase (BMP2K) has been potentially implicated in endocytosis and cell differentiation but its molecular functions remained unknown. We discovered that its longer (L) and shorter (S) splicing variants regulate erythroid differentiation in a manner unexplainable by their involvement in AP-2 adaptor phosphorylation and endocytosis. However, both variants interact with SEC16A and could localize to the juxtanuclear secretory compartment. Variant-specific depletion approach showed that BMP2K isoforms constitute a BMP2K-L/S regulatory system that controls the distribution of SEC16A and SEC24B as well as SEC31A abundance at COPII assemblies. Finally, we found L to promote and S to restrict autophagic degradation and erythroid differentiation. Hence, we propose that BMP2K-L and BMP2K-S differentially regulate abundance and distribution of COPII assemblies as well as autophagy, possibly thereby fine-tuning erythroid differentiation.

### Keywords
Bioid, Hek293, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Jaroslaw Cendrowski

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Miaczynska
Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland


