### Accession
PXD007664

### Title
A Spatial Interactome Reveals the Protein Organization of the Algal CO2 Concentrating Mechanism

### Description
One-third of global CO2 fixation is mediated by eukaryotic algae. Nearly all algae enhance their carbon assimilation by operating a CO2 concentrating mechanism (CCM), built around a mysterious organelle called the pyrenoid. Here, we leveraged new tools to determine the localizations of 146 candidate CCM proteins in the model alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Twelve of the tagged proteins localized to the pyrenoid in six distinct sub-pyrenoid localizations: matrix, membrane tubules, plates, a mesh layer, and two punctate layers. Many stromal proteins can access the pyrenoid matrix. The proteins with access to the matrix tend to be small, suggesting that the pyrenoid may show protein size selectivity. Contrary to current models, the carbonic anhydrase CAH6 is in the flagella. Affinity purification mass spectrometry of 38 CCM-related proteins reveals dozens of additional components, including novel Rubisco interacting proteins, photosystem I assembly factor candidates and inorganic carbon flux components. Together, our spatial interactome reveals new protein components, sub-compartments and biophysical characteristics that open doors to a detailed molecular characterization of the algal CCM.

### Sample Protocol
Limited gel slices representing 3xFLAG AP eluates were diced into 1x1mM squares and then incubated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for ~15 minutes. After pH neutralization, the diced gel slices were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 55°C. The reducing buffer was removed and samples were alkylated with 10 mM propionamide at 10 mM for 30 minutes at room temperature. Gel samples were washed with multiple rounds of 1:1 acetonitrile:50mM ammonium bicarbonate until the gels were free of all dye. 10 uL of 125 nanogram trypsin/lysC (Promega) was added to each gel band and gels were allowed to swell for 10 minutes, followed by the addition of 25 to 35uL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The gels were digested overnight at 37°C. Peptide extraction was performed in duplicate, and the peptide pools dried in a speed vac until readied for LCMSMS. Each peptide pool was reconstituted in 12.5 uL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, 97.9% water and loaded onto a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters). The mobile phases were A: 0.585% acetic acid, 99.415% water and B: 0.585% acetic acid, 10% water, 89.415% acetonitrile. The analytical column was a picochip (New Objective) packed with 3 µM C18 reversed phase material approximately 10.5cm in length. The flow rate was 600 nL/min during the injection phase and 450 nL/min during the analytical phase. The mass spectrometer was a orbitrap Elite, operated in a data-dependant acquisition (DDA) schema in which the fifteen most intense multiply charged precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. The precursor mass settings were a resolution of 120,000 and an ion target value of 750,000, max fill time 120 usec. The MSMS settings were 50,000 ions and a maximum fill time of 25 µsec. Initial data analysis was performed using Byonic (Bern et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using an initial screening by Preview for validation of data quality, followed by Byonic v2.6.49 (ProteinMetrics) for peptide identification and protein inference against the NCBI c. reinhardtii database. In a typical analysis, each data file was searched in two parallel Byonic (Protein Metrics, v2.6.0) analyses: one for the unlabeled peptides, and one treating the incorporation of N15 isotopic labels as a fixed modification. In both cases, these data were restricted to 12 ppm mass tolerances for precursors, with 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerances assuming up to two missed cleavages and allowing for only fully tryptic peptides. These data were validated at a 1% false discovery rate using typical reverse-decoy techniques as described previously (Elias Nat. Meth. 2007). The combined identified peptide spectral matches and assigned proteins were then exported for further analysis using custom tools developed in MatLab (MathWorks) to provide visualization and statistical characterization.

### Publication Abstract
Approximately one-third of global CO<sub>2</sub> fixation is performed by eukaryotic algae. Nearly all algae enhance their carbon assimilation by operating a CO<sub>2</sub>-concentrating mechanism (CCM) built around an organelle called the pyrenoid, whose protein composition is largely unknown. Here, we developed tools in the model alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to determine the localizations of 135 candidate CCM proteins and physical interactors of 38 of these proteins. Our data reveal the identity of 89 pyrenoid proteins, including Rubisco-interacting proteins, photosystem I assembly factor candidates, and inorganic carbon flux components. We identify three previously undescribed protein layers of the pyrenoid: a plate-like layer, a mesh layer, and a punctate layer. We find that the carbonic anhydrase CAH6 is in the flagella, not in the stroma that surrounds the pyrenoid as in current models. These results provide an overview of proteins operating in the eukaryotic algal CCM, a key process that drives global carbon fixation.

### Keywords
High-throughput fluorescence protein tagging, Pyrenoid, Interactome, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Carbon-fixation, Rubisco, Affinity purification mass spectrometry, Co2-concentrating mechanism, Orbitrap, Ccm, Photosynthesis, 15n isotopic labelling

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA

### Submitter
Ryan Leib

### Lab Head
Dr Martin C Jonikas
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA


