### Accession
PXD020720

### Title
Kinome Profiling of Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Using Multiplexed Inhibitor Beads and Mass Spectrometry Identifies Wee1 as a Candidate Therapeutic Target

### Description
Purpose: Management of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) has been revolutionized by the identification of activating mutations in KIT and PDGFRA and the clinical application of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitors in the advanced disease setting. Stratification of GIST into molecularly defined subsets provides insight into clinical behavior and response to approved targeted therapies. Although these RTK inhibitors are effective in the majority of GIST, resistance to these agents remains a significant clinical obstacle. Development of effective treatment strategies for refractory GIST requires identification of novel targets to provide additional therapeutic options. Global kinome profiling has the potential to identify critical signaling networks and reveal protein kinases that are essential in GIST.  Experimental Design: Using Multiplexed Inhibitor Beads and Mass Spectrometry paired with a super-SILAC kinome standard, we explored the majority of the kinome in GIST specimens from three GIST subtypes (KIT-mutant, PDGFRA-mutant and succinate dehydrogenase-deficient GIST) to identify novel kinase targets. In vitro and in vivo studies were performed to evaluate the utility of targeting the identified kinases in GIST.  Results: Kinome profiling revealed distinct signatures in three GIST subtypes. PDGFRA-mutant GIST had elevated tumor associated macrophage (TAM) kinases and immunohistochemical analysis confirmed increased TAMs present in these tumors. Kinome profiling with loss-of-function assays revealed a significant role for G2-M tyrosine kinase, Wee1, in GIST survival. In vitro and in vivo studies revealed significant efficacy of MK-1775 (Wee1 inhibitor) in combination with avapritinib in both KIT and PDGFRA-mutant GIST cell lines, as well as notable efficacy of MK-1775 as a single agent in the PDGFRA-mutant line.   Conclusions: These studies provide strong preclinical justification for the use of MK-1775 in GIST.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic measurement of kinase abundance in primary GIST tissues, we applied MIB-MS kinome profiling coupled with a super-SILAC (s-SILAC) approach, as previously described (PMID: 32071169).  Briefly, five milligrams of each primary GIST tissue were mixed 1:1 with the s-SILAC reference sample, endogenous kinases purified by MIB-resins, kinases eluted, digested, and peptides analyzed by LC/MS-MS.  Proteolytic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 on a Thermo Easy-Spray C18 PepMap 75µm x 50cm C-18 2 µm column with a 240 min gradient of 4-25% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min at 50°C. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer utilizing a top 15 methodology in which the 15 most intense peptide precursor ions were subjected to fragmentation. The AGC for MS1 was set to 3x106 with a max injection time of 120 ms, the AGC for MS2 ions was set to 1x105 with a max injection time of 150 ms, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
MIB-MS analysis was performed on GIST (n=33), KIT-mutant (n=15), PDGFRA-mutant (n=10), SDH-d (n= 8) and normal gastric tissues (n=9). Raw data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 and searched using andromeda 1.5.6.0 against the swiss-prot human protein database (downloaded on April 24th, 2019, 20402 entries). The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. All settings were default and searched using acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm and maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of < 1%. LFQ quantitation was performed using MaxQuant with the following parameters: LFQ minimum ratio count = 2, Fast LFQ was selected, LFQ minimum number of neighbors- 3, LFQ average number of neighbors = 6. Skip normalization was not selected, and match between runs was selected. The MQ output file was filtered for human protein kinases in excel and kinase LFQ intensities imported into Perseus version 1.6.5.0 for analysis. Kinase LFQ values were filtered in the following manner:  kinases identified by site only were removed, reverse or potential contaminants were removed and filtered for kinases identified by >1 unique peptide. LFQ data were log2 transformed, followed by an additional filter for kinases identified in at least 70% of MIB-MS runs. Parameters for the Student's T-test were as follows: S0=0.1, side=both using Permutation-based FDR <0.05. SILAC MS data was analyzed in MaxQuant using the following group specific parameters: Type = standard, multiplicity = 2, Max labeled = 3, and heavy labels Arg10 and Lys8 selected. Parameters for protein quantitation were as follows: Label min ratio count = 1, peptides used for quantition = unique, only use modified proteins was selected, discard unmodified counterpart was selected, and normalized average ratio estimation was selected. The MaxQuant output file was filtered for human protein kinases in excel and kinase ratio normalized H/L intensities were imported into Perseus for analysis. Normalized H/L s-SILAC ratios were 1/(x) transformed to get L-tumor/ H-s-SILAC ratios and filtered in the following manner:  kinases identified by site only were removed, reverse or potential contaminants were removed and filtered for kinases identified by >1 unique peptide. Kinase s-SILAC ratios were log2 transformed and filtered for detection in a minimum of 70% of MIB-MS runs. Parameters for the Student's T-test were as follows: S0=0.1, side=both using Permutation-based FDR <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Management of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) has been revolutionized by the identification of activating mutations in KIT and PDGFRA and clinical application of RTK inhibitors in advanced disease. Stratification of GISTs into molecularly defined subsets provides insight into clinical behavior and response to approved targeted therapies. Although these RTK inhibitors are effective in most GISTs, resistance remains a significant clinical problem. Development of effective treatment strategies for refractory GISTs requires identification of novel targets to provide additional therapeutic options. Global kinome profiling has the potential to identify critical signaling networks and reveal protein kinases essential in GISTs. Using multiplexed inhibitor beads and mass spectrometry, we explored the majority of the kinome in GIST specimens from the 3 most common molecular subtypes (KIT mutant, PDGFRA mutant, and succinate dehydrogenase deficient) to identify kinase targets. Kinome profiling with loss-of-function assays identified an important role for G2/M tyrosine kinase, Wee1, in GIST cell survival. In vitro and in vivo studies revealed significant efficacy of MK-1775 (Wee1 inhibitor) in combination with avapritinib in KIT mutant and PDGFRA mutant GIST cell lines as well as notable efficacy of MK-1775 as a monotherapy in the engineered PDGFRA mutant line. These studies provide strong preclinical justification for the use of MK-1775 in GIST.

### Keywords
Pdgfra, Kit, Gastrointestinal stromal tumor

### Affiliations
Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Fox Chase Cancer Center

### Submitter
Lori RInk

### Lab Head
Dr Lori Rink
Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA


