### Accession
PXD009300

### Title
Proteomic Distinction of Renal Oncocytomas and Eosinophilic Chromophobe Renal Cell Carcinomas

### Description
Background Renal oncocytomas (ROs) are benign epithelial tumors of the kidney that may progress into malignant chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCCs), with the latter constituting 5 – 7 % of renal neoplasias. ROs and chRCCs show pronounced molecular and histological similarities, which renders their differentiation demanding. We aimed for the differential proteome profiling of ROs and chRCCs in order to better understand distinguishing protein patterns.   Methods We employed formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples (six RO cases, six chRCC cases) together with isotopic triplex dimethylation and a pooled reference standard to enable cohort-wide quantitative comparison. For lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) and integrin alpha-V (ITGAV) we performed corroborative immunohistochemistry (IHC) in an extended cohort of 42 RO cases and 31 chRCC cases lacking any overlap with the smaller proteomic cohort.  Results: At 1 % false discovery rate, we identified > 3900 proteins, of which >2400 proteins were consistently quantified in at least four RO and four chRCC cases. The proteomic expression profiling discriminated ROs and chRCCs and highlighted established features such as accumulation of mitochondrial proteins in ROs together with emphasizing the accumulation of endo-lysosomal proteins in chRCCs. In line with the proteomic data, IHC showed enrichment of LAMP1 in chRCC and of ITGAV in RO.   Conclusion We present one of the first differential proteome profiling studies on ROs and chRCCs and highlight differential abundance of LAMP1 and ITGAV in these renal tumors.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue specimens were used as described previously [15, 19], including macrodissection to remove areas necrosis, fibrosis, hemorrhage, and inflammation. For quantitative comparison, triplex isotopic dimethylation of primary amines was employed [20], distinguishing RO, chRCC, and a pooled mix that serves as a standard similar to the Super-SILAC approach [21]. Samples were further fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography as described [22]. LC-MS/MS was performed using a Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) as described previously [18]

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.28 [23] as described previously [19]. Proteins were only further considered if they were identified and quantified in at least four RO samples and four chRCC samples. Due to this strict requirement, we also included proteins that were identified and quantified by single peptides in individual samples. Files obtained by MaxQuant were further processed using RStudio v.0.99.446 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) as previously described [24]. Reverse and potential contaminants entries were removed. Ratios were log2 transformed, normalized by centering, and a linear model was fitted using the limma package [25].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Renal cell tumors formalin-fixation, Paraffin embedment proteomics immunohistochemistry

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
PD Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Fellow Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
PD Dr. Oliver Schilling Heisenberg Fellow Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de


