### Accession
PXD031490

### Title
Cyclodepsipeptides, solonamides, influence motility in the native producer Photobacterium galatheae S2753

### Description
The marine bacterium Photobacterium galatheae S2753 produces a group of cyclodepsipeptides, solonamides, which impede the virulence but not the survival of Staphylococcus aureus. Besides the invaluable antivirulence activity, little is known about the biosynthesis and physiological function of solonamides in the native producer. This study generated a solonamides-deficient mutant, Δsol, by in-frame deleting the sol gene, thereby identifying the core gene for solonamides biosynthesis. By annotation from antiSMASH, the biosynthetic pathway of solonamides in S2753 was also proposed. Mass spectrometry analysis of cell extracts found that deficiency of solonamides production influenced the production of several novel lipids, but not the overall secondary metabolite profile. Physiological comparison between Δsol and wild-type S2753 demonstrated that growth dynamics and biofilm formation of both strains were similar; however, Δsol  displayed reduced swimming rings as compared to the wild-type. The  swimming ring size of Δsol was restored to the level of wild-type strain by adding solonamide B, indicating that solonamide B influences regulate  the swimming behavior of P. galatheae S2753. Proteomic analysis of the Δsol and wild-type found that eliminating solonamides influenced many cellular processes, including swimming-related proteins and that solonamides trigger the motility of S2753 likely by adjusting the cellular cyclic di-GMP concentration. In conclusion, our results revealed the biosynthetic pathway of solonamides and their ecological benefits to P. galatheae S2753 by enhancing the swimming velocity, likely by altering the motile physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation and analyses were conducted as described by Wang et al. 2021 (66). Samples were collected at exponential and stationary growth points (Figure 3). Cultures were harvested at 5,000 x g for five minutes, and the supernatant was collected and filtered through a 0.02 µm film to remove cells. The cell pellets were washed twice with 1 mL ice-cold PBS buffer, centrifuged at 7,000 x g for 1 minute, and transferred to Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes. Lysis buffer (67) was added, and samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes and subsequently cooled on ice. Ice-cold acetone was added to the supernatant to a final percentage of 80% acetone and stored at -20°C for overnight to precipitate all proteins. The supernatant samples were centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 20 minutes followed by removing the acetone carefully without disturbing the protein pellets. The remaining acetone was evaporated in a fumehood. After that, the protein pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer and boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes. All samples were treated as described by Lechman et al. (2016) (68) with few modifications. Samples were sonicated for 150 s using BioRuptor and the protein concentrations were determined using BCA gold. A sample of 10 µg was adjusted by lysis buffer to 20 µL and then diluted three folds with digestion buffer (10% ACN, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). LysC was added in a 1:50 ratio, and the sample was incubated for four hours at 37°C. Samples were diluted 10fold with digestion buffer relative to the starting volume, trypsin was added in a 1:100 ratio, and samples were incubated at 37°C for overnight. Since P. galatheae S2753 forms biofilms, to increase the sample quality, an extract centrifuge step at 20,000 x g for 10 min was added to all samples before they were diluted with 2% TFA to a final percentage of 1% TFA. Pipette tips of 250 µL were loaded by adding four layers of C18 disks. After activating the stagetips with 20 µL 100% MeOH, 20 µL Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), and 2 x 20 µL Buffer A’ (3% ACN, 1% TFA). Samples after the extract centrifuge step were loaded onto the stagetip. Filters were washed twice with Buffer A (0.1% FA in MiliQ water), and samples were subsequently eluted with Buffer B’ (40% ACN, 0.1% FA). Buffer was then evaporated in a Speedvac 5301 (Eppendorf) for 90 minutes at 60°C, and proteins were resuspended in Buffer A* (2% ACN, 1% TFA). Concentration was determined using Fluorometers, and the NanoDrop™ One Spectrophotometer. 500 ng of each sample was injected for proteomics detection.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the P. galatheae S2753 database obtained from NCBI (GCA_000695255.1). Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q) and Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Solonamides, Lc-ms, Photobacterium galatheae, Proteome, Secretome

### Affiliations
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;

### Submitter
Shengda Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lone Gram
Department of Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;


