### Accession
PXD033552

### Title
Pharmacoproteomic profiling directed by C. elegans-driven phenotypic quantitative HTS

### Description
Quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) pharmacologically evaluates libraries of drugs and investigational agents for potential therapeutic uses, toxicological risk assessment, and increasingly for academic chemical tool discovery.  Phenotypic HTS assays aim to interrogate molecular pathways and networks, often relying on cell culture systems, historically with less emphasis on multicellular organisms.  C. elegans has served as a powerful eukaryotic model organism for human biology and disease by virtue of genetic conservation and experimental tractability.  Here we describe a paradigm to enable C. elegans in qHTS using 384-well microtiter plate laser scanning cytometry for rapid signal acquisition with concurrent quantification of the fluorescent protein-expressing organism to select phenotype-modifying compounds for subsequent life-stage and proteomic analysis.  E. coli bacterial ghosts, a non-replicating nutrient, allow compound exposures over 7-days spanning two life cycles to mitigate complications from bacterial overgrowth.  We demonstrate the method using 643 anti-infective biased agents tested in 7-pt titration to assess feasibility of nematode-based in vivo qHTS. A pharmacological profile from the primary screen confirmed the efficacy of known anti-parasitic molecules, such as ivermectin and levamisole as well as illuminating anthelmintic properties of general chemical classes, including MEK, -secretase, bromodomain and proteasome inhibitors. Subsequent life-stage and proteomics analysis helped elucidate the physiologic consequence of specific compounds on C. elegans viability.  For example, bortezomib induced a parallel upregulation of core proteasome subunits and the transcription factor skn-1-activating DDI aspartyl protease, while the kinase inhibitor trametinib upregulated the C. elegans MEK-1 ortholog, Mnk-1, downstream aminoacyl tRNA synthetases and ribosomal survival pathway proteins. We anticipate a broader application of this qHTS-coupled proteomics approach will enable the analysis of C. elegans orthologous transgenic phenotypes of human pathologies to facilitate drug and probe profiling from high-impact chemical libraries for a range of therapeutic indications.

### Sample Protocol
Compound and control treatment groups comprised of three biological replicates each were prepared for proteomic digestion by trypsin prior to HPLC-MS analysis. The groups were consisted of untreated and DMSO control groups and a bortezomib (4 µM), Trametinib (1 µM), LY411575 (500 nM), Selumetinib (10 µM) and Selinexor (20 µM) treated groupsSix samples representing two groups with three biological replicates were prepared for proteomic digestion by trypsin prior to HPLC-MS analysis. The two variable groups were: 1) Untreated group and 2) bortezomib treated group (4 µM, 7 days). NP40 cell lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) was added to each worm sample for protein extraction.  Samples were added to LN2 in a mortar and pestle and protein extracted with manual grinding as above. The samples were centrifuged (4 °C, 13,000 g, 15 min) to remove worm debris, then diluted 1:5 for BCA protein concentration determination. Around To ~30 µg of the proteins estimated from the BCA results were was added RapidGest (0.1% w/v) and TCEP (20 mM) followed by reduction incubation (40 °C, 850 rpm, 20 min). After reduction incubation, the samples were centrifuged, and IAA was then added to each sample (15 mM) for incubation (30 min, under dark environment). Chilled acetonitrile (-20 °C) was then added to each sample in a 9:1 v/v ratio. The samples were then immediately incubated on ice then centrifuged (4 °C, 18,000 g, 10 min). As much acetonitrile as possible was then removed without disturbing the precipitated protein pellet. The samples were then evaporated on the Centrivap Complete Vacuum Concentrator for 10 min. A volume of 30 µL of 0.02 mg/mL trypsin was then added to each sample then transferred to the Thermal Mixer for overnight incubation (37 °C, 850 rpm, 15-18 hours). Formic acid stock solution was added to each sample to quench the reaction prior to HPLC-MS/MS analysis. All proteomic HPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000-nano LC system coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer equipped with the Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size: 3 µm, 100 Å) and separated with an analytical column with the spray tip (75 µm x 30 cm, 1.7 µm, 100 Å) (CoAnn Technologies, Richland, WA, U.S.A.) using a 200 min method (180 min gradient). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column by autosampler using loading solvent (2% acetonitrile in 98% UHPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a 180 min gradient (including sample loading and re-equilibration) starting at 98% A (0.1% formic acid in UHPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was maintained at 2% B (80% Acetonitrile, 19.9% Water, 0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, 2-9% B for 4 min, 9-38% B for 141 min, 38-50% B for 25 min, 50-90% B for 3 min, and maintained at 90% B for 10 min, followed by reequilibration of the column with 2% B for 10 min. Column oven parameters were set at a temperature of 40 °C. The Orbitrap™ Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with the Easy-Max NG ion source with spray voltage set at 1,800 V, and ion transfer tube temperature set at 250 oC. The MS scan was operated at data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 375-1,800 with detection in the Orbitrap (120 K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 1.0x106. The fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap (15 K resolution) with a normalized collision energy of 28% at HCD activation mode. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, the most intense ions above were selected for the MS/MS analysis, and the cycle time for MS and MS/MS analysis was set as 2 s. The AGC for MS/MS was Standard (instrument default) and a maximum injection time was 22 ms. Precursor ions with charges of +2 to +7 were isolated for MS/MS sequencing. The MS/MS isolation window was 1.2 Da, and the dynamic exclusion time was set at 60 s (after one MS/MS acquisition) with a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest algorithm were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The MS raw data were searched against a Swiss-Prot C. elegans database (version August 2020, reviewed database) consisting of 4,165 entries using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Peptide identification false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to a maximum of 0.01 using identifications from a concatenated database from the non-decoy and the decoy databases. Label-free quantification analysis used the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) pharmacologically evaluates chemical libraries for therapeutic uses, toxicological risk and, increasingly, for academic probe discovery. Phenotypic high-throughput screening assays interrogate molecular pathways, often relying on cell culture systems, historically less focused on multicellular organisms. Caenorhabditis elegans has served as a eukaryotic model organism for human biology by virtue of genetic conservation and experimental tractability. Here, a paradigm enabling C. elegans qHTS using 384-well microtiter plate laser-scanning cytometry is described, in which GFP-expressing organisms revealing phenotype-modifying structure-activity relationships guide subsequent life-stage and proteomic analyses, and Escherichia coli bacterial ghosts, a non-replicating nutrient source, allow compound exposures over two life cycles, mitigating bacterial overgrowth complications. We demonstrate the method with libraries of anti-infective agents, or substances of toxicological concern. Each was tested in seven-point titration to assess the feasibility of nematode-based in vivo qHTS, and examples of follow-up strategies were provided to study organism-based chemotype selectivity and subsequent network perturbations with a physiological impact. We anticipate that this qHTS approach will enable analysis of C. elegans orthologous phenotypes of human pathologies to facilitate drug library profiling for a range of therapeutic indications.

### Keywords
Infectious disease, Genetic disorders, Proteomics, High-throughput screening, Model organisms, Laser cytometry, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)


