### Accession
PXD023212

### Title
Proteomics-based data integration of wheat cultivars facing Fusarium graminearum strains revealed a core-responsive pattern driving the fate of the interaction

### Description
The aim of this work is to dissect the plant component of the dual-proteome established during the FHB process using the same three wheat cultivars facing the three fungal strains as described in Fabre et al. (2019b). Qualitative and quantitative dissection of the three wheat cultivar proteomes was devoted to identify molecular events that drive the FHB-susceptibility differences. This included, the identification of (i) the generic molecular adjustments taking place during FHB progress, (ii) the cultivar-specific responses and their accommodation with different F. graminearum strains inducing FHB and (iii) the range of wheat proteins that basically discriminate the three wheat cultivars of contrasted susceptibility. The joint analysis of all these data with the fungal protein information was carried out to identify relationship between wheat protein abundance changes and fungal effectors differentially accumulated between the three F. graminearum strains (Fabre et al., 2019b).

### Sample Protocol
For each biological replicate, wheat spikelets were finely ground in liquid nitrogen. Denaturing protein extraction were performed on 100 mg of ground material using 1.8 mL of cold trichloroacetic acid/β-mercaptoethanol/acetone solution and then mixed and stored at -20°C for 1h as described in Bonhomme et al. (2012). Protein resolubilization were performed in a urea-thiourea buffer [6M urea; 2M thiourea; 1% Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail 100X (Thermo Fisher Scientific 78429); 100mM ammonium bicarbonate; 0.1% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega V2071)] by following the ratio 10μL per mg of dry matter as described in Fabre et al. (2019a). Protein quantification were performed using Protein Quantification Assay kit (Macherey-Nagel; 740967.250) with bovine serum albumin as standard. For each sample, a starting amount of 600μg of proteins from each sample was collected and submitted to reduction and alkylation as described in Maghames et al. (2018). Protein digestion was achieved using trypsin (Promega) following a Protease:Protein ratio of 1:30. Tandem mass spectrometry analyses were performed using a nanoESI Q ExactiveTM HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific 0726042) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPLC gradients and data acquisition parameters were set as described in Fabre et al. (2019b). Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins from MS/MS data  Database searches were performed using X!Tandem (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/;  2010.01.01.4). Enzymatic cleavage was described for trypsin digestion with one possible miscleavage. Cyscarboxyamidomethylation and Met oxidation were set as static and variable modification, respectively. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Protein identifications were performed using a concatenated file including the wheat database (IWGSC, v1.0, 110,790 entries, 04/2017) and a contaminant database (trypsin, keratins, etc.). To prevent peptides derived from F. graminearum proteins from being assigned to plant proteins, the MDC_Fg1 (13166 entries, 01/2019), MDC_Fg13 (13297 entries, 01/2019), and MDC_FgU1 (13014 entries, 01/2019) databases obtained from an in-lab re-sequencing of each F. graminearum strain (Alouane et al., 2018) were also added for the protein identifications. Identified proteins were parsed and grouped using the X!TandemPipeline v0.2.40 c++ (Langella et al., 2017). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E-value < 0.05. Proteins were reported when they displayed at least two different peptides in the same sample and when the protein E-value < 0.0001. The FDR (False Discovery Rate) at the peptide level assessed from searches against reversed amino acid sequences for each protein was smaller than 0.8 × 10-6. Relative protein abundance was determined from the sum of the abundances of each specific peptide assigned to a given protein using MassChroQ 2.2.17 software (Valot et al., 2011) by extraction of ion chromatograms as described in Bonhomme et al. (2012). Protein abundance normalization was then performed by dividing ratios by the total peptide abundance value in each LC-MS/MS run. Subsequent statistical analyses were performed on log2-transformed normalized data.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analyses were performed using the programming software R 3.4.4 (R Core Team, 2018). Principal component analysis (PCA) using samples as individuals and based on all quantification values for each protein was performed in order to identify the main factors explaining the differences between samples.  At the individual protein level, analysis of the explanatory factors for wheat protein abundance variations was carried out, after verification of the absence of any block/repeat effect, using a nested ANOVA (Analysis of variance). This include: (i) wheat proteins whose abundance differences were specifically explained by the presence of F. graminearum stricto sensu (Treatment_factor, T_effect proteins), (ii) wheat proteins whose abundance differences were only explained by the wheat genetic background (Cultivar factor, Cv_effect proteins), (iii) wheat proteins whose abundance differences were explained by the two main factors (Cv+T_effect proteins), (iv) wheat proteins whose abundance differences observed between the two treatments were dependent of the host cultivar (Cv×T_effect proteins) and, (v) wheat proteins whose abundance differences observed between host cultivar were dependent of the inoculated fungal strain (Cv×T{S}_effect proteins). Following the methodology described by Kumar and Futschik (2007), fuzzy C-means clustering of wheat proteins showing significant abundance changes according to each effect tested was performed from Z-score transformed values and a fuzzification parameter of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium head blight (FHB), caused mainly by <i>Fusarium graminearum</i>, is the foremost destructive disease of cereals worldwide. Effector-like molecules produced by <i>F. graminearum</i> play key roles in the infection process and are assumed to be one of the essential components of the pathogen's aggressiveness. However, their nature and role in the disease are still largely misunderstood. As a mean to provide relevant information about the molecular determinism of <i>F. graminearum</i> aggressiveness, we surveyed three <i>F. graminearum</i> strains on three wheat cultivars contrasted by their susceptibility to FHB. <i>F. graminearum</i> strains revealed large differences in aggressiveness which were mostly unchanged when facing hosts of contrasted susceptibility, suggesting that their behavior rely on intrinsic determinants. Surveying the fungal mass progress and the mycotoxin production rate in the spikes did not evidence any simple relationship with aggressiveness differences, while clues were found through a qualitative and quantitative characterization of the three strain proteomes established <i>in planta</i> especially with regards to early synthesized putative effectors. Independently of the wheat cultivar, the three <i>F. graminearum</i> strains produced systematically the same protein set during the infection but substantial differences in their abundance enabled the categorization of fungal aggressiveness. Overall, our findings show that the contrasts in <i>F. graminearum</i> aggressiveness were not based on the existence of strain-specific molecules but rather on the ability of the strain to ensure their sufficient accumulation. Protein abundance variance was mostly driven by the strain genetics and part was also influenced by the host cultivar but strain by cultivar interactions were marginally detected, depicting that strain-specific protein accumulations did not depend on the host cultivar. All these data provide new knowledge on fungal aggressiveness determinants and provide a resourceful repertoire of candidate effector proteins to guide further research.

### Keywords
Triticum aestivum; susceptibility; fusarium head blight; gibberella zeae; strain aggressiveness; proteomics; plant-pathogen interactions; wheat resistance

### Affiliations
UMR UCA/INRA 1095
Université Clermont Auvergne, INRAE, UMR 1095 Genetics, Diversity and Ecophysiology of Cereals, Clermont-Ferrand, France

### Submitter
Ludovic Bonhomme

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Langin
Université Clermont Auvergne, INRAE, UMR 1095 Genetics, Diversity and Ecophysiology of Cereals, Clermont-Ferrand, France


