### Accession
PXD010113

### Title
limpet teeth LC-MSMS -  The Microstructure, Proteomics and Crystallization of the Limpet Teeth

### Description
Limpets are marine mollusks using mineralized teeth, one of the hardest and strongest biomaterials, to feed on algae on intertidal rocks. However, most of studies only focuses on the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the teeth while the molecular information is largely unknown, limiting our understanding of this unique and fundamental biomineralization process. In this study, we investigated the teeth of limpet Cellana toreuma from three perspectives: 1) by using electron microscopy to observe the microstructure of the teeth; 2) by using proteomics and RNA-seq to investigate the proteins involved in the limpet teeth and 3) by in vitro crystallization experiment combined with Raman spectroscopy to investigate the effects of proteins and chitin framework on crystal formation. It is found that the limpets formed alternatively tricuspid teeth and unicuspid teeth. Small nanoneedles were densely packed at the tips or leading regions of the cusps. In contrast, big nanoneedles resembling chemical synthesized goethite were loosely packed in the trailing regions of the cusps. Proteins extracted from the whole teeth such as ferritin, peroxiredoxin, arginine kinase, GTPase-Rabs and clathrin were identified by proteomics. Goethite-binding experiment coupled with proteomics and RNA-seq highlighted six chitin-binding proteins (CtCBPs). Furthermore, these proteins or the framework chitin only induced packing of crystals without affecting their crystal polymorphs in vitro. Taken together, the limpets formed hierarchical teeth across different length scales through preformed framework and secreted complex proteins; in addition, the chitin could also be an important player in controlling crystallinity and crystal packing in vivo. This study provides insight into the unique biomineralization process in the limpet teeth at the molecular levels, which may guide biomimetic strategies aimed at designing hard materials at room temperature.

### Sample Protocol
A section of the radula containing fully mineralized radular teeth was excised and were subsequently washed thoroughly with de-ionized water, 70% ethanol and then dried at the room temperature. The radula were then ground into a fine powder using an agate mortar and pestle. To isolate the radula-associated proteins, the ground radula were treated with 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution for 30 minutes at 100℃. After a short centrifugation, the denatured samples were ready to be applied on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels. The experiment is according to the previous established procedures with modifications(25). Briefly, Protein bands were selected and were completely destained by washing with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3/CH3CN (50/50) mixture for 30 min at 37 °C. Then, reduction was conducted with 50 μL of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 57 °C, and alkylation was performed with 50 μL of 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 mins at room temperature in the dark. The cut gels were dried in CH3CN and were treated with 0.4 μg trypsin (Proteomics grade, Sigma) in 10 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 12 h at 37 °C. The solution was treated with 50 μL of 1% formic acid at 30 °C for 30 min under agitation. The digests were then lyophilized and suspended in 30 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 4% acetonitrile for LC–MS/MS analysis. 5 μL of sample was injected into the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer with Dionex U-3000 Rapid Separation nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) for analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired automatically using Analyst QS 1.1 software (Applied Biosystems) following a MS survey scan over m/z 350–1500 at a resolution of 60,000 for full scan and 2, 000 for MS/MS measurements. The LC-MS/MS data were searched against the Mollusca protein database by a Mascot 2.1 search engine with carbamidoethylated cysteine as a fixed modification with oxidized methionine and tryptophan as variable modifications. Finally, sequences with mascot scores of at least 5.0 and at least two matched peptide fragments were considered valid. Proteins identified using Blastp and tBlastn searches against the NCBI database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). Functional domains were analyzed by SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/) and InterproScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro ).

### Publication Abstract
Limpets are marine mollusks that use mineralized teeth, one of the hardest and strongest biomaterials, to feed on algae on intertidal rocks. However, most of studies only focus on the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the teeth while the molecular information is largely unknown, limiting our understanding of this unique and fundamental biomineralization process. The study investigates the microstructure, proteomics, and crystallization in the teeth of limpet Cellana toreuma. It is found that the limpets formed alternatively tricuspid teeth and unicuspid teeth. Small nanoneedles are densely packed at the tips or leading regions of the cusps. In contrast, big nanoneedles resembling chemically synthesized goethite are loosely packed in the trailing regions of the cusps. Proteins extracted from the whole radula, such as ferritin, peroxiredoxin, arginine kinase, GTPase-Rabs, and clathrin, are identified by proteomics. A goethite-binding experiment coupled with proteomics and RNA-seq highlights six chitin-binding proteins (CtCBPs). Furthermore, the extracted proteins from the cusps of radula or the framework chitin induce packing of crystals and possibly affect crystal polymorphs in vitro. This study provides insight into the unique biomineralization process in the limpet teeth at the molecular levels, which may guide biomimetic strategies aimed at designing hard materials at room temperature.

### Keywords
Limpet teeth, Cellana toreuma

### Affiliations
Tsinghua university
school of life sciences,Tsinghua University,Beijing 100084,China

### Submitter
Yadong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Rongqing Zhang
school of life sciences,Tsinghua University,Beijing 100084,China


