### Accession
PXD041218

### Title
Progresses and challenges of Strongyloides spp. proteomics

### Description
The availability of high-quality data of helminth genomes provided over the last two decades has supported and accelerated large-scale ‘omics studies and, consequently, the achievement of a more in depth molecular characterisation of a number of pathogens. Strongyloides spp. are no less and since their genome was made available transcriptomics has been rather frequently applied to investigate gene expression regulation across their life cycle. Strongyloides proteomics characterisation has instead been somehow neglected, with only a few reports performing high-throughput or targeted analyses associated with protein identification by tandem mass spectrometry. Such investigations are however necessary in order to discern important aspects associated with human strongyloidiasis, including understanding parasite biology and the mechanisms of host-parasite interaction, but also to identify novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets. In this review article we will give an overview of the published proteomics studies investigating strongyloidiasis at different levels, spanning from the characterisation of the somatic proteome and excretory/secretory products of different parasite stages to the investigation of potentially immunogenic proteins. Moreover, in the effort to try to start filling the current gap in host-proteomics, we will also present the first serum proteomics analysis in patients suffering from human strongyloidiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analyses  For each sample, 10 μl of serum were depleted of the 12 most abundant serum proteins (i.e., α1-acid glycoprotein, α1-antitrypsin, α2-macroglobulin, albumin, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, IgA, IgG, IgM and transferrin) using Pierce TM top 12 abundant protein depletion spin columns (Pierce, IL, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Depleted samples were then buffer exchanged and concentrated using Amicon ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices (3 kDa cut-off) (Millipore, MA, USA) and protein concentration was measured using Qubit protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA, USA). Protein samples were solubilised in 0.1% RapiGestSF surfactant (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), pH 8.0, vortexed and heated 10 min at 80°C. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin sequencing grade (Roche, 1:50 protease to protein ratio). Samples were then incubated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid for 45 min at 37 °C to cleave the RapiGest SF surfactant, cleaned with C18 spin columns (Pierce™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by LC-MS/MS Samples were analyzed in two steps: a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) followed by data-independent analysis (DIA) on the same sample using the same gradient conditions. All samples were analyzed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent, Dublin, USA) system interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). Peptides were separated using Halo C18 column (0.5×100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies Dublin, USA). The reverse phase LC solvents include solvent A (99.9% water +0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid). A 30 min gradient was used at a flow rate of 15 μL/min with an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40%. For DDA acquisition, experiments were set to obtain a high-resolution TOF-MS scan over a mass range of 100–1500 m/z, followed by an MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. Using the same conditions as described above, a SWATH acquisition using DIA was carried out for the label-free quantification process. The mass spectrometer was operated so that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were carried out in a cyclical manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). Peptides (and proteins) were identified using DDA followed by database search, while the quantification was obtained by integrating the area under the chromatographic peak for each ion fragment of identified peptides by using the DIA file.  The DDA files were searched against the UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 01.02.2018, containing 42,271 sequence entries) using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). Samples were input in the Protein Pilot software with the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and False Discovery Rate (FDR) at 1%. For Mascot search, we selected Trypsin as digestion enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, set the instrument to ESI-QUAD-TOF and specified the following modifications for the assay: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. An assay tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic. A target-decoy database search was performed, and FDR was fixed at 1%. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library with the DDA acquisitions to use as the ion library file for all SWATH analysis and quantification. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD.  Quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. Spectral alignment of the SWATH samples (DIA run) was carried out with PeakView 2.2 (ABSCIEX, Concord, Canada) using the spectral library generated above and the following parameters: 6 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, XIC extraction window of 5 min and a width of 15 ppm. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView 1.2 (ABSCIEX, Concord, Canada) for the t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The availability of high-quality data of helminth genomes provided over the past two decades has supported and accelerated large-scale 'omics studies and, consequently, the achievement of a more in-depth molecular characterization of a number of pathogens. This has also involved <i>Strongyloides</i> spp. and since their genome was made available transcriptomics has been rather frequently applied to investigate gene expression regulation across their life cycle. <i>Strongyloides</i> proteomics characterization has instead been somehow neglected, with only a few reports performing high-throughput or targeted analyses associated with protein identification by tandem mass spectrometry. Such investigations are however necessary in order to discern important aspects associated with human strongyloidiasis, including understanding parasite biology and the mechanisms of host-parasite interaction, but also to identify novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets. In this review article, we will give an overview of the published proteomics studies investigating strongyloidiasis at different levels, spanning from the characterization of the somatic proteome and excretory/secretory products of different parasite stages to the investigation of potentially immunogenic proteins. Moreover, in the effort to try to start filling the current gap in host-proteomics, we will also present the first serum proteomics analysis in patients suffering from human strongyloidiasis. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue '<i>Strongyloides</i>: omics to worm-free populations'.

### Keywords
Somatic proteome, Excretory/secretory product (esp), Immunoproteomics, Strongyloidiasis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT) Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT) Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD University of Piemonte Orientale Novara, Italy


