### Accession
PXD002549

### Title
MStern Blot - Urinary Biomarker Study

### Description
This large-scale study focused on the discovery on urinary biomarker for ovarian cyst.

### Sample Protocol
Neat urine samples were denatured with urea and consequently reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Urinary proteins were adsorbed to a PVDF membrane and tryprically digested directly on the membrane. Resulting peptides were eluted with acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Samples ran on a Thermo QExactive. Resulting RAW files were loaded into MaxQuant and searched against a Human dabase (UniProt). LFQ and iBAQ were assessed.

### Publication Abstract
We describe a 96-well plate compatible membrane-based proteomic sample processing method, which enables the complete processing of 96 samples (or multiples thereof) within a single workday. This method uses a large-pore hydrophobic PVDF membrane that efficiently adsorbs proteins, resulting in fast liquid transfer through the membrane and significantly reduced sample processing times. Low liquid transfer speeds have prevented the useful 96-well plate implementation of FASP as a widely used membrane-based proteomic sample processing method. We validated our approach on whole-cell lysate and urine and cerebrospinal fluid as clinically relevant body fluids. Without compromising peptide and protein identification, our method uses a vacuum manifold and circumvents the need for digest desalting, making our processing method compatible with standard liquid handling robots. In summary, our new method maintains the strengths of FASP and simultaneously overcomes one of the major limitations of FASP without compromising protein identification and quantification.

### Keywords
Urine, Ovarian cyst, Mstern blot, Urinary biomarker

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sebastian Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen, PhD
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


