### Accession
PXD004171

### Title
Proteomic Evaluation of PANDER TG Mice

### Description
Previous studies have demonstrated elevated circulating levels of PANcreatic DERived factor (PANDER) overexpression induced a selective hepatic insulin resistant phenotype in the liver of the PANDER transgenic mouse model. Here we utilized SILAC for "spike-in" as a quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomic workflow to reveal proteomic profile changes between the PANDER transgenic mouse and the wild-type mouse.

### Sample Protocol
PANDER transgenic and wild-type mice were treated under three metabolic conditions: fasted, fed and insulin stimulated. Protein lysate was obtained from tissue that was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after excision following treatment and euthanasia. Tissue was lysed in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 4% SDS, and 100mM dithiothreitol. Tryptic peptides were generated utilizing the FASP method. Following a desalt procedure, peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography. Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 10cm x 75cm I.D. reversed phase column packed with 5μm C18 material with 300 Å pore size (New Objective) using 125 minute gradients of 2–40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid in-line with mass spectrometric analysis performed on an Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra identifications and quantifications were assigned through MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 employing the Andromeda search algorithm against the UniprotKB reference database for Mus musculus. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-terminus) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. Digestion parameters were set to Trypsin/P as the enzyme used for producing heavy Lys6 and light SILAC labeled peptides. A minimum peptide length of 6 was used as well as 2 allowed missed cleavages. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis was performed on the resulting protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
This article contains raw and processed data related to research published in "Quantitative Proteomic Profiling Reveals Hepatic Lipogenesis and Liver X Receptor Activation in the PANDER Transgenic Model" (M.G. Athanason,&#xa0;W.A. Ratliff, D. Chaput, C.B. MarElia, M.N. Kuehl, S.M., Jr. Stevens, B.R. Burkhardt (2016)) [1], and was generated by "spike-in" SILAC-based proteomic analysis of livers obtained from the PANcreatic-Derived factor (PANDER) transgenic mouse (PANTG) under various metabolic conditions [1]. The mass spectrometry output of the PANTG and wild-type B6SJLF mice liver tissue and resulting proteome search from MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 employing the Andromeda search algorithm against the UniprotKB reference database for Mus musculus has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with dataset identifiers PRIDE: PXD004171 and doi:10.6019/PXD004171. Protein ratio values representing PANTG/wild-type obtained by MaxQuant analysis were input into the Perseus processing suite to determine statistical significance using the Significance A outlier test (p&lt;0.05). Differentially expressed proteins using this approach were input into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to determined altered pathways and upstream regulators that were altered in PANTG mice.

### Keywords
Liver, Fam3b, Silac, Pander

### Affiliations
University of South Florida
Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology University of South Florida Tampa, FL USA

### Submitter
Mark Athanason

### Lab Head
Dr Brant R. Burkhardt
Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology University of South Florida Tampa, FL USA


