### Accession
PXD022576

### Title
Comparative proteomics provides insights into diapause program of Bactrocera minax (Diptera: Tephritidae)

### Description
The Chinese citrus fly, Bactrocera minax, is a notorious univoltine pest that causes damage to citrus. B. minax enters obligatory pupal diapause in each generation to resist harsh environmental conditions in winter. Despite the enormous efforts that have been made in the past decade, the understanding of pupal diapause of B. minax is currently still fragmentary. In this study, the 20-hydroxyecdysone solution and ethanol solvent was injected into newly-formed pupae to obtain non-diapause- (ND) and diapause-destined (D) pupae, respectively, and a comparative proteomics analysis between ND and D pupae was performed 1 and 15 d after injection. A total of 3,255 proteins were identified, of which 190 and 463 were found to be differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in ND1 vs D1 and ND15 vs D15 comparisons, respectively. The reliability and accuracy of LFQ method was validated by qRT-PCR. Functional analyses of DAPs, including Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction, were conducted. The results revealed that the diapause program of B. minax is closely associated with several physiological activities, such as phosphorylation, chitin biosynthesis, autophagy, signaling pathways, endocytosis, skeletal muscle formation, protein metabolism, and core metabolic pathways of carbohydrate, amino acid, and lipid conversion. The findings of this study provide insights into diapause program of B. minax and lay a basis for further investigation into its underlying molecular mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
The selected pupae were ground together in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6). The homogenate was sonicated and boiled for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filter. The protein content of the filtrate was quantified using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad). Samples for MS measurement were prepared according to the ﬁlter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, 200 μg of protein extraction was incorporated into 30 μL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, pH 8.0) and cleaned by repeated ultrafiltration. Then, the cleaned protein filter was mixed with 100 μL 100 mM iodoacetamide solution dissolved in UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and incubated in darkness for 30 min to block reduced cysteine residues. After washing with 100 μL UA buffer three times and 100 μL 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice, the protein suspension was digested by 4 μg trypsin in 40 μL 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer. The digested sample was desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma) and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, followed by reconstitution in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Three biological replicates were set for each group, and a total of 12 samples for all four groups were used for LC-MS/MS analysis.Each sample was subjected to high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation using Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptide mixture was loaded onto a C18 trap column (Thermo ScientificTM AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, with nanoViperTM fingertight fitting) connected to a C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid), and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 2 h (0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min). MS analysis was then performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method that dynamically chose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Precursor ions that were singly-charged and unassigned were excluded. The full scan MS spectra and HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively, at 200 m/z, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1. 5. 3. 17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany), and searched against the peptide database. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Mass accuracy for the ﬁrst and main search was 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively. Mass tolerance was 20 ppm for fragment ions. Fixed modiﬁcations were carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and variable modiﬁcation was oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation. The cutoff of the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein was adjusted to 0.01. All proteins identified were subjected to LFQ analysis. The relative levels of proteins between ND and D groups were expressed as LFQ intensity ratio (i.e. fold change). The criteria for identification of DAPs were defined as fold change > 2 and p < 0.05 (t-test). In addition, proteins that were detected in at least two replicates of one group, but not detected in all three replicates of the other group were deemed as DAPs as well.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bactroceraf minax

### Affiliations
College of plant protection, Southwest University, China
College of plant protection, Southwest University

### Submitter
Jia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jia Wang
College of plant protection, Southwest University, China


