### Accession
PXD006574

### Title
An Evaluation of the Crystal Structure of C-terminal Truncated Apolipoprotein A-I in Solution Reveals Structural Dynamics Related to Lipid Binding

### Description
Apolipoprotein (apo)A-I mediates many of the anti-atherogenic functions attributed to high density lipoprotein (HDL). Unfortunately, efforts toward a high-resolution structure of full-length apoA-I have not been fruitful, though there have been successes with deletion mutants. Recently, a C-terminal truncation (apoA-IΔ185-243) was crystallized as a dimer. The structure showed two helical bundles connected by a long, curved pair of swapped helical domains. To compare this structure to that existing under solution conditions, we applied small angle X-ray scattering and isotope-assisted chemical cross-linking to apoA-IΔ185-243 in its dimeric and monomeric forms. For the dimer, we found evidence for the shared domains and aspects of the N-terminal bundles, but not the molecular curvature seen in the crystal. We also found that the N-terminal bundles equilibrate between open and closed states. Interestingly, this movement is one of the transitions proposed during lipid binding. The monomer was consistent with a model in which the long shared helix doubles back onto the helical bundle. Combined with the crystal structure, these data offer an important starting point to understand the molecular details of HDL biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
ApoA-IΔ185-243 Protein Expression and Purification - Our previously reported construct for recombinant, full-length apoA-I (15) was modified with a stop codon (TAG) after Asn-184. The mutant apoA-IΔ185-243 was then expressed and purified as described (15). pET30 vectors (Novagen) containing mutant apoA-IΔ185-243 were transformed into BL-21 E. coli cells. Cells were grown at 37°C in Luria-Bertani culture media containing kanamycin for selection of pET30 transformants. Protein expression was induced by addition of isopropyl ß-ᴅ-thiogalactopyranoside (0.1 mM) followed by shaking at 225 RPM for 2 h at 37°C. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation, supernatant was discarded, and cells were resuspended in binding buffer (5 mM imidazole, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9) and lysed at 4°C by probe sonication. The cell lysate was pelleted and the supernatant was applied to His-bind columns. Fractions containing apoA-IΔ185-243 were pooled and the His-tag was cleaved by tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease at a mass ratio of 20 (apoA-I):1(TEV) for 2 h at room temperature. The sample was reapplied to the His-bind resin to remove the His-tag and fractions containing apoA-IΔ185-243 were pooled, concentrated and dialyzed into 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.1, lyophilized to dryness, and stored at -80°C until ready for use. The recombinant protein contained an additional glycine at the N-terminus after cleavage of the his-tag by TEV. The sequence was confirmed by the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Sequencing Core. 15N-labeled apoA-IΔ185-243 was generated as previously described (16).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files were loaded into the SIM-XL search engine (18) for cross-linked peptides link version 1.1. Briefly, this latest version is optimized for characterizing interaction between homodimers by allowing the user to specify which proteins(s) in the sequence database have light (e.g., 14N) and heavy (e.g., 15N) versions. The carbamidomethylation of the cysteine and the BS3 cross-linker mass modification of 138.0681 at the N-terminus and lysine was considered as fixed. A tolerance of 20 ppm was accepted at the MS1 and MS2 levels. All initial identification of cross-linked peptides required a SIM-XL primary score greater than 1.5. As a single incorrect cross-link identification may lead to an erroneous model, a manual post-validation of the search engine results, at the MS/MS level, was independently performed by two experienced analysts.

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein (apo) A-I mediates many of the anti-atherogenic functions attributed to high density lipoprotein. Unfortunately, efforts toward a high resolution structure of full-length apoA-I have not been fruitful, although there have been successes with deletion mutants. Recently, a C-terminal truncation (apoA-I(&#x394;185-243)) was crystallized as a dimer. The structure showed two helical bundles connected by a long, curved pair of swapped helical domains. To compare this structure to that existing under solution conditions, we applied small angle x-ray scattering and isotope-assisted chemical cross-linking to apoA-I(&#x394;185-243) in its dimeric and monomeric forms. For the dimer, we found evidence for the shared domains and aspects of the N-terminal bundles, but not the molecular curvature seen in the crystal. We also found that the N-terminal bundles equilibrate between open and closed states. Interestingly, this movement is one of the transitions proposed during lipid binding. The monomer was consistent with a model in which the long shared helix doubles back onto the helical bundle. Combined with the crystal structure, these data offer an important starting point to understand the molecular details of high density lipoprotein biogenesis.

### Keywords
Oligomerization, Mass spectrometry (ms), Small-angle x-ray scattering (saxs), Structural model, Apolipoprotein, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Computational Mass Spectrometry Group - Brazil
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Diogo Borges Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo C Carvalho
Computational Mass Spectrometry Group - Brazil


