### Accession
PXD023702

### Title
ZMYND11-MBTD1 induces leukemogenesis through hijacking NuA4/TIP60 acetyltransferase complex and a PWWP-mediated chromatin association mechanism

### Description
Recurring chromosomal translocation t(10;17)(p15;q21) present in a subset of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients creates an aberrant fusion gene termed ZMYND11-MBTD1 (ZM); however, its function remains undetermined. Here, we show that ZM confers primary murine hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells indefinite self-renewal capability ex vivo and causes AML in vivo. Genomics profilings reveal that ZM directly binds to and maintains high expression of pro-leukemic genes including Hoxa, Meis1, Myb, Myc and Sox4. Mechanistically, ZM recruits NuA4/Tip60 histone acetyltransferase complex to cis-regulatory elements, sustaining an active chromatin state enriched in histone acetylation and devoid of repressive histone marks. Systematic mutagenesis of ZM demonstrates essential requirements of Tip60 interaction and an H3K36me3-binding PWWP domain for oncogenesis. Inhibitor of histone acetylation-‘reading’ bromodomain proteins, which act downstream of ZM, is efficacious in treating ZM-induced AML. Collectively, this study demonstrates AML-causing effects of ZM, examines its gene-regulatory roles, and reports an attractive mechanism-guided therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid Construction The human ZMYND11-MBTD1 (ZM) fusion cDNA was generated by Gibson Assembly-mediated ligation between a ZMYND11 cDNA segment encoding its amino acids 1-409 (NM_006624) and a MBTD1 segment (NM_017643), which contains a small region of 5’-UTR immediately upstream of the start codon (which encodes 16 amino acids; see Fig. 1a) plus the entire open reading frame (ORF, amino acids 1-628)1. The ZM chimeric cDNA was then C-terminally tagged by either 3XHA-3XFlag or GFP and cloned into the MSCV-Puro retroviral expression vector (Clontech). For BioID-based protein interactome studies, a biotin ligase (BirA) cDNA (a kind gift of BD Strahl) was inserted into either N-terminus or C-terminus of ZM cDNA in the MSCV-Puro vector.   Purification, Expansion, and Retroviral Transduction of Primary Murine Hematopoietic Stem/Progenitor Cells (HSPCs) The primary lineage-negative (Lin-) murine HSPCs were obtained through isolating bone marrow cells from femur and tibia of wildtype BALB/C mice, followed by depletion of mature hematopoietic cells using a lineage cell depletion kit (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-090-858) as described before3, 4.  BioID The HSPCs stably expressing BirA-tagged ZM were treated with 50uM of biotin for 24hrs to allow for proximity-dependent biotinylation of ZM-interacting proteins, followed by lysis in RIPA buffer (10% glycerol, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.2% Sodium Deoxycholate) freshly supplemented with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM PMSF, and 250 units of Benzonase for 1h with rotation at 4 ºC. After centrifugation at max speed for 30 min at 4 ºC, the cleared supernatant was incubated with Neutravidin beads (Thermo Fisher, 29204) overnight at 4 ºC. The beads were washed sequentially with 1mL of RIPA buffer, TAP lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 50mM HEPES pH 8) and ABC buffer (50mM Ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8), followed by mass spectrometry-based analysis. Mass Spectrometry-based Protein Identification Proteins were eluted from beads by adding 100 µL of 1x Laemmli buffer (Boston Bioproducts) and heating at 95 degrees for 5 minutes.  Samples were loaded on a 4-12% Bis-Tris Deep Well gel, resolved by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie staining. Each SDS-PAGE gel lane was sectioned into 12 segments of equal volume. Each segment was subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion using the following established protocol. Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Fisher), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction in 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Pierce) and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Fisher), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37 degrees for 12-16 hours. Peptide products were then acidified in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 buffer A:B ratio (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis Proteins were identified by searching the UniProtKB database restricted to Mus musculus using Mascot (Matrix Science) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl of cysteine, and variable modifications for oxidation on methionine and acetyl on N-terminus. Scaffold (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm25. Proteins were filtered if they had a spectral count < 8 in at least one sample group, and the counts were normalized to log2 normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values26. Significant interacting proteins were identified by a log2 fold change > 4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k36me3, Bromodomain, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
1Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 2Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 3Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
UAMS

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Gang Greg Wang
1Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 2Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 3Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA


