### Accession
PXD015647

### Title
VHH D4 target identification by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Using a synthetic library of humanized llama single domain antibodies, we identified a novel surface marker for human naturally-occuring monocyte-derived DCs. Proteomics Mass-spectrometry was used to idenitfy the target of this antibody. We found that our antibody targets an extra-cellular domain of LSP-1.

### Sample Protocol
Cleared cell lysates resuspended in an equal volume of IP buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40) were pre-incubated 1 h at 4°C in the presence of 200 μL of protein G agarose beads (Thermo Fisher) and successively washed 3 times in IP buffer to eliminate unspecific binding. The supernatant was recovered by centrifugation (3 min × 2500 g), mixed with 200 µg of antibody, and incubated 2 h at 4°C. Finally, 200 μL of washed protein G agarose beads were added and washed after 1 h at 4°C 5 times in 10 mL of IP buffer five times before being resuspended in 50 μL of SDS loading buffer and heated 10 min at 95°C. Gel slices were washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT before alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% (vol/vol) MeCN, we performed in-gel digestion using trypsin (Roche) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against the Swissprot fasta database containing Homo Sapiens  (2014_10, 20194 sequences) using MascotTM (version 2.3.02) and further analyzed in myProMS.

### Publication Abstract
Human mononuclear phagocytes comprise several subsets of dendritic cells (DCs), monocytes, and macrophages. Distinguishing one population from another is challenging, especially in inflamed tissues, owing to the promiscuous expression of phenotypic markers. Using a synthetic library of humanized llama single domain antibodies, we identified a novel surface marker for human naturally occurring monocyte-derived DCs. Our antibody targets an extra-cellular domain of LSP-1, specifically on monocyte-derived DCs, but not on other leukocytes, in particular monocytes, macrophages, classical DCs, or the recently described blood DC3 population. Our findings will pave the way for a better characterization of human mononuclear phagocytes in pathological settings.

### Keywords
Human, Dendritic cell

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


