### Accession
PXD016341

### Title
Cold-induced urticarial autoinflammatoy syndrome related to factor XII activation

### Description
Early onset urticarial rash with systemic inflammatory symptoms are hallmarks of hereditary autoinflammatory diseases caused by gene mutations of the innate immune pathway, e.g. nucleotide receptor protein 3 (NLRP3). However, in many cases genetic tests are negative, suggesting the existence of unrecognized genetic variants. Here, we report a four-generation family with cold-induced urticarial rash, arthralgia, chills, headache and malaise associated with an autosomal-dominant inheritance. Genetic studies identified a novel substitution mutation in gene F12 (T859A, resulting in p.W268R) which encodes coagulation factor XII (FXII). Occurrence of the mutation segregated with disease status. Functional studies revealed fragmentation and spontaneous activation of FXII in patient plasma and supernatant of HEK293 cells transfected with recombinant W268R-mutated proteins. Furthermore, we observed contact system activation with reduced plasma prekallikrein and profound cleavage of high molecular weight kininogen, representing bradykinin production. As a local source of FXII, skin and blood neutrophils were identified. Interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) was upregulated in lesional skin and in mononuclear donor cells exposed to recombinant mutant proteins. In accordance with these findings, treatment with icatibant (bradykinin-B2-antagonist) or anakinra (interleukin-1-antagonist) reduced disease activity in patients. Thus, we identified anovel autoinflammatory syndrome characterized by a substitution in the F12 gene resulting in activation of the contact system and cytokine-mediated inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Factor XII samples from cleavage assay were separated by SDS page and stained with CoomassieGel bands representing cleavage products were processed by  in-gel tryptic digest. Peptides were measured by mass spectrometry (HF-X Thermo instrument) and analysed with MaxQuant software package

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using MaxQuant verison 1.6.0.1, with semitryptic enzyme parameter, variable modifications: M oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamindation of N and Q; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl C. Factor XII peptides were selected and filtered for minimum 2 MS/MS counts and valid value in both biological replicates

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary autoinflammatory diseases are caused by gene mutations of the innate immune pathway, e.g. nucleotide receptor protein 3 (NLRP3). Here, we report a four-generation family with cold-induced urticarial rash, arthralgia, chills, headache and malaise associated with an autosomal-dominant inheritance. Genetic studies identify a substitution mutation in gene F12 (T859A, resulting in p.W268R) which encodes coagulation factor XII (FXII). Functional analysis reveals enhanced autocatalytic cleavage of the mutated protein and spontaneous FXII activation in patient plasma and in supernatant of transfected HEK293 cells expressing recombinant W268R-mutated proteins. Furthermore, we observe reduced plasma prekallikrein, cleaved high molecular weight kininogen and elevated plasma bradykinin. Neutrophils are identified as a local source of FXII. Interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) is upregulated in lesional skin and mononuclear donor cells exposed to recombinant mutant proteins. Treatment with icatibant (bradykinin-B2-antagonist) or anakinra (interleukin-1-antagonist) reduces disease activity in patients. In conclusion, our findings provide a link between contact system activation and cytokine-mediated inflammation.

### Keywords
Cleavage, Activation, Factor xii

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Charite Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Department of Dermatology and Allergy; Autoinflammation Reference Center (ARC2)

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Karoline Krause
Charite Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Department of Dermatology and Allergy; Autoinflammation Reference Center (ARC2)


