### Accession
PXD007535

### Title
LFQ and SRM proteome analysis of Saliva reveals transition signatures from health to periodontal disease

### Description
Phase 1: The whole saliva samples were obtained from 66 systemically healthy subjects consisting of patients with chronic periodontitis (CP), generalized aggressive periodontitis (G-AgP), gingivitis and individuals with periodontal health. The use of humans for study satisfied the requirements of the Ege University Institutional Review Board (Ethics number 16-12.1/16) and and was conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. It is confirmed that this cross-sectional study conforms to STROBE guidelines for observational studies. Complete medical and dental histories were taken from all participants. Systemic exclusion criteria were the presence of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, diabetes mellitus, HIV infection, systemic inflammatory conditions or non-plaque-induced oral inflammatory conditions, immunosuppressive chemotherapy, and current pregnancy or lactation. Smoking status was also recorded. None of the patients had taken medication such as antibiotics or anti-inflammatory drugs that could affect their periodontal status for at least 6 months before the study. Patients eligible for the study returned to the clinic for clinical measurement screening one-week after being pre-screened. Before being enrolled in the study, participants provided written and informed consent to use their saliva samples and individual  data for scientific purposes. The clinical periodontal indices including probing depth (PPD), clinical attachment level (CAL), plaque index (PI) and bleeding on probing (BOP) were recorded by a manual periodontal probe by a trained and calibrated examiner (V.O.O). The extent and severity of alveolar bone support  were evaluated radiographically in each patient. The participants were classified into four groups based on their periodontal conditions according to the criteria proposed by the 1999 International Workshop for a Classification of Periodontal Diseases and Conditions (REF). Generalized Aggressive Periodontitis (G-AgP): The G-AgP group included 17 patients with ≥16 teeth. The patients had a non- contributory medical history and demonstrated with an early age of clinical manifestations with a generalized pattern of rapid attachment loss and bone destruction. These individuals had minimum of CAL ≥ 5 mm and PD ≥ 6 mm on eight or more teeth; at least three of these were other than central incisors or first molars. Radiographic bone loss was above  ≥ 30 % of root length affecting ≥3 permanent teeth other than first molars and incisors.  Generalized Chronic Periodontitis (CP): The CP group included 17 patients with severe generalized chronic periodontitis.  These individuals had a minimum four non-adjacent teeth with sites with CAL ≥ 5 mm and PPD ≥ 6 mm, and ≥50 % alveolar bone loss in at least two quadrants which was commensurate with the amount of plaque accumulation.  Phase 2: We aimed to develop SRM-based workflow for detecting and quantitating the relative abundance of the candidate proteins in an independent saliva cohort . 82 subjects (48 females and  34 males; age range 24-59 years) were recruited for the study at the Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Adnan Menderes University, Aydın, Turkey. Ethical clearance was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the School of Medicine, Ege University with the protocol number ((Ethics number 70198063-050.06.04). Each participant gave written and verbal informed consent after the purpose and procedures of the study were explained. A dental and medical history was compiled for all subjects as detailed in phase 1 and participants were clustered into four groups according to the criteria proposed by the 1999 International Workshop for a Classification of Periodontal Diseases and Conditions as detailed at Phase 1

### Sample Protocol
Phase 1: Total protein content of the collected supernatants were measured with Qubit® Protein Assay Kit. Solutions of 80 µg of proteins per each sample were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion according to the RapiGest protocol as described earlier. Briefly, the supernatants were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer to reach a neutral pH, then RapiGest was added to the samples at the final concentration of 0.1 %. Afterwards, the samples were reduced with DTT by incubation at 60 °C for 30 min and carbamidomethylated using iodoacetamide at final concentration of 15 mM for 30 min in dark. The pH of the processed samples was checked. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin in 0.05M triethylammonium bicarbonate (1:100 w:w) overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and the reactions were stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptide mixtures were desalted using reverse phase cartridges Finisterre SPE C18 according to the manufacturer's specifications.   Tryptic digests were analysed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos equipped with a nanospray ion source. Chromatographic separations of peptides on a Eksigent nanoLC-1D device (coupled onto an in-house pulled and packed tip column, 75 μm diameter, packed with Magic C18 AQ beads (3 μm bead size, 200 Å pore size). Peptides were loaded on the column from a cooled (4°C) Eksigent autosampler and separated with a linear gradient of acetonitrile/water, containing 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. A gradient from 2 to 30 % acetonitrile in 60 minutes was used. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–2000 m/z, with a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap. CID peptide fragments were acquired in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35, activation energy of 0.25 and 30 ms activation time, excluding singly charged ions for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a list size of 500 that was repeated every 30 s and with a duration of 90 s.   Phase 2: The samples were preparead in the same way as described in Phase 1. The samples were alternated in random order in each analysis batch during both the sample preparation. Solutions of 80 µg of proteins per each sample were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion according to the RapiGest protocol as described the above at the discovery phase.   SRM triggered MS2 and SRM measurements were performed on a QTRAP 5500 instrument equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separations of peptides were performed on a NanoLC-2D HPLC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a 15 cm fused silica emitter, 75 μm diameter, packed with a ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 120 A and 1.9 μm resin. Peptides were loaded on the column from a cooled (4°C) Eksigent autosampler and separated with a linear gradient of acetonitrile/water, containing 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A gradient from 1 to 40 % acetonitrile in 29 minutes was used. For the SRM triggered MS2 measurements, MS2 spectra were recorded upon detection of an SRM trace above a threshold of 1000 counts per second. An average of 100 transitions (scan time 10 ms/transition) per run was used and Q1 and Q3 were obtained at 0.7 unit mass resolution. MS2 spectra were recorded in enhanced product ion (EPI) mode for the highest SRM transitions, using dynamic fill time, Q1 resolution unit, scan speed 10000 Da/s, m/z range 300-1000. In SRM, the mass spectrometer was operated in SRM scan mode, where Q1 and Q3 were obtained at 0.7 unit mass resolution.   Collected MS2 data from the pooled of synthetic peptides were analyzed with the Mascot search engine. Data were searched with full tryptic cleavage using 2.0 Da for the parent-ion mass tolerance and 0.8 Da for the fragment-ion mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification on cysteine and oxidation as variable modification on methionine residues. Additionally, lysine and arginine were searched with 13(C6)15(N2)(K) and 13(C6)15(N4)(R) as  fixed labels , since the C-terminal K or R residues of the synthetic peptides were substituted with the corresponding heavy version. The output mascot search results (ie. dat files) were exported and the spectral library (ie. blib file) was built using the skyline open source software.  For each peptide (ie. light and heavy form), three transitions with optimum SRM properties were selected. Normalized retention times (ie. iRT) were obtained for all the target peptides using the coordinates of the spiked iRT-C18 reference peptides from Biognosys AG, Zurich. To ensure high sensitivity for the low abundant proteins, two different time-scheduled SRM acquisition methods were generated.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw files from the mass spectrometer were uploaded onto the Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1), Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). The LC-MS data were normalized and aligned according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The Mascot generic file (.mgf file format) generated with Progenesis LC-MS (using up to five tandem mass spectra for each feature with the top 200 fragment ion peaks, charge deconvolution and deisotoping option applied) was searched against an in-house built database, including combination of common contaminants and reversed sequences (a total of 249061 sequences) [ss1] using the Mascot 2.4.1 search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) in order to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy.  The selected parameters included precursor tolerance (15 ppm) and [ss2] fragment ion tolerance  (0.6 Da). Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme, and three missed cleavages were allowed[ss4] . Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, deamidation from glutamine and asparagine and N-terminal acetylation of proteins  whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected  as a fixed modification. The mascot result was loaded into Scaffold v4.1.1 using 95% PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet thresholds and protein cluster analysis. The spectrum report was exported and loaded into ProgenesisLCMS. The experimental design consisted of the following groups:  Health Vs Gingivitis or CP or G-AgP; Gingivitis Vs CP or G-AgP; G-AgP Vs CP[ss5] . For quantification, all proteins identified with at least 2 peptide ions were assessed. For normalization, the default function in Progenesis LC-MS was used.     SRM Data Processing The acquired SRM raw files were imported into skyline daily  Automatic peak picking was performed based on the MProphet algorithm for SRM data processing and statistical error estimation. The second best peaks were used as controls in training the model. The peaks with an estimated false discovery rate (q value) of 0.05 were considered for peak peaking and peak integration. Peak scoring results together with transitions peak areas for all assigned peak groups were exported for further downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Periodontal diseases are among the most prevalent worldwide, but largely silent, chronic diseases. They affect the tooth-supporting tissues with multiple ramifications on life quality. Their early diagnosis is still challenging, due to lack of appropriate molecular diagnostic methods. Saliva offers a non-invasively collectable reservoir of clinically relevant biomarkers, which, if utilized efficiently, could facilitate early diagnosis and monitoring of ongoing disease. Despite several novel protein markers being recently enlisted by discovery proteomics, their routine diagnostic application is hampered by the lack of validation platforms that allow for rapid, accurate and simultaneous quantification of multiple proteins in large cohorts. Here we carried out a pipeline of two proteomic platforms; firstly, we applied open ended label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics for discovery in saliva (<i>n</i> = 67, including individuals with health, gingivitis, and periodontitis), followed by selected-reaction monitoring (SRM)-targeted proteomics for validation in an independent cohort (<i>n</i> = 82). The LFQ platform led to the discovery of 119 proteins with at least 2-fold significant difference between health and disease. The 65 proteins chosen for the subsequent SRM platform included 50 functionally related proteins derived from the significantly enriched processes of the LFQ data, 11 from literature-mining, and four house-keeping ones. Among those, 60 were reproducibly quantifiable proteins (92% success rate), represented by a total of 143 peptides. Machine-learning modeling led to a narrowed-down panel of five proteins of high predictive value for periodontal diseases with maximum area under the receiver operating curve &gt;0.97 (higher in disease: Matrix metalloproteinase-9, Ras-related protein-1, Actin-related protein 2/3 complex subunit 5; lower in disease: Clusterin, Deleted in Malignant Brain Tumors 1). This panel enriches the pool of credible clinical biomarker candidates for diagnostic assay development. Yet, the quantum leap brought into the field of periodontal diagnostics by this study is the application of the biomarker discovery-through-verification pipeline, which can be used for validation in further cohorts.

### Keywords
Data integration, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Srm

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics Center Zurich (UZH/ETHZ)
Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institute Alfred Nobels Alle 8, 14104, Huddinge, Sweden

### Submitter
Jonas Grossmann

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institute Alfred Nobels Alle 8, 14104, Huddinge, Sweden


