### Accession
PXD012521

### Title
SLX4 and SLX4IP TAP-MS -  SLX4IP acts with SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 to promote interstrand crosslink repair

### Description
Interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic DNA lesions, which are repaired via a complex process that requires the coordination of several DNA repair pathways. Defects in ICL repair result in Fanconi anemia (FA), which is diagnosed with bone marrow failure, development abnormalities and high incidence of malignancies. SLX4, which is also known as FANCP, acts as a scaffold protein in coordinating multi-endonucleases that function in unhooking ICLs, resolving homologous recombination intermediates, and perhaps also removing unhooked ICLs. To reveal the underlying mechanism for the involvement of SLX4IP in ICL repair, we tagged SFB to the C terminus of SLX4IP and performed tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry analysis as outlined above. We found SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 at the top of the list of SLX4IP-binding proteins. We also identified some other potential SLX4IP interacting proteins, such as PASK, AJUBA, LRP4 and TRIM26, but none of them has been previously indicated to participate in DNA repair. SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 are the major SLX4IP-interacting proteins, with or without MMC treatment. SLX4 has been shown to coordinate with XPF-ERCC1 and participate in the unhooking of ICLs during the repair process. The binding of SLX4IP to both SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 intrigued us to further investigate whether SLX4IP plays a role in regulating SLX4-XPF-ERCC1 interaction.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing SFB tagged SLX4 or SLX4IP were seeded into 150 cm2 plates. Four plates of nearly 100% confluency cells were used for each purification. For MMC treatment, 100 ng/ml of MMC were added 24 hours before cell collection. Cells were scratched down and collected by centrifugation. Then, cells were lysed with ice-cold NETN buffer with rotation at cold room for 30 min. And cell lysis were clarified at 13000 rmp for 30 min at 4 degree. Supernatant from centrifugation were mixed with 200 μl pre-equilibrated streptavidin beads at cold room for 2 hours. After washed with NETN buffer for three times, 2 mg/ml of Biotin were used to elute all the binding proteins off. Then the Biotin elution samples were mixed with 50 μl pre-equilibrated S beads for 2 hours at cold room. S beads were washed with NETN buffer for three times and boiled at 95 degree for 10 min in 2XLaemmli buffer.  For mass spectrometry analysis, samples were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE gel, and stained with Coomassie Blue. The gel were excised into small pieces and distained completely before digested into peptide with trypsin at 37 degree overnight. Then, peptides were extracted and dried for Mass spectrometry analysis.   The samples were reconstituted in loading solution (5% methanol containing 0.1% formic acid) and subjected to nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) capillary column was created by packing Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 silica into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter  ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. The peptides were separated with a 75-min discontinuous gradient of 4-26% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 800 nl/min. Separated peptides were directly electro-sprayed into a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap; ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode, and the precursor MS spectrum was scanned at 375-1300 m/z with 140k resolution at 400 m/z (3  106 AGC target). The MS/MS resolution setting is 17,500. The 35 strongest ions were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation with 27 normalized collision energy and 3.0 m/z isolation width with 30 s of dynamic exclusion time, 2  104 AGC target and 60 ms of maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were searched in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) with Mascot algorithm 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The Human UniProt FASTA database (October 2015) was searched. Dynamic modifications included acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine. The precursor mass tolerance was confined within 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Assigned peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate using percolator validation. We processed the protein-protein interactions analysis for tandem affinity purification. Briefly, the identified proteins and corresponding peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were subjected to assessment using the CRAPome methodology. We used 90 tandem affinity purification (TAP)-MS data with randomly selected baits as the negative controls. An FC-B score from CRAPome analysis of higher than 2 was taken as the threshold for potential binding proteins. Then, to assess the specificity of protein-protein interaction, we compared the TAP-MS data with HEK293T whole-cell lysis as the background subtraction. Through comparison with this global expression background, proteins that were enriched above the average fold enrichment following the TAP-MS procedure were included in HCIP lists.

### Publication Abstract
Interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic DNA lesions that are repaired via a complex process requiring the coordination of several DNA repair pathways. Defects in ICL repair result in Fanconi anemia, which is characterized by bone marrow failure, developmental abnormalities, and a high incidence of malignancies. SLX4, also known as FANCP, acts as a scaffold protein and coordinates multiple endonucleases that unhook ICLs, resolve homologous recombination intermediates, and perhaps remove unhooked ICLs. In this study, we explored the role of SLX4IP, a constitutive factor in the SLX4 complex, in ICL repair. We found that SLX4IP is a novel regulatory factor; its depletion sensitized cells to treatment with ICL-inducing agents and led to accumulation of cells in the G2/M phase. We further discovered that SLX4IP binds to SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 simultaneously and that disruption of one interaction also disrupts the other. The binding of SLX4IP to both SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1 not only is vital for maintaining the stability of SLX4IP protein, but also promotes the interaction between SLX4 and XPF-ERCC1, especially after DNA damage. Collectively, these results demonstrate a new regulatory role for SLX4IP in maintaining an efficient SLX4-XPF-ERCC1 complex in ICL repair.

### Keywords
Tap-ms, Slx4, Slx4ip, Sfb

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA


