### Accession
PXD017963

### Title
Deciphering the protein secretome of leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin

### Description
Leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin (L-PRF) is extensively used in the dentistry field and other clinical scenarios due to its regeneration properties. We obtained L-PRF membranes in absence of anticoagulants and cultured in DMEM. The secretomewas collected at days 3, 7 and 21 in order to identify the proteins secreted and the differences over time. Protein secretomeat day 3 was analysed by LC-MS/MS and differences in the proteome were analysed by Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH). Overall, 705 proteins were identified in the secretome of L-PRF membranes after 3 days of culture, including growth factors (EGF, PDGFA) and proteins related to platelet and neutrophil degranulation. A total of 202 differentially secreted proteins were quantified by SWATH when comparing secretomes at days 3, 7 and 21. The majority of them were enriched at day 3 such as MMP9, TSP1 and CO3. On the contrary, fibrinogen and CATS were found down-regulated at day 3. Growth factor and western blotting analysis corroborated the proteomic results. This is the most detailed proteome analysis of the L-PRF secretome to date. Proteins and growth factors identified, and their kinetics, provide novel information to further understand the wound healing properties of L-PRF.

### Sample Protocol
L-PRF membranes were cultured in DMEM medium. Secretomes were collected at different times points after the last wash: day 3 (which represent the secretome released between 24h and day 3), day 7 (which belong to the secretome released between day 3 and 7) and day 21 (which belong to the secretome released between day 7 and 21). After collection, secretomeswere centrifuged for 3 minutes at 3000 g in order to discard debris contaminants. Secretomes were concentrated from 5 ml to 500 µl using Amicon® Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter (Merk, Millipore, Massachusetts, USA) of 3KDa of size pore, and stored at -80ºC. Samples used for proteomic analysis were precipitated in 20% trichloroacetic acid in acetone and finally resuspended in a SDS buffer (2 % SDS, 500 mMTris pH 7.6 and 0.05 M Dithiothreitol). Protein quantitation was done with Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay mixed with Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent following the manufacturer´s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Asheville, NC, USA).   Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS): For protein identification protein samples from membranes of four donors were pooled on equal amounts at days 3 and 7. Proteins were separated by 11% SDS-PAGE, loading 50 µg of each protein pool per lane. Protein profile at day 3 and differential bands among day 3 and 7 were cut, digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted carrying out three incubations of 20 minutes each with 60% acetonitrile and 0.5% HCOOH. The resulting peptide extracts were pooled, concentrated and stored at −20 °C.  Relative quantification by SWATH acquisition: Protein samples from four L-PRF membranes from four donors were pooled on equal amounts at days 3, 7 and 21. A total of 50 µg per pool were loaded on a 11% SDS-PAGE gel to concentrate the protein in a gel band that was excised and digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA; Ingenuity® Systems; www.ingenuity.com), String software, FunRich (http://www.funrich.org/) and Reactome (https://reactome.org/) were used for biological pathways and interaction networks analyses of proteins identified

### Publication Abstract
Leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin (L-PRF) is extensively used in the dentistry field and other clinical scenarios due to its regeneration properties. The goal of the present study was to depict the L-PRF secretome and how it changes over time. We obtained L-PRF membranes and cultured them in DMEM. The secretome was collected at days 3, 7 and 21. The secretome at day 3 was analysed by LC-MS/MS and differences over time were analysed by Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH). Overall, 705 proteins were identified in the secretome of L-PRF membranes after 3&#xa0;days of culture, including growth factors (EGF, PDGFA) and proteins related to platelet and neutrophil degranulation. A total of 202 differentially secreted proteins were quantified by SWATH when comparing secretomes at days 3, 7 and 21. Most of them were enriched at day 3 such as MMP9, TSP1 and CO3. On the contrary, fibrinogen and CATS were found down-regulated at day 3. Growth factor and western blotting analysis corroborated the proteomic results. This is the most detailed proteome analysis of the L-PRF secretome to date. Proteins and growth factors identified, and their kinetics, provide novel information to further understand the wound healing properties of L-PRF.

### Keywords
Leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin (l-prf), Wound healing, Swath, Secretome

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Proteomics Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana B Bravo Lopez
Proteomics Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.


