### Accession
PXD006014

### Title
SILAC analysis of relative protein abundance in cytosol - AG3258 and AG11498

### Description
Premature aging disorders provide a lens through which to study the drivers of aging. In Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) a mutant form of the nuclear scaffold protein lamin A distorts nuclei and sequesters nuclear proteins. We used stable isotope labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate nuclear protein abundance in primary HGPS-derived cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cycling wild type fibroblasts were grown for five population doublings in media containing stable heavy isotopes of lysine and arginine. A parallel population of HGPS fibroblasts were grown in normal media. Fibroblasts were induced to enter quiescence by switching subconfluent cultures to growth media containing 1% serum for 5 days.  Crude nuclear extracts were prepared as follows. Cells were harvested in PBS, then swollen in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM Tris acetate pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and protease inhibitors), followed by mechanical lysis through a 25-gauge needle and syringe. The nuclei were pelleted and the supernatant retained for cytosolic fractions. The nuclei were resuspended in buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% sucrose, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM MgCl2, 20 ug/ml DNAse I, and 1 ug/ml RNase I. After nuclease treatment, nuclei were layered on top of a 30% sucrose cushion and pelleted. Protein content was determined by BCA assay. Equal protein masses of wild type and HGPS nuclei were mixed 1:1 before trypsin digestion and protein identification by LC-MS/MS. Samples were denatured in 8 M urea / 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5; reduced with TCEP; alkylated with chloroacetamide; and digested overnight with trypsin. Digestion was quenched with 5% formic acid. Samples were run on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS/MS with CID fragmentation. The digest was injected directly onto a 30cm, 75um ID column packed with BEH 1.7um C18 resin. Samples were separated at a flow rate of 200nl/min on a nLC 1000. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1-25%B over 160min, an increase to 35%B over 60min, an increase to 90%B over another 10min and held at 90%B for a final 10min of washing was used for 240min total run time. Column was re-equilibrated with 20ul of buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5kV voltage at the back of the column. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data dependent mode.  Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1500 m/z and an AGC target of 4e5. The cycle time was set to 3sec, and within this 3sec the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap with an AGC target of 1e4 and minimum intensity of 5000. Maximum fill times were set to 50ms and 100ms for MS and MS/MS scans respectively. Quadrupole isolation at 1.6m/z was used, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, charge states of 2-7 were selected and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 5 sec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification, quantification, and analysis were performed with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline-IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications; www.integratedproteomics.com). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter52 and searched with ProLUCID53 against the human UniPROT database. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification. Data were searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 600 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Data was filtered to 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance post-search. Identified proteins were filtered using DTASelect54 and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery rate to 1% at the protein level. Census55 was utilized for quantitative analysis of SILAC labeled peptides. Peptide ratios were calculated for each tryptic peptide with a profile score >0.8 as the peak area ratio of the heavy isotope-containing mass spectrum to light isotope-containing mass spectrum. Ratios were averaged for all peptides identified for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human progeria silac

### Affiliations
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Abby Buchwalter

### Lab Head
Dr Martin W Hetzer
Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037


