### Accession
PXD029053

### Title
Redox proteomics analysis of head and neck cancer cell model of radiation resistance

### Description
Quantitative redox proteomics analysis was performed using the SCC-61/rSCC-61 matched model system of radiation resistance in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
SCC-61 cells and rSCC-61 cells were then lysed in 0.5 mL with modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 1% NP40; 15 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM NaF; Roche protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablets) supplemented with 1 mM 1,3-cyclopentanedione (BP1; biotin-tagged selective protein sulfenylation reagent; Xoder Technologies) and 200 U/mL catalase. Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). Samples were normalized, combined 1:1, precipitated by cold acetone and pellets were resuspended in minimum volume (approx. 100 μL) of 1% SDS in PBS. Samples were diluted 10-fold prior to enrichment with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Approximately 250 μL of suspended streptavidin agarose beads (Cat. # 20361, Thermo/Invitrogen) were used for each 1 mg of lysate. The beads were equilibrated 3 times with 4 bed volumes of 0.1% SDS in PBS for 10 min each. Biotinylated lysates were added to the beads and incubated on rotator (end-over-end) overnight at 4 oC. The non-specifically bound proteins were removed by washing the beads sequentially with 2 M urea, 1 M NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 10 mM DTT, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins on beads were digested overnight at 37°C on a shaker with trypsin using a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The resulting peptides were acidified with 1% formic acid, centrifuged at 2,000 g for 5 min, and desalted using a tC18 SepPak column (Cat #WAT036820) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The dried samples were used in HPLC fraction immediately or stored in -20°C.   Basic high pH reversed-phase chromatography was conducted on a Waters 2695 instrument using a Xbridge C18, 3.5 µm, 4.6 x 150 mm chromatography column. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10, injected and separated using a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min and the following gradient: Solvent A (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10), Solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10); 0% B for 2 min; 0-10% B in 5 min; 10- 27% B in 34 min; 27- 31% B in 4 min; 31- 39% B in 4 min; 39-60% in 7 min; 60% B for 8 min; 60-100% B in 2 min; 100% B for 4 min; 100-0% B in 1 min; 0% B for 1 min]. Eluted peptides fractions (1 mL/tube) were collected using Water Fraction Collector III. The 36 eluted fractions were combined from the beginning, middle, and end of the run to generate 12 fractions (1,13,25; 2,14,26; etc) and then dried using a SpeedVac SavantTM SPD1010 (Thermo).   Dried peptide extracts were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, 5% ACN, and separated by nanoLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with a Nano Trap Column, Acclaim PepMap100 (C18, 5 µm, 100Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm nanoViper) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanocolumn (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm, nanoViper) (Thermo Scientific). The samples (10 µL) were injected and separated on the nanocolumn at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: Solvent A: 95% water, 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 20% water, 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid); 2–10 min: 2–7% B; 10– 130 min: 7–50% B; 130–132 min: 50–85% B; 132–147 min: 85% B; 147-150 min: 85-2% B; 150–160 min, 2% B. LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) was used for MS/MS analysis. The sample was ionized in the nanospray source equipped with stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.5 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 200°C. Full scan MS survey spectra in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap. In positive ion mode by alternating full-scan MS 10 most intense peaks in the ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled.  These most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a normalized collision energy of 35.0. The resolution was 60,000. The lock mass (371.101240) option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the XCalibur v.2.1 software. Protein identification and quantitation was performed using Proteome Discoverer v 1.4 and human protein database downloaded in FASTA format from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/). Data files (.raw format) were searched against the downloaded database using the following parameters: Enzyme: trypsin; Max. Missed Cleavage Sites: 2; Search Mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.6 Da; Target False Discovery Rate (FDR):  0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Redox metabolism is increasingly investigated in cancer as driving regulator of tumor progression, response to therapies and long-term patients' quality of life. Well-established cancer therapies, such as radiotherapy, either directly impact redox metabolism or have redox-dependent mechanisms of action defining their clinical efficacy. However, the ability to integrate redox information across signaling and metabolic networks to facilitate discovery and broader investigation of redox-regulated pathways in cancer remains a key unmet need limiting the advancement of new cancer therapies. To overcome this challenge, we developed a new constraint-based computational method (COSM<sup>ro</sup>) and applied it to a Head and Neck Squamous Cell Cancer (HNSCC) model of radiation resistance. This novel integrative approach identified enhanced capacity for H<sub>2</sub>S production in radiation resistant cells and extracted a key relationship between intracellular redox state and cholesterol metabolism; experimental validation of this relationship highlights the importance of redox state in cellular metabolism and response to radiation.

### Keywords
Human, Redox proteomics, Cosmro, Head and neck cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA

### Submitter
Jingyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina M. Furdui
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA


