### Accession
PXD013226

### Title
Exercise training reverses cancer cachexia-induced decrease in muscle COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN

### Description
The mechanisms underlying exercise-induced effects in the skeletal muscle during cancer cachexia progression have not been fully described. Here, we tested the hypothesis that different exercise training protocols could attenuate metabolic impairment in a severe model of cancer cachexia. Moderate-intensity training (MIT) and high-intensity interval training (HIIT) improved running capacity and prolonged lifespan in tumor-bearing rats. HIIT also reduced oxidative stress and reestablished muscle contractile function. An unbiased proteomics screening revealed that COP9 signalosome complex subunit 2 (COPS2), also known as thyroid receptor interacting protein 15 (TRIP15) or ALIEN, is one of the most downregulated proteins at the early stage of cancer cachexia progression. HIIT restored COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN protein expression to the control levels. Moreover, lung cancer patients with low endurance capacity had lower muscle COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN protein content compared to age- and sex-matched control subjects. We further established an in vitro model of cancer-induced muscle wasting using tumor cells-conditioned media to explore the potential protective role of COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN for myotubes homeostasis. This in vitro model indicate that tumor cells produce factors that directly affect myotube metabolism, but COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN overexpression is not able to fully reestablish metabolic homeostasis and protein content in myotubes incubated with tumor cells-conditioned media. The current study provides new insight into the role of exercise training as a co-therapy for cancer cachexia and uncovers COPS2/TRIP15/ALIEN as a novel potential target for cancer cachexia.

### Sample Protocol
Plantaris muscle extracts were homogenized in degassed 2D buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 2.5% CHAPS) without DTT (dithiothreitol) at pH 5.0. Protein (600 μg) was precipitated in methanol (4 V), chloroform (1 V) and H2O (3 V) and frozen for further labeling to proceed with gel-free proteomics. Oxidative isotope-coded affinity tags (OxICAT) was performed as previously described (56, 57). Each sample was digested with trypsin, purified and analyzed by mass spectrometry. For gel-free proteomics in the Walker rat model, technical duplicate was performed for each of 5 biological independent samples. For OxICAT in the Walker rat model, and for gel-free proteomics in B16 mouse model, technical duplicate was performed in a pool of 8 samples for each experiment. Peptides were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, USA) interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, USA) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) as previously described (57).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., US) using the SEQUEST HT search engine with the Dec 2013 version of the Rat protein sequence database from UniProt (UniProt Consortium). Enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed was searched. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The Cys residue (labeled with OxICAT) oxidation was set as dynamic modification. The Percolator tool was used for peptide validation and a cutoff value of 0.01 for false discovery rate. Only peptides with high confidence were used for final protein identification. In order to further understand the biological relevance of the identified proteins, we performed functional enrichment analysis in the context of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases using the Enrichr43 and QIAGEN’S Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). A p value cut-off of 0.001 was used to identify enriched processes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer cachexia; skeletal muscle wasting; muscle atrophy; endurance exercise; aerobic exercise

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
General Manager of PROMEC, NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Hagen
General Manager of PROMEC, NTNU, Norway


