### Accession
PXD040434

### Title
Human adipose tissue proteomics reveal adaptations to exercise and type 2 diabetes

### Description
White adipose tissue (WAT) plays a critical role in whole-body energy homeostasis. In this study, we established the differential proteomic signatures of WAT in glucose-tolerant lean and obese individuals and patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and in response to 8 weeks of high intensity interval training (HIIT). We combined a high-throughput and reproducible mass spectrometry-based proteomics pipeline and identified a total of 3773 proteins. We find that a majority of regulated proteins displayed progression from lean to obese and T2D individuals and were highly associated with clinical measures of glucose homeostasis (e.g., insulin sensitivity, HbA1c) and they could, therefore, serve as potential disease biomarkers. Interestingly, HIIT induced a strong increase in WAT ferritin levels independent of group. WAT ferritin levels strongly correlated with individual insulin sensitivity. Thus, we report novel proteomic signatures of WAT related to obesity and T2D and highlight an unrecognized role of human WAT iron metabolism in exercise training adaptations.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-Frozen adipose tissue biopsies were powdered and homogenized in Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl PH 8.5, 1% SDS) with an IKA instrument. Homogenates were then boiled at 95℃ for 10 minutes in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 1000 RPM and sonicated using a tip sonicator for 30 seconds, one second on/off at amplitude 50%. Then, 25U of benzonase were added to each sample and homogenate were incubated in a thermomixer at 37℃ for 30 minutes. Homogenates were centrifuged at 16000 G for 10 minutes and supernatant lysate was transferred to a new tube and sample protein concentration was determined using DC (Thermo Fischer). 40 µg of protein were reduced and alkylated by addition of Dithiothreitol (DTT) and Chloroacetamide (CAA) to a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM respectively followed by a 45-minute incubation at Room Temperature (RT) without agitation. Proteins were digested following a 96 well-adapted Protein Aggregation Capture (PAC) protocol. In brief, a 1:4 protein to bead ratio was added to the sample lysate and protein aggregation was induced by dispensing acetonitrile (ACN) to a final concentration of 70%, followed by a 10-minute incubation without agitation. Then, the sample containing plates were placed in a magnetic stand (Dynamag Thermo) and beads with protein aggregates were first washed twice with 100% ACN and then twice with 70% Etoh. All washes were performed without removing the plates from the magnetic stand. After discarding the last wash, beads were resuspended in 50 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl PH 8.5) and 1:500 enzyme to protein ratio of LysC (Wako) was added to the protein mixture and incubated in a Thermomixer for 1 hour at 40℃. Afterwards, 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio of Trypsin was added to the mixture and proteins were digested overnight at 37℃. The next day, digestion was quenched by addition of 1% Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) in isopropanol. Peptides were cleaned for salts and remaining lipids using Styrenedivinylbenzene- Reverse Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) and eluted in 1.25% NH4OH and 80% ACN. Peptides were dried completely and resuspended in 0.1% TFA and 5%ACN and loaded on evotips. A total of 200 ng of peptides were loaded on a disposable Evotip C18 trap column (Evosep Biosystem) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Evotip were wetted with 2-propanol, activiated with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, and equilibrated with 0.1 formic acid. Peptides were added to the tips and the box containing tips were centrifuged at 1000 g for 2 min. Evotips were then washed with 0.1% formic acid and stored by adding 200 µl 0.1% formic acid until LCMS measurements. A project specific library was generated from a peptide pool of all samples. In brief, 20µg of peptides were fractionated using High pH Reverse-Phase Chromatography (HpH-RP) on a Kinetex 2.6um EVO C18 100Å, 150 x 0.3 mm column (Phenomenex) using an EASY-nLC 1200 System (Thermo) operating at 1.5 µL/min. A 62 min step-gradient from 3 to 60 % solvent B (10 mM TEAB in 80 % acetonitrile) and solvent A (10 mM TEAB in water) was used for separation. A total of 98 fractions were collected and concatenated into 24 fractions. 200ng of peptide from each fraction was loaded onto Evotips as described earlier.  Peptides were analyzed by partially eluted from Evotips with <35% acetonitrile and analyzed with Evosep One LC system (Evosep Biosystems) couple online to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated on a 15-cm-long PepSep column (150 µm inner diameter packed with 1.5 µm of Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr Maisch) using standard preset gradient method (44 min, 30 samples per day) and elxtrosprayed with stainless emitter (30 µm inner diameter) at 2.3 kV. For the single shot adipose tissue proteome, the data were acquired in DIA mode. Each acquisition cycle consisted of a survey scan at a resolution of 120,000 (normalized automatic gain control (AGC) of 300%, scan range – 350-1400 m/z) followed by 49 DIA cycles with dynamic isolation windows at a resolution of 15,000 where precursor ions were fragmented with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of 27%. The data was acquired in profile mode using positive polarity.    To generate the library, each peptide fractions were measured in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top 15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 350-1400 m/z and 60,000 (normalized AGC target 300%). HCD peptide fragments acquired at 30 normalized collision energy were analyzed at 15000 resolution (normalized AGC target 200%). The data was acquired in profile mode using positive polarity. 

### Data Protocol
For library generation, raw spectra from library DDA and experimental DIA files were processed in FragPipe v19.0 with the DIA_SpecLib_Quant workflow. This was performed with default settings, which include a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. M-oxidation and NQ-deamination were set as variable modifications. Raw spectra were searched against the Human Uniprot reviewed FASTA (August 2021 release, 20435 entries). Raw files were then searched with DIA-NN v1.8.2 (beta) workflow in the FragPipe software against the project-specific library with default settings, which include Peptide length was set to 7-30 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation, N-terminal excision and M-oxidation were set as variable modifications. Quantification was based on Robust LC (high precision) and Match between runs was enabled. Precursor FDR was set to 1%. The downstream data analysis was performed using an in-house developed R script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High intensity interval training, Iron metabolism, White adipose tissue, Proteomics, Insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Assoc. Prof. at Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Diana Samodova-Sommer

### Lab Head
Dr Atul Shahaji Deshmukh
Assoc. Prof. at Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


