### Accession
PXD004023

### Title
The immunopeptidome presents a selected portion of the human genome with distinct features to CD8 T cells

### Description
Using proteogenomics, we identified and analyzed 25,172 major histocompatibility complex class I-associated peptides (MAPs) isolated from B lymphocytes of 18 individuals who collectively expressed 27 HLA-A,B allotypes. While 58% of genes were the source of 1-64 MAPs per gene, 42% of genes were not represented in the immunopeptidome. Overall, we estimate the immunopeptidome presented by 27 HLA-A,B allotypes covered only 17% of exomic sequences expressed in subjects’ cells. We identified several features of transcripts and proteins that enhance MAP production. From these data we built a logistic regression model that predicts with high accuracy whether a gene from our dataset or from independent datasets would generate MAPs. Our results show preferential selection of MAPs from a limited repertoire of gene products with distinct features. The notion that the immune system can monitor MAPs covering only a fraction of the protein coding genome has profound implications in autoimmunity and cancer immunology.

### Sample Protocol
MAPs were eluted from B-LCL and sequenced by mass spectrometry as previously described : Granados,D.P. et al. Impact of genomic polymorphism on the repertoire of human MHC class I-associated peptides. Nat Commun 5, 3600 (2014) & Granados,D.P. et al. Proteogenomic-based discovery of minor histocompatibility antigens with suitable features for immunotherapy of hematologic cancers. Leukemia (2016)

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with PEAKS®7 using subject-specific sequence databases. The following parameters were used for each search: mass tolerances for precursor ( 5 p.p.m.), fragment ions (0.02 Da), no enzyme specificity, variable modifications  cysteinylation, phosphorylation (Ser, Thr and Tyr), oxidation (Met) and deamidation (Asn, Gln).

### Publication Abstract
MHC class I-associated peptides (MAPs) define the immune self for CD8+ T lymphocytes and are key targets of cancer immunosurveillance. Here, the goals of our work were to determine whether the entire set of protein-coding genes could generate MAPs and whether specific features influence the ability of discrete genes to generate MAPs. Using proteogenomics, we have identified 25,270 MAPs isolated from the B lymphocytes of 18 individuals who collectively expressed 27 high-frequency HLA-A,B allotypes. The entire MAP repertoire presented by these 27 allotypes covered only 10% of the exomic sequences expressed in B lymphocytes. Indeed, 41% of expressed protein-coding genes generated no MAPs, while 59% of genes generated up to 64 MAPs, often derived from adjacent regions and presented by different allotypes. We next identified several features of transcripts and proteins associated with efficient MAP production. From these data, we built a logistic regression model that predicts with good accuracy whether a gene generates MAPs. Our results show preferential selection of MAPs from a limited repertoire of proteins with distinctive features. The notion that the MHC class I immunopeptidome presents only a small fraction of the protein-coding genome for monitoring by the immune system has profound implications in autoimmunity and cancer immunology.

### Keywords
Human, B cell, B-lcl, Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Hla-a, Hla-b, B lymphoblast

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


