### Accession
PXD032100

### Title
Cancer-derived branched-chain ketoacids modulate macrophage polarization and metabolic reprogramming

### Description
This study aims to uncover the effects of cancer-derived branched-chain ketoacids on macrophage polarization and the underlying mechanism. We uncovered the global responses of branched-chain ketoacids-stimulated macrophages by proteomics analysis. Functional enrihment analysis indicated that these ketoacids significantly altered macrophage metabolism, apoptosis and phagocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages were harvested by lysis buffer (6M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin-hydrochlorid (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide(CAA)), then heated and sonicated. BCA assay was performed to measure protein concentration. The protein lysate was digested by trypsin and desalted by C18 spin column. LC-MS/MS runs were performed on the UltiMate 300 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant, Persus and COVAIN. Enrichment analysis was conducted by ClueGo. Protein network map was performed by STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are prominent immune cells in the tumor microenvironment that can be educated into pro-tumoral phenotype by tumor cells to favor tumor growth and metastasis. The mechanisms that mediate a mutualistic relationship between tumor cells and macrophages remain poorly characterized. Here, we have shown <i>in vitro</i> that different human and murine cancer cell lines release branched-chain &#x3b1;-ketoacids (BCKAs) into the extracellular milieu, which influence macrophage polarization in an monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1)-dependent manner. We found that &#x3b1;-ketoisocaproate (KIC) and &#x3b1;-keto-&#x3b2;-methylvalerate (KMV) induced a pro-tumoral macrophage state, whereas &#x3b1;-ketoisovalerate (KIV) exerted a pro-inflammatory effect on macrophages. This process was further investigated by a combined metabolomics/proteomics platform. Uptake of KMV and KIC fueled macrophage tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates and increased polyamine metabolism. Proteomic and pathway analyses revealed that the three BCKAs, especially KMV, exhibited divergent effects on the inflammatory signal pathways, phagocytosis, apoptosis and redox balance. These findings uncover cancer-derived BCKAs as novel determinants for macrophage polarization with potential to be selectively exploited for optimizing antitumor immune responses.

### Keywords
Polarization, Macrophages, Branched-chain ketoacids

### Affiliations
Head of Molecular Systems Biology Lab (MOSYS), Vice-Head Department Functional & Evolutionary Ecology, Head of Large Instrument Facility for Mass Spectrometry in Life Sciences, Chair of the Vienna Metabolomics Center (VIME)
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Zhengnan Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Head of Molecular Systems Biology Lab (MOSYS), Vice-Head Department Functional & Evolutionary Ecology, Head of Large Instrument Facility for Mass Spectrometry in Life Sciences, Chair of the Vienna Metabolomics Center (VIME)


