### Accession
PXD030750

### Title
Comparison of wild type and abc1k6-1 mutant total leaf extracts from 4 and 5 week old plants

### Description
The quantitative proteomes of leaf tissue from A. thaliana at 4 weeks and 5 weeks of growth using tandem mass spectrometry with label-free quantification. A comparison of three genotypes has been performed, namely i) the Col-0 wild type ecotype, ii) a T-DNA insertion mutant disrupting the plastoglobule-localized ABC1K6 protein (abc1k6-1) that is delayed in transition to reproductive growth, and iii) a complementation line (Comp3) that restores the timely progression of development with the ABC1K6 wild-type protein sequence tagged C-terminally with GFP in the abc1k6-1 background. Whereas wild-type and abc1k6-1 remain in the vegetative growth stage at 4 weeks of age, the wild-type plants have transitioned to reproductive growth (as evidenced by the emergence of the infloresence bolt) by 5 weeks of age, while abc1k6-1 remians in vegetative growth. Our proteomics experiment seeks to identify leaf proteome differences prior to wild-type transition to reproductive growth that may account for the delayed transition in the abc1k6-1 mutant.

### Sample Protocol
A. thaliana [genotypes Col-0 (wild-type), abc1k6-1 (SALK T-DNA insertion line SALK_129965; At3g24190), and a complementation line (Comp3) that introduces abc1k6 cDNA and a C-terminal GFP tag driven by the 35S promoter] were grown under long day conditions, i.e. 16 hours light and 8 hours darkness, 120 uE light intensity from LED lighting for four weeks. A. thaliana leaves were excised and ground in tubes containing glass beads. The ground tissue was resuspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2% SDS and a protease inhibitor cocktail [P9599, Sigma]) and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. The samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 20.000 g and 4 ºC and the supernatant recovered containing the total protein extract. Protein content was measured using BCA method (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, 23227, Thermo Scientific). The samples (~100 µg each) were precipitated using chloroform:methanol (1:4) to remove buffer salts and SDS. Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, supplemented with 4% (w/v) sodium deocycholate (SDC) and digested according to Humphrey, et al. 2018.  Following digestion, SDC was removed by phase extraction, peptides desalted using C18 StageTips and eluates dried by vacuum centrifugation. Each sample was then re-suspended in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Injections of ~2 µg were automatically made using a Thermo EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1 mm x 20 mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5 min with Buffer A.  Bound peptides were then eluted over 125 min onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075 mm x 500 mm resolving column with a gradient of 8% B to 40% B in 114 min, ramping to 90% B at 115 min and held at 90% B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbitrap (35000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 15 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 7,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists using MaxQuant, v1.6.11.0, and searched against a database containing all A. thaliana protein sequences available from ARAPORT11 (downloaded from www.arabidopsis.org; last updated June 2016) and concatenated with common laboratory contaminants, using the Andromeda search algorithm, a part of the MaxQuant environment. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Label free quantification employed the LFQ quantification setting in the MaxQuant software. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01, using the target-decoy strategy as described by Elias & Gygi, 2007. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
The Absence of bc<sub>1</sub> Complex (ABC1) is an ancient, atypical protein kinase family that emerged prior to the archaeal-eubacterial divergence. Loss-of-function mutants in ABC1 genes are linked to respiratory defects in microbes and humans and to compromised photosynthetic performance and stress tolerance in plants. However, demonstration of protein kinase activity remains elusive, hampering their study. Here, we investigate a homolog from Arabidopsis thaliana, AtABC1K6, and demonstrate in&#xa0;vitro autophosphorylation activity, which we replicate with a human ABC1 ortholog. We also show that AtABC1K6 protein kinase activity requires an atypical buffer composition, including Mn<sup>2+</sup> as a divalent cation cofactor and a low salt concentration. AtABC1K6 associates with plastoglobule lipid droplets of A.&#xa0;thaliana chloroplasts, along with five paralogs. We show that the protein kinase activity associated with isolated A.&#xa0;thaliana plastoglobules was inhibited at higher salt concentrations, but could accommodate Mg<sup>2+</sup> as well as Mn<sup>2+</sup>, indicating salt sensitivity, but not the requirement for Mn<sup>2+</sup>, may be a general characteristic of ABC1 proteins. Finally, loss of functional AtABC1K6 impairs the developmental transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. This phenotype was complemented by the wild-type sequence of AtABC1K6, but not by a kinase-dead point mutant in the unique Ala-triad of the ATP-binding pocket, demonstrating the physiological relevance of the protein's kinase activity. We suggest that ABC1s are bona fide protein kinases with a unique regulatory mechanism. Our results open the door to detailed functional and mechanistic studies of ABC1 proteins and plastoglobules.

### Keywords
Coq8, Abc1k6, Leaf

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Peter Lundquist

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lundquist
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University


