### Accession
PXD028678

### Title
In Cellulo Kinase Screen Identifies Novel MASTL Substrates

### Description
MASTL (microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinase-like) has emerged as a critical regulator of mitosis and as a potential oncogene in a variety of cancer types. To date, Arpp-19/ENSA are the only known substrates of MASTL. With the cellular roles of MASTL expanding and increased interest in development of MASTL inhibitors, it has become critical to determine if there are any additional substrates and if so, what the optimal consensus motif for MASTL is. Here we utilised a whole cell lysate (in cellulo) kinase screen approach combined with stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to identify novel substrates and a consensus motif of MASTL. Using the related AGC kinase family members AKT1/2, the in cellulo assay identified several known and new substrates highly enriched with the validated consensus motif for AKT. Applying this method to MASTL identified 59 phosphosites on 26 novel proteins significantly increased in the presence of active MASTL. Subsequent in vitro kinase assays confirmed that MASTL was capable of phosphorylating YB1, RPS6, TUBA1C, and RPL36A under some conditions, and hnRNPM specifically on a single site (S-633/7). Taken together, these data suggest that MASTL can phosphorylate several additional substrates, which may help provide greater insight into the ever-increasing biological functions and roles MASTL plays in driving cancer progression and therapy resistance.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-10A cells were labelled by stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) as previously described (Rogers et al 2018). Briefly, cells were cultured for 6 population doublings in SILAC F12:DMEM (1:1) (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with either “heavy” lysine-13C614N2 (Lys8) and arginine-13C614N4 (Arg10), or the respective “light” counterparts (Lys0, Arg0). Labelled amino acid incorporation was checked routinely. Protein was harvested by scraping in 1 mL of ice-cold NP-40 buffer (1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 10% Glycerol) plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and PhosStop (Roche) and stored at -80 C. 100 mM 5'-4-fluorosulphonylbenzoyladenosine (FSBA) in DMSO was slowly diluted 1:5 in pre-warmed NP-40 buffer at 37 C. To irreversibly inhibit endogenous kinase activity, 1 mL of the FSBA solution was added to thawed lysates and shaken at 30 C for 30 min at 1,200 rpm. Precipitated FSBA was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was concentrated to 2.5 mL in a 10,000 MW centrifugal filter (Amicon). 1 mg of concentrated lysate was diluted 1:1 in 2x kinase assay buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, 3 mM MnCl2, 3 µM NaVO4, 2 mM DTT, and 500 µM ATP). 50 µg of recombinant purified MASTL kinase (Reaction Biology) or 10 µg AKT2 (Active Motif) was added to the heavy sample and incubated at 32 C for 3 h under gentle agitation. The reaction was stopped by adding GdmCl buffer (6 M GdmCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 20 mM TCEP, 100 mM IAM) to each sample. Kinase reactions were heated to 95 C for 5 min, cooled on ice, then kept at RT in the dark for 30 min to allow for peptide reduction and alkylation. Heavy and light samples were mixed 1:1 and 4x volumes of cold acetone were added to each mix and incubated at -20 C overnight. Precipitated proteins were digested in Lys-C, and trypsin at 100:1 (w:w) overnight at 37 C. The resultant mixture was then enriched for phosphorylated peptides using the EasyPhos method as described (Humphrey et al 2015). Briefly, phospho-peptides were bound to TiO2 beads (5 µm Titansphere, GL Sciences) at a ratio of 10:1 (protein:beads) at 40 C for 5 min. After washing (80% ACN, 0.5% 5% trifluoroacetic acid), phospho-peptides were eluted (40% ACN, 15% Ammonium Hydroxide), dried, and loaded onto SDB-RPS Stage-tips (3M empore). The stage-tips were desalted, and phospho-peptides eluted (80% ACN, 5% ammonium hydroxide), dried and stored at -80 C until mass spectrometry analysis. In vitro kinase reaction mixtures (40 μl total) contained 500 ng of AKT1 or MASTL kinase and 100 ng of substrate protein in kinase reaction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM dithiothreitol, pH 7.4) in the presence of 0.5 mM or 1 mM ATP. Reactions were performed at 30 C for 30 min and 60 min, then quenched with 2X SDS-PAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen). Samples were heated for 10 min at 70 C, then cooled on ice for 2 min. The full sample volume (less a small amount used for western blotting) was loaded onto 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gels and run under reducing conditions with MES Running Buffer (Invitrogen) at 180-200 V. Prestained molecular weight markers were also included. Once kinase and substrate molecular weights were sufficiently separated, gels were washed and stained according to manufacturer’s instructions using SimplyBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen) before proceeding to in-gel digestion. Stained protein bands were excised with a clean scalpel and underwent destaining, reduction-alkylation and digestion using an In-Gel Tryptic Digestion Kit (Thermo Scientific). Manufacturer’s instructions were followed. Briefly, one volume of reagent was used per protein band, and trypsin digestion was carried out on a heat block overnight (16-18 h) at 37 C. Digested samples were desalted, purified, and concentrated using C18 ZipTips (Millipore), then dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Digested phospho-peptides from in cellulo reactions were analysed as previously described. Briefly, a 50 cm x 75 μm fused silica column, packed in-house using 1.9 μM C18AQ particles using an Easy nLC-1200. Peptides were separated using a 195 min gradient using a binary buffer system of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5-30% buffer B over 150 min, followed by 30-60% buffer B over 5 min, and 60-95% buffer B over 5 min. Peptides were analysed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer operated in positive-ion DDA mode, with one full scan (300-1,650 m/z, R=35,000 at 200 m/z), at a target of 3e^6, selecting top 20 most abundant precursor ions (isolation window = 1.4 m/z, ion target 3e^5) for HCD fragmentation (NCE=27%) and MS2 scan (R=35,000 at 200 m/z).  Thermo RAW files were generated in centroid mode. Raw data were analysed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.3.30) with integrated Andromeda search engine, searching against the human whole proteome, with additions (Uniprot release 07.2018; 21,050 entries). Default MaxQuant settings were used, with 1% peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) followed by further filtering to 1% protein FDR. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for a first search followed by mass recalibration and 7 ppm tolerance for second search. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 7 ppm. The searches were conducted with carbamidomethylation of Cys set as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine, oxidation of Met and light” Lysine and Arginine were replaced by “heavy” isotope-labelled amino acids 13C615N4-l-Arginine (Arg 10) and 13C615N2-l-Lysine (Lys 8) with Arginine and Lysine set as variable modifications. The match between runs and re-quantify options were enabled with matching elution time of 1.0 min. Bioinformatics were performed in Perseus (1.5), and Microsoft Excel (2010). Briefly, SILAC H/L ratios determined by MaxQuant were inverted for label-swap experiments, and Log2 transformed prior to statistical analysis. Non-significant Log2H/L ratios were eliminated using the Student’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparisons, with P<0.05 as a significance cut off, ratios >0.5 were considered significantly altered. KEGG pathway enrichments were determined from the parent protein identified from the individual phospho-peptides using the Enrichr Online Tool (Chen et al 2013) and interaction networks were produced using STRING v11.5 (Szklarczyk et al 2020). In vitro reaction samples were injected onto a 50 cm x 75 μm internal diameter column (packed in-house with 1.9 μm Pur 120 C18 particles) using a Thermo Ultimate-3000 UHPLC. Peptides were separated using a 110 min gradient using a binary buffer system (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; buffer B = 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 0.250 μl/min. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5% buffer B over 30 min, then 5-10% over 1 min, then 10-35% over 59 min, then 35-95% over 3 min, then maintained at 95% for 4 min, then 95-5% over 1 min, then 5% maintained for a further 12 min. The column was maintained at 30 C. Data-dependent acquisition was performed with a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer operating in positive-ion mode, with a full-scan MS1 measured at 35,000 resolution (350 to 1550 m/z scan range; 50 ms injection time; 3x10^6 automated gain control (AGC) target) followed by isolation of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 26 normalised collision energy; 17,500 resolution; 60 ms injection time; 3x10^5 AGC target). Thermo RAW files were generated in centroid mode. Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 or v2.4 and searched with Sequest HT against the human UniProt database (07.2018; 21,050 entries). An automatic target FDR of 1-5% was set. Relative abundance levels of phosphorylation were found with label-free quantitation (LFQ) using the Minora Feature Detector.  For in cellulo kinase screening, two independent (n=2) biological replicates were performed. Average Log2H/L ratios from the 2 replicates greater than >0.5 were taken as potentially increased (phosphorylated) substrates for AKT and MASTL. Further stringency was applied using a Student’s t-test with Benjamin-Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparisons, with P<0.05 taken as significant. For MASTL, substrates were further refined by cross-referencing with previously identified proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with MASTL from mitotic HeLa cell extracts (Rogers et al 2016). For the AKT1+YB1 in vitro kinase assay, two (n=2) biological replicates were performed, and for MASTL+ENSA and MASTL+hnRNPM in vitro kinase assays, three (n=3) independent biological replicates were performed. Statistical significance for mass spectrometry results was determined using an unpaired 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test using GraphPad Prism software (v9.1.0).

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinase-like (MASTL) has emerged as a critical regulator of mitosis and as a potential oncogene in a variety of cancer types. To date, Arpp-19/ENSA are the only known substrates of MASTL. However, with the roles of MASTL expanding and increased interest in development of MASTL inhibitors, it has become critical to determine if there are additional substrates and what the optimal consensus motif for MASTL is. Here we utilized a whole cell lysate in vitro kinase screen combined with stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to identify potential substrates and the residue preference of MASTL. Using the related AGC kinase family members AKT1/2, the kinase screen identified several known and new substrates highly enriched for the validated consensus motif of AKT. Applying this method to MASTL identified 59 phospho-sites on 67 proteins that increased in the presence of active MASTL. Subsequent in vitro kinase assays suggested that MASTL may phosphorylate hnRNPM, YB1 and TUBA1C under certain in vitro conditions. Taken together, these data suggest that MASTL may phosphorylate several additional substrates, providing insight into the ever-increasing biological functions and roles MASTL plays in driving cancer progression and therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Kinase, Silac, Akt, Agc kinase, Mastl, Phospho-peptides

### Affiliations
ANZAC Research Institute, The University of Sydney
ANZAC Research Institute

### Submitter
Kamila Marzec

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Burgess
ANZAC Research Institute, The University of Sydney


