### Accession
PXD026092

### Title
Revisiting Ehrlichia ruminantium Replication Cycle Using Proteomics : The Host and the Bacterium Perspectives

### Description
The Rickettsiales Ehrlichia ruminantium (ER), the causal agent of the fatal tick-borne disease Heartwater, induces severe damage to the vascular endothelium in ruminants. Nevertheless, E. ruminantium-induced pathobiology remains largely unknown. Our work paves the way for understanding this phenomenon by using quantitative proteomic analyses (2D-DIGE-MS/MS, 1DE-nanoLC-MS/MS and biotin-nanoUPLC-MS/MS) of host bovine aorta endothelial cells (BAE) during the in vitro bacterium intracellular replication cycle. We detect 265 bacterial proteins (including virulence factors), at all time-points of the E. ruminantium replication cycle, highlighting a dynamic bacterium–host interaction. We show that E. ruminantium infection modulates the expression of 433 host proteins: 98 being over-expressed, 161 under-expressed, 140 detected only in infected BAE cells and 34 exclusively detected in non-infected cells. Cystoscape integrated data analysis shows that these proteins lead to major changes in host cell immune responses, host cell metabolism and vesicle trafficking, with a clear involvement of inflammation-related proteins in this process. Our findings led to the first model of E. ruminantium infection in host cells in vitro, and we highlight potential biomarkers of E. ruminantium infection in endothelial cells (such as ROCK1, TMEM16K, Albumin and PTPN1), which may be important to further combat Heartwater, namely by developing non-antibiotic-based strategies.

### Sample Protocol
2D-DIGE-MS/MS:  ER—infected and uninfected BAE protein samples (50 μg) were labeled with 400 pmol of Cy3 or Cy5, and Cy2 was used as an internal calibrator. For each gel, Immobiline DryStrip strips 24 cm, pH 3–11 NL were used. The SDS-PAGE was performed using an Ettan DALT six system. The gels were scanned at different wavelengths depending on the dye used (Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5) with the high-resolution scanner Typhoon FLA 9500. Gel images were then analyzed using the various modules of Decyder 2-D 7.2 software. Considering the ratio infected vs. non-infected at each TOI, only spots having fold-change ≥ 1.2 or ≤−1.2 and p-value < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed. The spots of interest were automatically excised by the Ettan spot picker (GE Healthcare) and transferred to a 96-well collecting plate containing 120 µL of a 10% ethanol solution. After in-gel digestion, the peptides were eluted onto a MALDI plate using a matrix solution that contained 5 mg/mL α-cyano-4- hydroxycinnamic acid dissolved in 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Protein identification was performed on a 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument with 4000 series explorer v3.5 software in both MS and MS/MS mode. Each MS spectrum was obtained in a result-independent acquisition mode with a total of 800 laser shots per spectrum, with internal calibration using Angiotensin II (1046.2 Da), Angiotensin I (1296.5 Da), Neurotensin (1672.9 Da), ACTH  (2093.5 Da) and ACTH (2465.7 Da; PepMix1, Laserbio labs, France). MS/MS analyses were performed using CID (collision-induced dissociation) assisted with air, using a collision energy of 1 kV and a gas pressure of 1 × 10−6 Torr. A total of 1400 laser shots were collected for each MS/MS spectrum with the peak detection minimum S/N setting at 20. LABEL-FREE QUANTITATIVE 1DE-NLC-MS/MS:  Proteins (10 µg) from 3 biological replicates of non-infected and ER-infected BAE cells at 5 time-points post-infection (24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 hpi; 30 samples in total) were separated on SDS-PAGE gels (12%). Gel lanes were cut into 3 gel pieces, de-stained with TEABC 50 mM and washed 3 times in 100% ACN. After protein reduction and alkylation proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin. The generated peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed online on a Pepmap® pre-column (0.3 × 10 mm, Dionex, France). A gradient consisting of 0–40% B for 60 min and 80% B for 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary reverse-phase column (0.075 × 150 mm, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were electro-sprayed online at a voltage of 2 kV into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (400–2000 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 (at 400 m/z), followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS spectra, was repeated continuously throughout the nanoLC separation. All MS/MS spectra were recorded using normalized collision energy (33%, activation Q 0.25 and activation time 10 ms) with an isolation window of 2 m/z. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v 2.2). For all full scan measurements with the Orbitrap detector, a lock-mass ion from ambient air (445.120024 m/z) was used as an internal calibrant.  BIOTIN ENRICHMENT PROTOCOL AND DIFFERENTIAL SHOTGUN PROTEOMICS Experiments were performed with 3 biological replicates for E. ruminanti-um-infected and non-infected BAE cells at 72 hpi (6 samples in total). Surface protein biotinylation was performed according to Turtoi and co-workers.  The isolated biotinylated proteins were then solubilized in 30 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested (1:50 protease/protein ratio) overnight using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (37 °C). The digestion was further extended for 4 h by addition of fresh trypsin (using a dilution 1:100). From the prepared sample, 9 μL were injected, corresponding to an estimated protein load of 2.5 μg. For the MS analysis, the 2D-nano Aquity UPLC (Waters, USA) was coupled online with the SYNAPT G1 qTOF system (Waters, USA). Raw data were processed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) v2.4 (Waters, USA ). The processing parameters were: MS TOF resolution, and the chromatographic peak width was set to automatic, low-/elevated-energy detection threshold to 250/100 counts, identification intensity threshold to 1500 counts and lock mass window to 785.8426 ± 0.30 Da. Processed MS spectra were then searched against the Bos taurus UniProt database (release 2019_04, 48,272 entries). Peptide modification carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and oxidation (M) as variable.

### Data Protocol
2D-DIGE-MS/MS: Protein identification was performed with the software Protein-Pilot, using Bos taurus (48,272 entries) and E. ruminantium (4149 entries) Uniprot databases (release 2019_04), and peptide modification carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and oxidation (M) as variable. Label-Free Quantitative 1DE-nLC-MS/MS. Analysis of MS data was performed using the MaxQuant software against the UniProtKB Proteome UP000000533 database  for E. ruminantium (strain Gardel) (release 2016_02 identical to release 2019_04, 948 entries) and the UniProtKB Reference Proteome UP000009136 database for BAE (release 2016_02 identical to release 2019_04, 24,112 entries) using the following parameters: enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ion were applied. The “match between runs” option was checked. Oxidation (M) was specified as variable modification and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for pre-cursor ion for mass calibration, and with a 4.5 ppm tolerance after calibration. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Quantification was performed using standard parameters: we only considered proteins with at least 2 peptides identified/quantified for further analysis, after elimination of reverse and contaminant entries. The Perseus software (v 1.5.3.0) enabled protein quantification (label-free quantification) via the iBAQ intensities. Proteins were filtered out if they were not quantified in at least all replicates from one condition. For BAE proteins’ analysis, a scatter plot based on a Student’s T-test (two tailed T-test, unequal variances) of triplicate MS analyses was per-formed on log2-transformed values using the Perseus toolbox. Criteria used to classify the proteins were the Student’s T-test difference calculated by Perseus (difference be-tween the two compared conditions of the mean log2-transformed value for triplicate MS/MS analyses), and the Student’s T-test p-value. Results were filtered using the fol-lowing combination of criteria: −1 ≥ |Welch t-test difference| > 1 and -Log p-value > 2. For the E. ruminantium proteins’ analysis, a profile plot analysis of triplicate MS analyses was performed on log2-transformed values using the Perseus toolbox. Criteria used to classify the proteins were the reference profiles of significant protein relative amount during the infection kinetics. Biotin Enrichment Protocol: Processed MS spectra were then searched against the Bos taurus UniProt database (release 2019_04, 48,272 entries). Peptide modification carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and oxidation (M) as variable. PLGS software calculated the score and the relative ratio of protein expression (infected vs. non-infected). The p-value output format (PLGS) ranged from 0 to 1, indicating: (i) 0–0.05, significant downregulation, and (ii) 0.95–1.0, significant upregulation of the respective protein, and both instances indicate a level of certainty ≥ 95%. BIOINFORMATICS:  To perform the network biological analyses, we used the Cytoscape v3.8.0 combined with different plugins: ClueGO, CluePedia, BiNGO, StringApp and Enrichment Map. The ClueGO (v2.5.7) plugin was used for enrichment analysis of DEPs based on Gene Ontology (GO) term and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway data. CluePedia (v 1.5.7) was used to explore the functional network. Terms with p < 0.05 and a κ score of 0.4 were regarded as significantly enriched terms. For functional analysis of proteins sig-nificantly downregulated or upregulated by E. ruminantium (q   < 0.05), enrichment of GO Biological Process, Molecular Function and Cellular Component terms against a background of all quantitated proteins was determined using BiNGO (v 3.0.4). The threshold for a differentially expressed protein was defined as p < 0.05. The differential co-expression network was constructed with the absolute value of correlation coefficient ≥ 0.9. Correlation analysis between proteins was measured using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. To account for redundancy between annotations, en-riched GO terms were visualized using the Enrichment Map (v3.3.1) with default set-tings (q-value cut-off of 0.1) and sparse-intermediate connectivity. Clusters were manually labeled to highlight the prevalent biological functions amongst each set of related annotations.

### Publication Abstract
The Rickettsiales <i>Ehrlichia ruminantium</i>, the causal agent of the fatal tick-borne disease Heartwater, induces severe damage to the vascular endothelium in ruminants. Nevertheless, <i>E. ruminantium-</i>induced pathobiology remains largely unknown. Our work paves the way for understanding this phenomenon by using quantitative proteomic analyses (2D-DIGE-MS/MS, 1DE-nanoLC-MS/MS and biotin-nanoUPLC-MS/MS) of host bovine aorta endothelial cells (BAE) during the in vitro bacterium intracellular replication cycle. We detect 265 bacterial proteins (including virulence factors), at all time-points of the <i>E. ruminantium</i> replication cycle, highlighting a dynamic bacterium-host interaction. We show that <i>E. ruminantium</i> infection modulates the expression of 433 host proteins: 98 being over-expressed, 161 under-expressed, 140 detected only in infected BAE cells and 34 exclusively detected in non-infected cells. Cystoscape integrated data analysis shows that these proteins lead to major changes in host cell immune responses, host cell metabolism and vesicle trafficking, with a clear involvement of inflammation-related proteins in this process. Our findings led to the first model of <i>E. ruminantium</i> infection in host cells in vitro, and we highlight potential biomarkers of <i>E. ruminantium</i> infection in endothelial cells (such as ROCK1, TMEM16K, Albumin and PTPN1), which may be important to further combat Heartwater, namely by developing non-antibiotic-based strategies.

### Keywords
Ehrlichia ruminantium; endothelial cells; host response; immunomodulation; bacterial life cycle; differential protein expression; infection biomarkers; virulence factors

### Affiliations
ASTRE, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier, France + CIRAD, UMR ASTRE, F-34398, Montpellier, France
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, MolSys Research Unit, University of Liege, Liege 4000, Belgium

### Submitter
Gabriel Mazzucchelli

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie VACHIERY
ASTRE, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier, France + CIRAD, UMR ASTRE, F-34398, Montpellier, France


