### Accession
PXD024290

### Title
LC-MS/M of GABARAPL1 and GABARAPL1Y49A/L50A immunoprecipitates

### Description
To identify substrates or adaptors of selective autophagy, we performed a differential interactome screen using wild-type GABARAPL1 and the LIR-docking site mutant GABARAPL1Y49A/N50A,

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-GABARAPL1 and FLAG-GABARAPL1Y49A/N50A-interacting proteins were immunoprecipitated from HEK293T cells and identified by LC-MS/MS analysis using a high-performance LabDroid system at Robotic Biology Institute (https://rbi.co.jp/en/). Briefly, HEK293T cells transiently expressing FLAG-GABARAPL1 and FLAG-GABARAPL1Y49A/N50A were lysed with lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, containing 1% digitonin, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mg/mL leupeptin, 5 mg/mL aprotinin, 3 mg/mL pepstatin A, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min to remove insoluble materials. The supernatants were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (M8823; Sigma-Aldrich). Precipitated immunocomplexes were washed three times in washing buffer (10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% Triton X-100) and eluted with FLAG peptides. The samples obtained were subjected to trichloroacetic acid precipitation. The resulting pellets were dissolved in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.8) containing 7 M guanidine hydrochloride, reduced using 5 mM TCEP (tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine; 77720; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and subsequently alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, samples were digested with lysyl-endopeptidase (129-02541; Wako Pure Chemical Industries) for 3 h at 37°C and then further digested with trypsin (4352157; Sigma-Aldrich) for 14 h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptide samples were analyzed using a nanoscale LC-MS/MS system. The peptide mixture was applied to a Mightysil-PR-18 (Kanto Chemical) frit-less column (45 x 0.150 mm ID) and separated using a 0–40% gradient of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a flow rate of 100 nL/min. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex). MS/MS spectra were obtained using the information-dependent mode. Up to 25 precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 50 counts/s were selected for MS/MS analyses from each survey scan. All MS/MS spectra were searched against protein sequences of NCBI nonredundant human protein dataset (NCBInr RefSeq Release 71, containing 179,460 entries) using the Protein Pilot software package (Sciex). Protein quantification was performed using the iBAQ method without conversion to absolute amounts using universal proteomics standards (iBQ). The iBQ value was calculated by dividing the sum of the ion intensities of all the identified peptides of each protein by the number of theoretically measurable peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy regulates primary cilia formation, but the underlying mechanism is not fully understood. In this study, we identify NIMA-related kinase 9 (NEK9) as a GABARAPs-interacting protein and find that NEK9 and its LC3-interacting region (LIR) are required for primary cilia formation. Mutation in the LIR of NEK9 in mice also impairs in vivo cilia formation in the kidneys. Mechanistically, NEK9 interacts with MYH9 (also known as myosin IIA), which has been implicated in inhibiting ciliogenesis through stabilization of the actin network. MYH9 accumulates in NEK9 LIR mutant cells and mice, and depletion of MYH9 restores ciliogenesis in NEK9 LIR mutant cells. These results suggest that NEK9 regulates ciliogenesis by acting as an autophagy adaptor for MYH9. Given that the LIR in NEK9 is conserved only in land vertebrates, the acquisition of the autophagic regulation of the NEK9-MYH9 axis in ciliogenesis may have possible adaptive implications for terrestrial life.

### Keywords
Gabarapl1, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine The University of Tokyo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

### Submitter
Yasuhiro Yamamoto

### Lab Head
Dr Noboru Mizushima
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan


