### Accession
PXD004640

### Title
RNA localization is a key determinant of neurite-enriched proteome

### Description
RNA localization and local translation are important biological processes that underlie establishment of body axis, cell migration and synaptic plasticity. However, it is unclear to which extent mRNA localization contributes toward local proteome and how much of protein localization is achieved via protein transport or local translation of uniformly distributed mRNAs. To address this question, we performed genome-wide analysis of the local proteome, transcriptome, and translation rates in neurites and cell bodies of neurons differentiated from mouse embryonic stem cells. Our results reveal mRNA localization as a key determinant of protein localization to neurites that accounts for around a half of the neurite-localized proteome. Moreover, we identify non-coding RNAs and RNA-binding proteins targeted to neurites.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion, 2m long monolithic column - 6 hr gradient, Q-Exactive plus, LFQ

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant ver.1.5.1.2, Andromeda, label-free quantification method

### Publication Abstract
Protein subcellular localization is fundamental to the establishment of the body axis, cell migration, synaptic plasticity, and a vast range of other biological processes. Protein localization occurs through three mechanisms: protein transport, mRNA localization, and local translation. However, the relative contribution of each process to neuronal polarity remains unknown. Using neurons differentiated from mouse embryonic stem cells, we analyze protein and RNA expression and translation rates in isolated cell bodies and neurites genome-wide. We quantify 7323 proteins and the entire transcriptome, and identify hundreds of neurite-localized proteins and locally translated mRNAs. Our results demonstrate that mRNA localization is the primary mechanism for protein localization in neurites that may account for half of the neurite-localized proteome. Moreover, we identify multiple neurite-targeted non-coding RNAs and RNA-binding proteins with potential regulatory roles. These results provide further insight into the mechanisms underlying the establishment of neuronal polarity.Subcellular localization of RNAs and proteins is important for polarized cells such as neurons. Here the authors differentiate mouse embryonic stem cells into neurons, and analyze the local transcriptome, proteome, and translated transcriptome in their cell bodies and neurites, providing a unique resource for future studies on neuronal polarity.

### Keywords
Mouse es, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Local translation, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Koshi Imami

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


