### Accession
PXD003538

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with cytoplasmic high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) during the hepatocellular response to ischemia reperfusion injury

### Description
Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) occurs in liver transplantations and major resections and can lead to liver dysfunction. HMGB1 locates in nucleus of normal hepatocytes, but translocates to cytoplasm and the extracellular space during IRI. Although the functions of nuclear and extracellular HMGB1 are well explored, the role cytoplasmic HMGB1 plays in hepatic IRI is still unknown.  We hypothesize cytoplasmic HMGB1 interacts with binding proteins involved in the hepatocellular response to IRI. In this study binding proteins of cytoplasmic HMGB1 during hepatic IRI were identified.  Normal and warm ischemia reperfusion (WI/R) liver tissues were used for cytoplasmic protein extraction. The protein extracts were subjected to co-immunoprecipitation to enrich HMGB1-protein complexes. To identify the immunoprecipitated proteins in eluates, 2DE and subsequent MS detection were performed.  Three identified proteins were verified using western blotting: betaine--homocysteine S-methyltransferase 1 (BHMT), cystathionine gamma-lyase (CTH) and ATP synthase beta subunit (ATP5B). All three identified proteins have a role in metabolic pathways and autophagy. Our results demonstrate cytoplasmic HMGB1 binds to BHMT, CTH and ATP5B during hepatic WI/R. Since both, cytoplasmic HMGB1 and binding proteins, are involved in autophagy, we speculate this protein complex may be involved in the hepatocellular response to IRI via the autophagy pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Two-dimensional electrophoresis and silver staining The Hoefer IEF100 isoelectric focusing unit (Hoefer, USA) was used to perform first dimension electrophoresis. IPG Blue strips (7cm, pH 3-10 and pH 5-8, linear), ampholytes (ServalytTM, pH 3-10 and pH 5-8) and HPE IPG Overlay were purchased from Serva Electrophoresis (Germany). Preparation of solutions and rehydration of strip gels were performed according to the IEF100 manual. Co-IP eluate (about 10µg protein) was applied by cup loading after full denaturation with 2DE compatible buffer. IEF100 preprogrammed protocol of 7cm IPG’s under constant watt conditions was used. A two-step equilibration of IPG strips was performed before the second dimension SDS-PAGE. A minigel system (Hoefer, USA) and 10% polyacrylamide gels were employed for SDS-PAGE. The IPG strip was placed on the top of the SDS gel. A piece of filter paper loaded with prestained peqGold Protein Marker V (Peqlab, Germany) was placed on the alkaline end of the IPG strip, and an overlay of hot agarose was used to seal the strip. SDS gels were transferred and subjected to silver staining. Pierce Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used according to the kit’s manual. Image acquisition of stained gels was performed using a scanner (Epson V750, Japan).  Mass spectrometry detection Protein spots were excised from silver-stained gels and destained according to the silver stain kit manual. Gel pieces were washed using 50mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile solutions, and digested with trypsin in 25mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C according to the protocol of Shevchenko et al. 1996 [7]. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces and injected into an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermofisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched online based on a pre-concentration set-up using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After 4 min, a valve switch was performed to elute the pre-concentrated peptides onto the analytical column. For separation of peptides, an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (15 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) was used as stationary phase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The binary mobile phase consisting of A) 0.1% formic acid in H2O and B) 0.1% formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O v/v was applied for gradient elution: 0-4 min at 4% B, 36 min at 35% B, 40 min at 50% B, 41-45 min at 96% B, 45.1-60 min at 4% B. The Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) provided with a stainless steel emitter was used to generate positively charged ions at 2.2 kV spray voltage. The capillary temperature was set to 220 °C and the S-lens RV level was set to 50. The mass spectrometer was calibrated externally prior to the analysis with positive CalMix solution and internally based on the lock mass of m/z 445.12003 amu for C2H6SiO6 (polydimethylsiloxane). The hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass analyser was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (TopN) mode. Precursor ions were measured in full scan mode within a mass range of m/z 300-1600 at a resolution of 35k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 140 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. For data-dependent acquisition, up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with an assigned charge state of z = 2-6 were selected in the quadrupole for further fragmentation using an isolation width of m/z 3.0. Fragment ions were generated in the HCD cell at a normalized collision energy of 30 V using nitrogen gas. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 25 s. Fragment ions were monitored at a resolution of 17.5k (FWHM) using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1e6. The LC-MS/MS instrument was operated by means of the Thermo/Dionex Chromeleon Xpress v6.80 SR13 build 3818 software and the Thermo QExactive Plus Tune / Xcalibur v3.0.63 2.3 build 1765 graphical interface software.

### Data Protocol
Using Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo raw data were processed and searched against the NCBI database of Rattus using Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK). Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set for oxidation of Met. Static modification was based on the carbamidomethylation of Cys by iodoacetamide. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for (q value) validation of the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using a maximum Delta CN of 0.05 and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1%. At least 2 peptides per protein were required for positive protein hits.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) occurs inevitably in liver transplantations and frequently during major resections, and can lead to liver dysfunction as well as systemic disorders. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) plays a pathogenic role in hepatic IRI. In the normal liver, HMGB1 is located in the nucleus of hepatocytes; after ischemia reperfusion, it translocates to the cytoplasm and it is further released to the extracellular space. Unlike the well-explored functions of nuclear and extracellular HMGB1, the role of cytoplasmic HMGB1 in hepatic IRI remains elusive. We hypothesized that cytoplasmic HMGB1 interacts with binding proteins involved in the hepatocellular response to IRI. In this study, binding proteins of cytoplasmic HMGB1 during hepatic IRI were identified. Liver tissues from rats with warm ischemia reperfusion (WI/R) injury and from normal rats were subjected to cytoplasmic protein extraction. Co-immunoprecipitation using these protein extracts was performed to enrich HMGB1-protein complexes. To separate and identify the immunoprecipitated proteins in eluates, 2-dimensional electrophoresis and subsequent mass spectrometry detection were performed. Two of the identified proteins were verified using Western blotting: betaine-homocysteine <i>S</i>-methyltransferase 1 (BHMT) and cystathionine &#x3b3;-lyase (CTH). Therefore, our results revealed the binding of HMGB1 to BHMT and CTH in cytoplasm during hepatic WI/R. This finding may help to better understand the cellular response to IRI in the liver and to identify novel molecular targets for reducing ischemic injury.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ischemia, 2d-ge, Hmgb1

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


