### Accession
PXD022351

### Title
Inhibition of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase impairs DNA damage tolerance and repair in glioma cells

### Description
Expression of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) is a determinant of malignancy in gliomas through kynurenine (KYN) signaling. We report that inhibition of TDO activity attenuated recovery from replication stress and increased the genotoxic effects of bis-chloroethylnitrosourea (BCNU). Activation of the Chk1 arm of the replication stress response (RSR) was reduced when TDO activity was blocked prior to BCNU treatment, whereas phosphorylation of serine 33 (pS33) on replication protein A (RPA) was enhanced - indicative of increased fork collapse. Analysis of quantitative proteomic results revealed TDO-dependent changes in several pathways - including down-regulation of 53BP1 and sirtuin signaling. We went on to show that cells lacking TDO activity exhibited defective recruitment of 53BP1 to gamma-H2AX foci, which corresponded with delayed repair of DNA breaks. Addition of exogenous KYN increased the rate of break repair. TDO inhibition diminished SIRT7 deacetylase recruitment to chromatin, which increased histone H3K18 acetylation - a key mark involved in preventing 53BP1 recruitment to sites of DNA damage. These results highlight the potential for tumor-specific metabolic changes to influence genome stability and may have implications for glioma treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
T98G cells (~106 cells/condition) were pre-treated with 680C91 (10 or 20 μM) or cultured in DMSO-containing media as a control for 24 h prior to BCNU treatment. After the 680C91 pre-treatment, the old media was replaced with fresh media containing containing either DMSO, 680C91, or BCNU (125 μM). After 24 h treatment with BCNU, the cells were harvested and subjected to nuclear and cytosolic fractionation via NE-PER kit (ThermoFisher Scientific; Cat# 78833, Waltham, MA). Nuclear protein was isolated and 100 μg of lysate was submitted to UAMS proteomics core facility. Purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation (16). Tryptic peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat# 90110, Waltham, MA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides were separated into 36 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters, Cat# 186002346, Milford, MA) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with a 40 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 12 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters, Cat# 186006103, Milford, MA) on an in-line 120 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 67:33 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.25 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and TMT MS3 reporter ions quantified by searching the Homo sapiens database using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10, Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (17). TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed by a normal distribution for each sample using Perseus (Max Planck Institute). TMT batch effects were removed using ComBat (18) in order to correct for technical variation due to multiplexing samples across multiple TMT10plex batches. Statistical analysis was performed using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors (19). Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered to be significant. Significant proteins were analyzed for protein networks and pathways using the Ensemble of Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (EGSEA) Bioconductor package (20) and Qiagen’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (21).

### Publication Abstract
Expression of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) is a determinant of malignancy in gliomas through kynurenine (KYN) signaling. We report that inhibition of TDO activity attenuated recovery from replication stress and increased the genotoxic effects of bis-chloroethylnitrosourea (BCNU). Activation of the Chk1 arm of the replication stress response (RSR) was reduced when TDO activity was blocked prior to BCNU treatment, whereas phosphorylation of serine 33 (pS33) on replication protein A (RPA) was enhanced-indicative of increased fork collapse. Analysis of quantitative proteomic results revealed that TDO inhibition reduced nuclear 53BP1 and sirtuin levels. We confirmed that cells lacking TDO activity exhibited elevated gamma-H2AX signal and defective recruitment of 53BP1 to chromatin following BCNU treatment, which corresponded with delayed repair of DNA breaks. Addition of exogenous KYN increased the rate of break repair. TDO inhibition diminished SIRT7 deacetylase recruitment to chromatin, which increased histone H3K18 acetylation-a key mark involved in preventing 53BP1 recruitment to sites of DNA damage. TDO inhibition also sensitized cells to ionizing radiation (IR)-induced damage, but this effect did not involve altered 53BP1 recruitment. These experiments support a model where TDO-mediated KYN signaling helps fuel a robust response to replication stress and DNA damage.

### Keywords
Replication stress, Kynurenine, Dna replication, Dna repair, Dna damage, Tryptophan 2, 3-dioxygenase

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, U.S.A

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Eoff
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, U.S.A


