### Accession
PXD031212

### Title
Shotgun proteomic data obtained from whole cell lysates of ´Geobacer ammonificans´

### Description
Dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonia (DNRA) is an important part of the microbial N-cycle both in natural and man-made habitats, although its significance in wastewater treatment plants is not well understood. Nitrate-limited enrichments from activated sludge with acetate as e-donor consistently resulted in a domination of two closely related genotypes of ammonifying members of Deltaproteobacteria belonging to the genus Geobacter. One of the two was isolated in pure culture which appears to be an extremely specialized ammonifier, actively growing only with acetate as e-donor and C source and nitrate as e-acceptor. The shotgun proteomic raw data obtained from whole cell lysates are provided. First and corresponding author: Dimitry Y. Sorokin soroc@inmi.ru; d.sorokin@tudelft.nl

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis triplicate cell samples (technical replicates) were collected from a steady-state G1 culture grown with acetate as e-donor/C source in nitrate-limited chemostat at D=0.05 h-1. A slightly modified protocol from Kleikamp et al. (2021) was used for sample preparation and shotgun proteomic analysis. Briefly, 20 mg biomass (wet weight) were lysed using B-PER reagent and bead beating followed by centrifugation at 14.000 x g under cooling to collect protein supernatant. The proteins were precipitated with TCA (20% v/v final) at 4°C followed by washing twice using ice cold acetone. The protein pellet was redissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 6 M urea, reduced in a 10 mM dithiothreitol solution and further alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide. The solution was diluted to approx. below 1 M urea and digested using Trypsin at a ratio protease to protein of 1:50. Before analysis, peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB solid phase extraction sorbent (Waters) according to the manufacturer protocols.

### Data Protocol
An aliquot corresponding to approx. 300 ng protein digest was analysed in duplicates using an one dimensional shotgun proteomics approach (Köcher et al., 2012). For this, 1 µL of samples were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL min-1 over a linear gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes, and finally to 75% B over 25 minutes. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring peptide signals form 350–1400 m/z, where the top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 30. The collected duplicate measurements were analysed combined against the protein sequence database constructed via genomics analysis as described above, using PEAKS Studio 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment ion mass error tolerance, 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications were evaluated by the number of unique peptides (for a complete list of protein identifications with >/= 1 unique peptide see supplemental information material). Relative protein abundances were correlated to protein molecular weight normalised spectral counts (Hongbin et al., 2004; Keiji and Itoh, 2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Discovery proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Geobacter, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


