### Accession
PXD019076

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling of mitochondrial toxicants in human cardiomyocyte cell line

### Description
Mitochondria are essential cellular organelles that participate in important cellular processes, including bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling. Recent functional and proteomic studies have revealed the remarkable complexity of mitochondrial protein organization. Protein machineries with diverse functions such as protein translocation, respiration, metabolite transport, protein quality control and the control of membrane architecture interact with each other in dynamic networks. The goal of this study was to identify protein expression changes in a human cardiomyocyte cell line treated with several mitochondrial toxicants which inhibit mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and mitochondrial respiration. AC16 human cardiomyocyte cells were treated with carbonyl cyanide p-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP), dinoterb, picoxystrobin, pinacyanol and triclocarban for 18 h around the IC50 values generated from MMP assay. The samples were harvested and labeled with tandem mass tags with different mass isotopes. Peptide assignment was performed in Proteome Discoverer. Each dataset was analyzed in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In the proteomic profile, these compounds showed dysregulation of a group of mitochondrial proteins (e.g. NDUA, NDUB, BCS1, CYB5B and SDHF2), as well as proteins involved in lipid metabolism (e.g. CPT, MECR, and LPGAT1), cytoskeleton protein changes (e.g. CROCC, LAMC3, FBLN1 and FMN2) and stress response (e.g. IKBKG, IKBB, SYVN1, SOD2 and CPIN1). Proteomic data from the current study provides key insights into chemical induced cellular pathway dysregulation, supporting the use of proteomic profiling as a sensitive method to further explore molecular functions and disease pathogenesis upon exposure to environmental chemicals.

### Sample Protocol
AC16 human cardiomyocytes (passage 7) were cultured in T-75 cm2 flasks at densities of 2 × 106. After incubation at 37°C for 6 hours, the media was replaced with fresh culture medium containing test compounds or DMSO for 18 h treatment. The cells were harvested by scraping off tissue culture plates after washing twice with PBS. The homogenates were centrifuged at 200 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The cell pellets were lysed in 0.4 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 2 % SDS) followed by 10 times 10 second pulse sonication with 10 seconds rest between each time (Fisher Scientific Sonic Dismembrator Model 500 , 15% amplitude). The lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 10 min at 4ºC. Supernatants were collected and stored at -80ºC for further analysis. The protein concentration of the supernatants was determined by a BCA™ Reducing Reagent compatible assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). For trypsin digestion, an aliquot of 150 µg proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Alkylated proteins were desalted on Amicon Ultra Centrifuge Filter Units (EMD Millipore) followed by trypsin digestion at 37°C overnight (16 h). After trypsin digestion, the samples were dried and used for TMT labeling. The TMT-11plex labeling method tags 11 samples with different mass isotopes in one batch. 18 cell lysate samples were divided them into two sets. The first set included 9 samples (triplicates of DMSO, FCCP and Dinoterb) and two pooled samples. The second set also included 9 samples (triplicates from Pinacyanol, Picoxystrobin and Triclosarban) and two pooled samples. Pooled samples were used as internal standards in both sets, which were created by mixing all 18 digested peptide samples equally. Tryptic digested peptides and the reference peptides were labeled with 11plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). Peptides labeled by different TMT reagents were then mixed and dried using a Speed-Vac. Extensive fractionation by basic reverse-phase liquid chromatography was used to reduce sample complexity and thus reduce the likelihood of peptides being co-isolated and co-fragmented. The 11plex TMT labeled sample was resuspended in 20 µL of 10 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer before being separated on an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system mounted with a Poroshell HPH-C18 Column (2.1 x 150 mm, 2.7 µm, Agilent). The labeled peptides were eluted using a gradient of 2 to 100% Solvent B (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0, 90% ACN) at a flow rate of 200 µL/min over 120 min. A total of 96 fractions were collected in a 96 well plate, which were then concatenated to 24 fractions by combining every four sequential elutes, vacuum dried and stored at -80 ºC until further LC/MS-MS analysis. LC/MS-MS analysis was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Each peptide fraction was loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were eluted onto a reversed-phase 20 cm C18 PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid. The elution duration was 100 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Eluted peptides from the PicoFrit column were ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source ES071 (Thermo Scientific) under the following settings: spray voltage, 1.8 kV, capillary temperature, 250°C. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 350−1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 35,000 resolution (m/z 200) after an accumulation of ions to a 3 × 106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC). The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms. The 15 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using normalized HCD collision energy 30 with an AGC target 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 400 ms at 17,500 resolution. The isolation window was set to 2. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and 1+ and 7+ or higher charge states ions.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw data files (24 files from 24 fractions) were searched against the Human UniProtKB human protein sequence databases (20,608 entries, 2016) and mitochondrial protein annotations were obtained from the NCBI website using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) based on the SEQUEST and Percolator algorithms (Spivak et al., 2009). The searches were performed with the following parameters: The false positive discovery rates (FDR) was set to 5%. The resulting Proteome Discoverer Report contained all assembled proteins with peptides sequences and peptide spectrum match counts (PSM#) and TMT-tag based quantification ratios. Relative protein abundance was calculated as the ratio of sample abundance to reference abundance using the summed reporter ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are essential cellular organelles that participate in important cellular processes, including bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling. Recent functional and proteomic studies have revealed the remarkable complexity of mitochondrial protein organization. Mitochondrial protein machineries with diverse functions such as protein translocation, respiration, metabolite transport, protein quality control and the control of membrane architecture interact with each other in dynamic networks. The goal of this study was to identify protein expression changes in a human cardiomyocyte cell line treated with several mitochondrial toxicants which inhibit mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and mitochondrial respiration. AC16 human cardiomyocyte cells were treated with carbonyl cyanide <i>p</i>-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP), dinoterb, picoxystrobin, pinacyanol, and triclocarban for 18 h around the IC<sub>50</sub> values generated from MMP assay. The samples were harvested and labeled with tandem mass tags with different mass isotopes. Peptide assignment was performed in Proteome Discoverer. Each dataset was analyzed in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In the proteomic profile, these compounds showed dysregulation of a group of mitochondrial proteins (e.g., NDUA, NDUB, BCS1, CYB5B, and SDHF2), as well as proteins involved in lipid metabolism (e.g., CPT, MECR, and LPGAT1), cytoskeleton protein changes (e.g., CROCC, LAMC3, FBLN1, and FMN2) and stress response (e.g., IKBKG, IKBB, SYVN1, SOD2, and CPIN1). Proteomic data from the current study provides key insights into chemical induced cellular pathway dysregulation, supporting the use of proteomic profiling as a sensitive method to further explore molecular functions and disease pathogenesis upon exposure to environmental chemicals.

### Keywords
Triclocarban, Picoxystrobin, Pathway enrichment analysis, Dinoterb, Pinacyanol, Mitochondrial toxicant, Fccp, Global proteomic profiling

### Affiliations
Poochon Scientific
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, MD, USA

### Submitter
Jon (Jian-Jiang)  Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Menghang Xia
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, MD, USA


