### Accession
PXD009219

### Title
The difference in serum proteomes in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

### Description
Purpose of study is revealing significant differences in serum proteomes in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder (BD), and matched healthy controls. The sample preparation included affinity removing of six major proteins, separation by 1D electrophoresis, in-gel tryptic hydrolysis, and LC-MS/MS peptide analysis using LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. When comparing proteome profiles, different unique protein sets were revealed (absent in other groups): 22 proteins typical for schizophrenia, and 20 – for BD. Protein set in schizophrenia was mostly associated with nucleic acid and protein metabolism, immune response, cell communication, and cell growth and maintenance. Protein set in BD was mostly associated with cell growth and maintenance, nucleic acid metabolism regulation, immune response, protein metabolism, transport and cell communication. Concentrations of ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein 12 (ANKRD12), coagulation factor XIII, and cadherin 5 in serum samples were determined by ELISA. Significant difference between three groups was revealed in ANKRD12 concentration (p=0.02), with maximum elevation of ANKRD12 concentration (median level) in schizophrenia followed by BD. Cadherin 5 concentration differed significantly (p=0.035) between schizophrenic patients with prevailing positive symptoms (4.78 [2.71;7.12] ng/ml) and those with prevailing negative symptoms (1.86 [0.001;4.11] ng/ml). Our results are presumably useful for discovering the new pathways involved in endogenous psychotic disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation. Six major high-abundance proteins – serum albumin, IgG, IgА, antitrypsin, transferrin, and haptoglobin were depleted from the sera before the further studies. For this, the samples were fivefold diluted with PBS, centrifuged (4000 g, 4°C, 5 min) using Zentrifuge Z 36 HK centrifuge (Hermle labortechnik Gmbh, Germany), filtered through Filtropur S 0.2 membrane (Sarstedt), and the supernatant was then passed through the Multiple Affinity Removal Column Human 6 (4.6 x 100 mm, Agilent, USA) for affinity binding of the major proteins, with subsequent concentration of the column flow-through by ultrafiltration through 5 kDa Microcon® Centrifugal Ultrafilters (Millipore, France) in accordance with the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Protein concentration was measured by absorbance at 280/260 nm using Epoch microplate spectrophotometer (BioTek, USA) with the software installed. One-Dimensional Laemmli PAG Electrophoresis. Reducing Laemmli sample buffer (1:1 v/v) was added to all the samples pre-treated as described above, and the samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged briefly to precipitate the condensate. The samples matched by the total protein content of 20 μg (respective volumes of samples were calculated for this) were subjected to the sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis by Laemmli in 12% PAG (1 mm gel thickness, 160 mmx 160 mm dimensions). The electrophoretic separation procedure was carried out using Protean II xi Cell (Bio-Rad, USA) device at 150-180 V supplied by the PowerPac ™ Universal Power Supply source (Bio-Rad, USA). The gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (0,1% Coomassi Brilliant Blue G250; 40% C2H5OH; 10% CH3COOH), then destained in solution with 70% C2H5OH for 2 h. Molecular weights corresponding to the stained protein bands in PAGs were automatically calculated using Alliance 2.7 Uvitec system (Cambridge) with the supplied software, relatively to molecular weights of protein standards (Broad MW range, Fermentas, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein Identification. Protein bands significantly more frequently met in gel lanes corresponding to patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder in comparison with lanes corresponding to control subjects (where they were virtually absent) were subjected to further analysis. Protein spots were cut from PAG manually (volume of ~3mm3) using scarifier, placed into microtubes, and incubated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile for 10-15 min on a shaker to remove Coomassie staining. The supernatant was discarded, and the PAG was washed with deionized water. The procedure was triplicated or more (till complete destaining). Then the samples were lyophilized for 45 min at 40°С. In-gel trypsinolysis of the proteins was carried out using Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (#V511A, Promega, USA) diluted by the supplied solution (50 mM CH3COOH) and then, sequentially, by 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH=8, to the concentration of 0.01-0.025 μg/ml. Twenty microliters of the trypsin solution were added to every sample and incubated at 4°C for 1 h for the gel swelling. The samples where then incubated at 37°C for 18 h for trypsinolysis. After finishing the reaction, 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to every sample and shaken on Vortex, and supernatants were placed in separate tubes. Then further extraction of peptide mixtures from the gels was done with 50% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid, the procedure was triplicated. The extracts were lyophilized and frozen. Peptide analysis by mass-spectrometry was carried out in IBMC, Moscow (Centre of Collective Usage “Human proteome”). Immediately prior to the analysis the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and injected into the liquid chromatography system UltiMate 3000 (HPLC, Thermo Scientific), coupled online to LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, with the m/z range of 50–2000, m/z 200–4000, 60000), at m/z 400, 1 Hz scanning frequency, and 7500 resolution. Maximum resolution &gt;100 000 at m/z 400 is &lt;3 ppm for outer calibration and &lt;1 ppm for internal calibration. Sensitivity of ion trap in MS/MS regimen is 100:1 S/N for 100 femtogram reserpine. The samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS peptide analysis. Mass-spectrometer was working in automatic regimen (60 min per two repeated measurements of one sample).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by comparison of the experimental masses with the masses of peptides annotated in databases using Mascot software Ver. 2.1 (www.matrixscience.com, &quot;Matrix Science&quot;, USA). For the parameter “Molecular weight” we used the experimental value of the mass with accuracy of ± 0.2 Da. The following set of parameters was used for protein identification in Mascot software Ver. 2.1 database: a search of the Swiss-Prot database was performed with a tolerance of 100 ppm, Homo sapiens taxon, trypsin enzyme, ion amounts of +1, +2, and +3. All these databases are real-time renewed online.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, One- dimensional gel electrophoresis, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Serum, Proteome, Bipolar disorder, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tomsk National
Research Medical Center
of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Mental Health Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Alexandr Seregin

### Lab Head
Dr Svetlana Ivanova
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Mental Health Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences


