### Accession
PXD023193

### Title
Genetic manipulation of Hmr leads to altered protein-protein interactions network

### Description
In this study we use Affinity Purification coupled with Mass Spectrometry (AP-MS) to test the effect of HMR overexpression (Hmr.over) or mutation (Hmr.dC and Hmr.2) on the interactome of HMR and in relation to the Speciation Core Complex (SCC). All affinity purifications were performed with a FLAG antibody  to target either the exogenously expressed transgenes (Hmr.over, Hmr.dC, Hmr.2) or an endogenously FLAG-tagged HMR (Hmr.endo). Hmr.dC mutants carry a truncation in the BESS-domain-containing C-terminus of HMR. Hmr.2 carries 2 point mutations towards its N-terminus.

### Sample Protocol
In stable Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells carrying either a wild-type (Hmr.over) or mutated (Hmr.dC and Hmr.2) alleles of Hmr, overexpression of these transgenes was induced with a pMT promoter. Nuclear extracts were subjected to immunoprecipitation as follows: α-FLAG immunoprecipitation was performed using 20 μL of packed agarose-conjugated mouse α-FLAG antibody (M2 Affinity gel, A2220 Sigma-Aldrich). FLAG-IPs in non-FLAG containing nuclear extracts were used as mock controls. After the washes, the beads containing the immunoprecipitated proteins were directly digested with trypsin and desalted with C18 stage tips before being injected into the mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were subjected to nanoRP-LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 nano chromatography system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with the Andromeda algorithm of the MaxQuant package (v1.6.7.0) against the Flybase reference database dmel-all-translation-r6.12.fasta including reverse sequences and contaminants. Default settings were used except: Variable modifications = Oxidation (M); Unique and razor, Min. peptides = 1; Match between windows = 0.8 min. Downstream analysis on the proteinGroups.txt file were performed in R (v4.0.1). Data were filtered for Reverse, Potential.contaminant and Only.identified.by.site. iBAQ values were log2 transformed and imputed using the R package DEP (v1.10.0, impute function with following settings: fun = "man",shift = 1.8, scale = 0.3). Statistical tests were performed by fitting a linear model and applying empirical Bayes moderation using the limma package (v3.44.3). Each group of bait IPs was compared with a pool of all control samples (CTRL_FLAG, i.e. FLAG mock IPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: chromatin; speciation; nucleolus; centromere; heterochromatin; chromocenter; drosophila; development; hybrids; hmr; bess; hmrdc; hmr2

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center of the Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Biomedical Center - Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany

### Submitter
Andrea Lukacs

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Biomedical Center - Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany


