### Accession
PXD032849

### Title
Phosphorylation of TCP22 by PPK1 in HEK293 cells

### Description
We used HEK293T cell expression system to study the phosphorylation site of Arabidopsis TCP22 by Arabidopsis PPK1

### Sample Protocol
Plasmids containing GFP-TCP22 and plasmids containing PPK1 or PPK1(D267N) were co-transfected into HEK293T cells.After cell lysis, GFP-trap beads were used to immunoprecipitate GFP-TCP22

### Data Protocol
The peptides were resuspended with solvent A water (7732-18-5, Optima) containing 0.1% formic acid (64-18-6, Sigma-Aldrich)) and analyzed by on-line nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with an ACQUITY UPLC M-class System (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). For one LC-MS/MS run, 1ug peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column (nanoEaseTM M/Z Symmetry C18,180 μm x 2 cm, waters) for 10 min with a flow of 3μL/min at 3%B [B: ACN (75-05-8,Optima)with 0.1% formic acid] and separated on the analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18, 75 μm×25 cm, waters) in a linear gradient of 3% B to 35% B over 78 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min. The electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used.  For DDA, the mass spectrometer was automatically switched under MS and MS/MS mode in 3.5 s cycles. MS1 mass resolution was set at 60000 with m/z 355-1550. The dynamic exclusion was set as n = 1, and the dynamic exclusion time was 30 seconds. AGC target is 4e5 and max injection time is 50 ms. MS2 resolution was set as 30000 under HCD mode. The AGC target is 5e4, max injection time is 100 ms. DDA raw data were analyzed using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer (2.2.0.388). For PRM, the resolution of MS1 full scan was set to 60,000. The AGC target was set to 4e5 and the maximum injection time was set to 50ms. The resolution of multiple PRM scans (MS2) was 30,000. The AGC target was set to 5e4 and the maximum injection time was set to 300ms. Precursors of each phosphorylated peptides were selected by the quadrupole mass analyzer (1.2 Da isolation window). Raw PRM data were analyzed using Skyline daily (version 3.5) to extract and calculate the transition peak areas. The parameters were as follows: the mass difference within ±20 ppm and dot-product (dotp) score > 0.7.

### Publication Abstract
Cryptochromes are blue light receptors that regulate plant growth and development. They also act as the core components of the central clock oscillator in animals. Although plant cryptochromes have been reported to regulate the circadian clock in blue light, how they do so is unclear. Here we show that Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) forms photobodies with the TCP22 transcription factor in response to blue light in plant cells. We provide evidence that PPK kinases influence the characteristics of these photobodies and that together these components, along with LWD transcriptional regulators, can positively regulate the expression of CCA1 encoding a central component of the circadian oscillator.

### Keywords
Tcp22，ppk1

### Affiliations
JiLin University

### Submitter
Li Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr zecheng Zuo
JiLin University


