### Accession
PXD015366

### Title
MS analysis of photocrosslink adducts for the mapping of interaction sites of selective engineered PSD-95 PDZ domain ligands

### Description
Designing highly specific modulators of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is especially challenging in the context of multiple paralogs and conserved interaction surfaces. In this case, direct generation of selective and competitive inhibitors is hindered by high similarity within the evolutionary-related protein interfaces and PPI domains. We report here a strategy that addresses this challenge by using a semi-rational approach that separates the modulator design into two functional parts. We first achieve specificity toward a region outside of the interface by employing a selection by phage display coupled with molecular and cellular validation. Highly selective competition is then generated by appending the more degenerate interaction peptide to bind against the target interface. We have applied this approach to PSD-95, an essential multi-PDZ domain-containing synaptic scaffold protein that belongs to a larger family of paralogs. We show here that with this strategy we could specifically target a single PDZ domain within the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 over highly similar PDZ domains in PSD-93, SAP-97 and SAP-102. Our work provides the first paralog-selective and domain specific inhibitor of PSD-95, and describes a method to efficiently target other conserved PPI modules. This archive contains the mapping by photocrosslinking and LC/MS/MS analysis of the interaction sites of engineered selective PSD-95 PDZ domain ligands, Xph20-ETWV, Xph20-Stg and Xph20-ETMA.

### Sample Protocol
The plasmids containing the amber codon were co-transformed in BL21(DE3) (ThermoFisher Scientific, C600003) with the pEVOL-pAzF (a gift from Peter Schultz, Scripps Research Institute, Addgene plasmid # 31186) coding for the orthogonal AzF RNA synthetase/ AzF tRNACUA pair derived from M. jannaschii. 5 mL of LB starter cultures with appropriate antibiotics were inoculated into 500 mL of M9-minimal medium (45 mM Na2HPO4, 25 mM KH2PO4, 8.5 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.03 mg/mL thiamine, 1 mg/mL NH4Cl, 2 mg/mL glucose, 22 nM FeCl3, pH 7.0) supplemented with kanamycin and chloramphenicol (30 µg/mL for kanamycin and chloramphenicol 10 µg/mL). At an OD600 of 0.6, AzF (H-4-Azido-Phe-OH, Bachem) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM and protein expression was induced for 16 h at 37 °C at 250 rpm with 1 mM IPTG and 0.02 % arabinose. After the expression, cultures were centrifuged 15 min at 6,000 g at 4 °C. Supernatants were discarded; bacteria pellets were resuspended in 35 mL of NaCl 0.9 % and transferred to fresh 50-mL Falcon tubes. Bacteria were centrifuged 30 min at 6,000 g at 4 °C and supernatants were discarded. The pellets were stored at -80 °C. The auto-induced pellets were then lysed and purified following a standard His-tagged purification protocol using Cobalt-Buster Nickel Affinity gel (Amocol).  For proteomic analysis of the region of interaction of the binding motif, photo-crosslinking reactions were performed in PBS buffer at room temperature. Each competitor (15 µM of Xph20-Stg*, –ETWV*, or -ETMA* fusion, 100-fold excess compared to KD) were mixed with PSD-95 tandem PDZ domains (20 µM) in a final volume of 20 µL, in 0.2 mL clear polypropylene PCR tubes (Bio-Rad). Samples UV irradiation and SDS-PAGE analysis were conducted as described above. For proteomic analysis of the selectivity, photo-crosslinking reactions were performed in PBS buffer at room temperature. Xph20-ETWV* at a final concentration of 10 µM was mixed with the four DLG tandems (PSD-95-12, PSD-93-12, SAP97-12, SP102-12, 20 µM each) in a final volume of 20 µL, in 0.2 mL clear polypropylene PCR tubes (Bio-Rad). Samples UV irradiation and SDS-PAGE analysis were conducted as described above. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the gel subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of 30 µL. Digests were finally acidified by addition of 1.2 µL of formic acid (5 %, v/v) and stored at -20 °C. Peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  For photocrosslinking experiments, 10 µL of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 25-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 108 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5 % ACN, and solvent B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired on an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using Xcalibur 2.2 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70,000 (at m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, ions with 2 to 7 charges were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 250 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 % and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were exported as mgf files and StavroX 3.6 (Michael Götze, University of Halle-Wittenberg, Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, General Biochemistry)79, was used for the detection of crosslinks between ligands incorporating p-azidophenylalanine and every possible amino acids in a database consisting of PDZ domains of PSD-95 embedded in ten yeast protein sequences. Stavrox  analysis  was  performed  with  the  following  settings:  Proteolytic cleavage: C-terminal at Lys and Arg with 3 and 2 missed cleavages respectively, minimum peptide length: 5, static modification:  alkylation  of  Cys  by  IAA,  variable  modification:  oxidation  of  M,  cross-linker: AzidoPhe (-N2),  precursor  and fragment mass accuracy:  10  ppm, signal-to-noise ratio: 2, precursor mass correction activated, prescore cut-off at 10% intensity, FDR cut-off: 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Designing highly specific modulators of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is especially challenging in the context of multiple paralogs and conserved interaction surfaces. In this case, direct generation of selective and competitive inhibitors is hindered by high similarity within the evolutionary-related protein interfaces. We report here a strategy that uses a semi-rational approach to separate the modulator design into two functional parts. We first achieve specificity toward a region outside of the interface by using phage display selection coupled with molecular and cellular validation. Highly selective competition is then generated by appending the more degenerate interaction peptide to contact the target interface. We apply this approach to specifically bind a single PDZ domain within the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 over highly similar PDZ domains in PSD-93, SAP-97 and SAP-102. Our work provides a paralog-selective and domain specific inhibitor of PSD-95, and describes a method to efficiently target other conserved PPI modules.

### Keywords
Engineered ligand/pdz domains/photocrosslinking/p-azidophenylalanine

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France


