### Accession
PXD014771

### Title
Customizing functionalized cofactor mimics to study the human pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-binding proteome

### Description
Here we apply functionalized cofactor derivatives to study vitamin B6-dependent enzymes in human cells. We are able to cover for a large fraction of the pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-binding proteome (PLP-ome) and validate our results exemplarily for two PLP-DEs. One of those, named pyridoxal 5'-phosphate binding protein (PLPBP) is characterized further including studies with chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry. We proceed with an in situ PLP-DE target screen applying B6-targeting compounds revealing interesting insights into selectivity. Finally, we broaden our analysis to multiple human cell lines revealing an altered PLP-DE target profile.

### Sample Protocol
Human cells were incubated with the cofactor mimic for seven passages previous to cell lysis, sodium borohydride reduction and click-chemistry. Following avidin-bead enrichment, proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges previous to LC-MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion and QExective Plus instruments.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant applying the Label-Free Quantification option. Downstream statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus tool.

### Publication Abstract
Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) is a versatile cofactor that catalyzes a plethora of chemical transformations within a cell. Although many human PLP-dependent enzymes (PLP-DEs) with crucial physiological and pathological roles are known, a global method enabling their cellular profiling is lacking. Here, we demonstrate the utility of a cofactor probe for the identification of human PLP-binding proteins in living cells. Striking selectivity of human pyridoxal kinase led to a customized labeling strategy covering a large fraction of known PLP-binding proteins across various cancer-derived cell lines. Labeling intensities of some PLP-DEs varied depending on the cell type while the overall protein expression levels of these proteins remained constant. In addition, we applied the methodology for in situ screening of PLP-antagonists and unraveled known binders as well as unknown off-targets. Taken together, our proteome-wide method to study PLP-DEs in human cancer-derived cells enables global understanding of the interactome of this important cofactor.

### Keywords
Pyridoxal-probe, Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, Vitamin b6 antagonist

### Affiliations
Chair of Organic Chemistry II  Department of Chemistry  Technical University Munich 85748 Garching
Techincal University Munich

### Submitter
Anja Fux

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Chair of Organic Chemistry II  Department of Chemistry  Technical University Munich 85748 Garching


