### Accession
PXD024701

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis reveals the function of ester cyclase in the rice false smut fungus Ustilaginoidea virens

### Description
Rice false smut is a world-wide fungal disease caused by Ustilaginoidea virens. In this study, we found an ester cyclase, UvEC1, was significantly up-regulated during U. virens infection. UvEC1 contained a ketone cyclase Snoal-like polyketide cyclase domain and the functions of this important class of proteins in plant fungal pathogens remain unclear. Deletion of UvEC1 caused defects in vegetative growth and conidiation. UvEC1 is also required for response to hyperosmotic and oxidative stresses, and maintenance of cell wall integrity. Importantly, the ∆UvEC1 mutants exhibited reduced virulence. We performed an TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between ∆UvEC1-1 mutant and the wild type HWD-2. Proteomic data have revealed that UvEC1 have various effects on metabolism process, localization, catalytic activity, binding and spliceosome. Taken together, our findings suggest that UvEC1 is critical for development and virulence of U. virens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Digestion. Proteins were extracted by lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). Proteins were re-dissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to obtain urea concentrations less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, USA), and then vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis. The full sequence of UvEC1 was downloaded from the U. virens database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JHTR00000000). Protein conserved domains were predicted with SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/). Other protein sequences from different organisms were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). After sequence alignments, the phylogenetic tree was generated by the Mega7.0 Beta program using the neighbor-joining algorithm. Dendrograms were generated, and the percentages of replicate trees in which the associated sequences were clustered together by bootstrap analysis (1000 replicates) are shown on corresponding branches. Bioinformatic analyses GO annotation of the proteome was achieved with reference to the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. Each GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. KEGG database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. Each pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. WoLF PSORT (version 0.2, http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) was used to predict protein subcellular localization. Each differentially expressed protein database accessions or sequences were searched against the STRING database (version 10.5, https://string-db.org/) for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence and all interactions that had a confidence score > 0.7 (high confidence) were retained. Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package networkD3 (version 0.4, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/networkD3/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ustilaginoidea virens; rice false smut; ester cyclase; virulence; gene function

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
17671788121

### Submitter
Pei zhangxin

### Lab Head
Dr LU Zheng
Huazhong Agricultural University


