### Accession
PXD035070

### Title
Medulloblastoma Patient-Derived Xenograft Proteomics

### Description
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of 20 orthotopic patient-derived xenograft models of medulloblastoma

### Sample Protocol
PDX cells were isolated from the cerebellum of NSG tumor-bearing mice. Cells were lysed in urea buffer and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with lysyl-endopeptidase and trypsin. Desalted peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags and pooled. Phosphopeptides were enriched by sequential TiO2 and IMAC and then fractionated into 9 fractions. The flow-through from the phosphoenrichment was used for global deep expression proteomics and separated offline by high pH reverse phase fractionation into 24 fractions. Data acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using TMT SPS-MS3 workflow.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and phosphosites were mapped against a human protein database using Mascot and Byonic, respectively, run through Proteome Discoverer. Protein copy numbers were normalized across TMT kits. A one-way ANOVA was run to identify significant differentially abundant proteins, phosphosites, and kinases.

### Publication Abstract
Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. MB is classified into four primary molecular subgroups: wingless (WNT), sonic hedgehog (SHH), Group 3 (G3), and Group 4 (G4), and further genomic and proteomic subtypes have been reported. Subgroup heterogeneity and few actionable mutations have hindered the development of targeted therapies, especially for G3 MB, which has a particularly poor prognosis. To identify novel therapeutic targets for MB, we performed mass spectrometry-based deep expression proteomics and phosphoproteomics in 20 orthotopic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of MB comprising SHH, G3, and G4 subgroups. We found that the proteomic profiles of MB PDX tumors are closely aligned with those of primary human MB tumors illustrating the utility of PDX models. SHH PDXs were enriched for NF&#x3ba;B and p38 MAPK signaling, while G3 PDXs were characterized by MYC activity. Additionally, we found a significant association between actinomycin D sensitivity and increased abundance of MYC and MYC target genes. Our results highlight several candidate pathways that may serve as targets for new MB therapies. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035070.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Medulloblastoma, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Patient-derived xenograft (pdx)

### Affiliations
Translational Genomics Research Institute
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Translational Genomics Research Institute


