### Accession
PXD027418

### Title
Genome-Wide Analyses of Proteome and Acetylome in Zymomonas mobilis Under N2-fixing Condition

### Description
We herein conducted high throughput analyses of proteome and protein acetylation in Z. mobilis under N2-fixing conditions, and established its first acetylome.

### Sample Protocol
Strain and Growth Conditions Wild type strain ZM4 of Z. mobilis was used in this study. For N-fixing condition, nitrogen gas was supplied to culture media, and for alternative condition ammonium chloride was supplied as nitrogen source. First, strain was grown on rich media plates (10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L glucose, 2 g/L KH2PO4, and 18 g/L agar) at 30°C anaerobically for 3 days. Then, a single colony was picked up from each plate and these were inoculated into 3 mL liquid rich medium for each sample, and cultures were grown for 16 hours. These cultures were then used to inoculate 25 mL rich media cultures (prepared separately for each sample) to an initial O.D600 of 0.05. The cultures were grown to reach O.D600 of 0.5, at which point cells were collected by centrifugation (at 4500 rpm for 15 min), and samples were stored at -80°C. Anaerobic glove bags were used for anaerobic growth conditions (under an atmosphere of 5% CO2, 5% H2 and <50 ppm oxygen level).   Protein Extraction and Digestion The samples were sonicated three times on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM trichostatin A, and 50 mM nicotinamide) using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Debris were removed by centrifugation (12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min). Supernatants were collected and precipitated with cold 20% TCA (trichloroacetic acid) for 2 hours on ice. Samples were centrifuged (12,000 g at 4 °C for 5 min), supernatants were discarded, and pellets were washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein samples were redissolved in 8 M urea, and protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime) as per kit’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein samples (after washed with cold acetone) were redissolved in buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). Then trypsin was added at 1:50 ratio and samples were incubated overnight. Again trypsin was added to samples at 1:100 ratio, and samples were subjected to incubation for 4 hours.  Finally, the samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 45 min at 37 °C, and alkylated with 15 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) for 45 min at RT in darkness. Enrichment of Acetylated Lysine Containing Peptides To enrich the acetylated peptides, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and samples were incubated (overnight at 4°C) with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM-104, PTM Bio) with gentle shaking. The beads were then washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with water. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), and were directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were eluted at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics), using a 3-steps linear gradient: from 6% to 22% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 43 min, from 22% to 30% B in 13 min, climbing to 80% B in 2 min, and then holding at 80% B for the last 2 min. The mass spectrometry was performed with timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) instrument with electrospray voltage of 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Data Analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software v.1.6.6.0 (https://www.maxquant.org/). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database (Zymomonas_mobilis_subsp._Mobilis_strainATCC_31821_264203_PR_ 20190830) and concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm in First search and 40 ppm in Main search, while the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, while acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and acetylation on Lys were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The intensity values for each acetylated site were averaged across the biological replicates for each growth condition. In a particular comparison ratio of average scores between the two conditions was considered as fold change of comparison at a specific acetylated site. Acetylated sites that were not quantified in at least two biological replicates of each condition in a relevant comparison were excluded from analyses. Data was subjected to log2 transformation. A two tailed student's T-test was performed for each comparison at a specific acetylated site. A p-value of <0.05 was considered as significant. All p-values were then converted to -log10 scores. Bioinformatics Annotation of Peptides All identified peptides were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) annotations and enrichment at UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotations under three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed, and a GO term with a p-value < 0.05 was considered as significant. Protein domains were annotated by InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). For annotation of metabolic pathways the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa and Goto 2000, Tanabe and Kanehisa 2012) was used. Protein interactions networks were generated using STRING database with an interaction confidence score of 0.7 (Szklarczyk et al. 2015). Subcellular localization of proteins was predicted using CELLO v.2.5 (Yu et al. 2006). Significant P values for each analysis were filtered and transformed into −log10 scores for using in graphics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zm4, Lc-ms/ms, Zymomonas mobilis

### Affiliations
Renmin South Rd. 4-13, Chengdu 610041, China
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xiangxu Gongye

### Lab Head
Dr Mingxiong He
Renmin South Rd. 4-13, Chengdu 610041, China


