### Accession
PXD043532

### Title
A hierarchical assembly pathway directs the unique subunit arrangement of TRiC/CCT

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study assembly intermediates of the chaperonin TRiC/CCT. Complex were cross-linked with the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking using DSS (d0/d12, Creative Molecules) was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Duplicate injections of three SEC fractions were performed. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for common ions, 0.3 Da for fragment containing the cross-link. Only lysine residues were considered as possible cross-linking sites. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. False discovery rates (FDRs) were controlled by searches against shuffled sequences of all reversed database entries. The FDR was set to <5% at the non-redundant peptide-pair level. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in spreadsheets in Microsoft Excel format that are included with the submission.

### Publication Abstract
How the essential eukaryotic chaperonin TRiC/CCT assembles from eight distinct subunits into a unique double-ring architecture remains undefined. We show TRiC assembly involves a hierarchical pathway that segregates subunits with distinct functional properties until holocomplex (HC) completion. A stable, likely early intermediate arises from small oligomers containing CCT2, CCT4, CCT5, and CCT7, contiguous subunits that constitute the negatively charged hemisphere of the TRiC chamber, which has weak affinity for unfolded actin. The remaining subunits CCT8, CCT1, CCT3, and CCT6, which comprise the positively charged chamber hemisphere that binds unfolded actin more strongly, join the ring individually. Unincorporated late-assembling subunits are highly labile in cells, which prevents their accumulation and premature substrate binding. Recapitulation of assembly in a recombinant system demonstrates that the subunits in each hemisphere readily form stable, noncanonical TRiC-like HCs with aberrant functional properties. Thus, regulation of TRiC assembly along a biochemical axis disfavors the formation of stable alternative chaperonin complexes.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; protein folding; chaperonin; tric/cct

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


