### Accession
PXD008305

### Title
Time-resolved inducible knock-down of Clp protease subunits in tobacco identifies putative protease substrates

### Description
The Clp protease complex in plants is the one with the highest complexity through all life kingdoms. It is composed of 14 nuclear- and plastid-encoded subunits which are allocated in different rings across the complex. The proteolytic ring (P-ring; ClpP3-ClpP6) and non-proteolytic ring (R-ring; ClpR1-ClpR4 and ClpP1) form the core complex playing an essential role in protein degradation and complex stabilization, respectively. The chaperones, ClpC1, ClpC2 and ClpD are involved in substrate folding and unfolding while accessory proteins, ClpT1 and ClpT2, are important to stabilize the core complex assembly. Adaptor proteins of the complex, ClpS and ClpF, recognize protease targets. Finding substrates of proteases is one of the remaining open questions in the protease field and specifically in the Clp protease. Several attempts were made analyzing the change of protein abundance in null clp mutants by proteomic analysis. However, null clp mutants are associated with massive accumulation of pleiotropic effects, as for example impaired growth and delayed in plant development, making impossible the detection of potential Clp substrates. To address this question, we design an ethanol (EtOH) inducible strategy to silence the expression of several subunits of the Clp protease in tobacco, and follow the change in protein abundance through the EtOH time-course. In this way, we distinguish between primary and secondary effects and determine time-resolved changes in proteins stability. Time-resolved proteomic analysechloroplast processes affected by the repression of Clp activity (e.g., photosynthesis and protein homeostasis).

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, total protein was extracted from 80 mg of ground tobacco leaves by adding 1.5 volumes of SDS buffer (4 % SDS). After vortexing, samples were centrifuged at 23°C for ten minutes at 14,000 rpm. This step was repeated until no pellet was observed anymore. The supernatant was collected and protein content was measured using the BCA protein assay kit (ThermoScientific). After protein quantification, 100 μg of total protein from each sample were subjected to a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Afterwards, protein samples were digested by adding 4 μg of trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio 1 : 25) in 100 μl ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic, 100 mM) buffer to the filter. The digestion reaction was incubated at 37°C for 14 h and the mixture was then centrifuged for 40 min at 14,000 g at 23°C followed by addition of 50 μl NaCl 0.5 M. The mixture was centrifuged for 20 min at 14,000 g at 23°C. Finally, 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution was added to the flow-through to adjust the pH of the samples to a value below 3. The purification of the peptides was done on SepPack columns (SPE C18 100 mg mL-1, Teknokroma). To this end, the columns were washed with 1 mL of methanol and subsequently with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA in water. The columns were equilibrated by 2 washes with 1 mL of TFA 0.1% in water. After addition of 400 µL of TFA 0.1%, the samples were loaded on the column. The columns were washed twice with 1 mL TFA 0.1% and then the peptides were eluted with 800 μL of acetonitrile 60%/TFA 0.1% and collected in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes. Finally, the samples were dried in a SpeedVac for 5 h and stored at -20°C until use for mass spectrometry. Peptides were resuspended in 40 μL 5% v/v acetonitrile, 2% v/v TFA. Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive Plus coupled with an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (ThermoScientific). Samples were separated in an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm long; ThermoScientific) at a flow rate of 0.4 μL min-1 in 3% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid, and eluted with a 3% to 30% v/v acetonitrile concentration gradient over 200 min, 30% to 40% in 20 min and 40% to 60% in 20 min, followed by a washing step with 90% v/v acetonitrile for 10 min at 0.3 μL/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 200 to 2000. MS/MS scans were performed for the ten peptides with the highest MS signal (AGC target 1x10-5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 3 m/z, relative collision energy 30%). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed with the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Proteins were identified from spectra using Mascot (Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were set as follows: PotQuant annotation, requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine), peptide mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ± 0.6 Da, allowed peptide charges of +2 and +3. A decoy database search was used to limit false discovery rates to 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications below rank one or with a Mascot ion score below 25 were excluded. Mascot results were imported into Progenesis QI, quantitative peak area information was extracted and the results were exported for data plotting and statistical analysis.  Due to the difficulties associated with proteomics in a non-fully sequenced allotetraploid species, a new peptide mapping method called POTbase-MSquant (version 0.8) was established and used as a reference in this work. An in-house database was created that contains the predicted protein sequences of the two parental species of Nicotiana tabacum (N. sylvestris and N. tomentosiformis) as derived from transcriptome sequencing as well as the organellar genome-encoded proteins of N. tabacum.  One-way ANOVA (p < 0.05) and pairwise comparison (Tukey HSD test p < 0.05) for the wild type and the inducible RNAi lines at each time point were used.

### Publication Abstract
The Clp protease in the chloroplasts of plant cells is a large complex composed of at least 13 nucleus-encoded subunits and one plastid-encoded subunit, which are arranged in several ring-like structures. The proteolytic P-ring and the structurally similar R-ring form the core complex that contains the proteolytic chamber. Chaperones of the HSP100 family help with substrate unfolding, and additional accessory proteins are believed to assist with Clp complex assembly and/or to promote complex stability. Although the structure and function of the Clp protease have been studied in great detail in both bacteria and chloroplasts, the identification of bona fide protease substrates has been very challenging. Knockout mutants of genes for protease subunits are of limited value, due to their often pleiotropic phenotypes and the difficulties with distinguishing primary effects (i.e. overaccumulation of proteins that represent genuine protease substrates) from secondary effects (proteins overaccumulating for other reasons). Here, we have developed a new strategy for the identification of candidate substrates of plant proteases. By combining ethanol-inducible knockdown of protease subunits with time-resolved analysis of changes in the proteome, proteins that respond immediately to reduced protease activity can be identified. In this way, secondary effects are minimized and putative protease substrates can be identified. We have applied this strategy to the Clp protease complex of tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) and identified a set of chloroplast proteins that are likely degraded by Clp. These include several metabolic enzymes but also a small number of proteins involved in photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Clp protease; chloroplast; protein degradation; protease substrate; nicotiana tabacum; inducible rnai; lc-msms; shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
MPIMP
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wisenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany

### Submitter
Silvia Martinez Jaime

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph Bock
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wisenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany


