### Accession
PXD012887

### Title
Venom composition does not vary greatly between different nematocyst types isolated from the primary tentacles of Olindias sambaquiensis (Cnidaria: Hydrozoa)

### Description
A quantitative proteomic study to determine the variety and relative abundance of toxins present in two nematocyst types isolated from primary tentacles of adult medusa stage Olidias sambaquiensis. Quantitative proteomics was performed with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) to compare similarities and also differences between the two sample types using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Intact nematocytes were isolated from primary tentacles after homogenisation and centrifugation. Protein samples were reducted by TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to enzymatic digestion with trypsin. TMT127 labelled macroblastic eurytele and TMT128 labelled macroblastic mastigophore were combined before sample separation using isoelectric focussing on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator. Low resolution (13cm; 12 fraction) IPG strip of pH 3-10 non-linear was run for 20kV hrs. Peptide fractions were further separated using a U3000 UHPLC in to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (both ThermoFisherScientific). The instrument was programmed to acquire using a “Synchronous Precursor Selection with MultinotichMS3” method (SPS). Synchronous Precursor Selection is a process of selecting multiple MS2 precursors using a single fill and single waveform in a CID or HCD cell, while MultinotichMS3 is to reduce co-isolated interference from MS2 in the ion-trap cell

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry rawfiles were processed for database spectral matching using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All fractions were processed together as one TMT experiment and were searched as a MudPIT using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science Ltd v2.6.0) and the embedded Sequest algorithm (Eng et al., 1994).  The search algorithm specified the use of trypsin as the digestion enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with carbamidomethylated-cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidised-methionine, TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-Term) as a variable modification. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were set. Spectra were searched against well annotated putative animal toxins downloaded from UniProtKB/SwissProt-ToxProt (Jungo et al., 2012) and a customized cnidarian specific dataset containing sequences from several recent venomics studies (Macrander et al., 2015; Gacesa et al., 2016; Ponce et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
In this quantitative proteomics study we determined the variety and relative abundance of toxins present in enriched preparations of two nematocyst types isolated from the primary tentacles of the adult medusa stage of the hydrozoan <i>Olindias sambaquiensis</i>. The two nematocyst types were microbasic mastigophores and microbasic euryteles, and these were recovered from the macerated tentacle tissues by using a differential centrifugation approach. Soluble protein extracts from these nematocysts were tagged with tandem mass tag isobaric labels and putative toxins identified using tandem mass spectrometry coupled with a stringent bioinformatics annotation pipeline. Astonishingly, the venom composition of the two capsule types was nearly identical, and there was also little difference in the comparative abundance of toxins between the two nematocyst preparations. This homogeneity suggested that the same toxin complement was present regardless of the penetrative ability of the nematocyst type. Predicted toxin protein families that constituted the venom closely matched those of the toxic proteome of <i>O. sambaquiensis</i> published four years previously, suggesting that venom composition in this species changes little over time. Retaining an array of different nematocyst types to deliver a single venom, rather than sustaining the high metabolic cost necessary to maintain a dynamically evolving venom, may be more advantageous, given the vastly different interspecific interactions that adult medusa encounter in coastal zones.

### Keywords
Nematocyst, Tmt quantitation, Venom, Cnidaria, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King's College London
Marine Biotechnology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paul Long
Marine Biotechnology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London


