### Accession
PXD016866

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis revealed complex responses to Bordetella bronchiseptica infections in spleen in rabbits

### Description
Thirty five-week-old healthy Newzealand meet rabbits were used for bacteria infection. Bb infections were performed as the following: Finally, the dosage was 4.6×109CFU, and the ear vein was used in rabbits in the challenge group. Blood samples were collected for anticoagulant blood cell assay and serum isolation and preservation at 7 days after challenge. Six rabbits in the attack group died 10 days after the attack. All rabbits were euthanatized at the end of the experiment. Nine of the rabbits in each group were taken for spleen extraction.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, a proper amount of sample was ground in liquid nitrogen into a cellular powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. The samples were treated with four volumes of lysis buffer (10 mM dithiothreotol, 1% protease inhibitor, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor) and then sonicated three times. The supernatant was centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C and 5,500 g with an equal volume of Tris equilibrium phenol. The supernatant was taken and precipitated overnight with a fivefold volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol. The protein precipitation was washed sequentially with methanol and acetone. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (P0012, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the final concentration of dithiothreotol in the protein solution was 5 mM and was reduced at 56°C for 30 min. The 11-m final concentration of iodoacetamide was incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein), and enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out overnight at 37°C. The trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:100, and the enzymatic hydrolysis continued for 4 h. The trypsinase-hydrolyzed peptide segments were desalted using a Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then freeze-dried in a vacuum. The peptide segment was dissolved in 0.5 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled according to the instructions of the TMT kit. The simple operation was as follows: the labeled reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile after thawing, incubated at room temperature for 2 h after mixing with the peptide segment, desalinated after mixing with the labeled peptide segment, and freeze-dried in a vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The MS/MS spectra were used as query against a human uniprot database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavage events. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation and oxidation of Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. 4.6. Annotation methods and functional enrichment The GO annotation on the proteomics level was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, the system converted the protein ID to UniProt ID, matched the GO ID with the UniProt ID, and then extracted the corresponding information from the UniProt-GOA database based on the GO ID. If there was no protein information queried in the UniProt-GOA database, then algorithm software based on the protein sequence, InterProScan, was used to predict the GO function of the protein.  The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways. First, the KEGG online service tool KAAS was used to annotate the submitted proteins, and then KEGG mapper was used to place the annotated proteins into the corresponding pathways in the database. WoLF PSORT, a software for predicting subcellular localization, was used to annotate the submitted proteins for subcellular localization. Fisher’s exact test was used to detect differentially modified proteins against the background of identified proteins. A P-value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. The softwares motif-x and MoMo were used to analyze the models of sequences that contained the amino acids in specific positions of modified 13-mers (six amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all the protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Bordetella bronchiseptica (B. bronchiseptica) causes a respiratory disease in rabbits. To determine the proteins of B. bronchiseptica in rabbits related to the disease, differentially accumulated proteins in B. bronchiseptica-infected cells are identified by comparative proteomic analysis. Comparative proteomic analysis detects 5814 proteins and quantifies 4854 of these. Fifty eight upregulated and 38 downregulated proteins are identified in spleen tissue after B. bronchiseptica infection of rabbits (both p &lt; 0.05). The significantly enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways are ribosome, biosynthesis of amino acids, biosynthesis of amino acids, protein export, and carbon metabolism etc. (all p &lt; 0.01). Significantly enriched KEGG pathways include 'ocu03010 ribosome' (a); 'ocu00260 glycine, serine threonine metabolism'. Analyses of control and infected spleen cells detect responses to B. bronchiseptica infection. Many differentially affected proteins are evident, and reflect different biological changes and diverse subcellular localizations between control and infected spleen cells. Infection markedly alters the expressions of proteins linked to the serine protease system, with the 'phagosome,' 'biosynthesis of amino acids,' 'glycine, serine threonine metabolism,' 'intestinal immune network for IgA production', and 'amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism' associated with B. bronchiseptica infection. The result will inform studies of responses to B. bronchiseptica infections in rabbits.

### Keywords
Spleen, Complex responses, Rabbits, Bordetella bronchiseptica, Infections

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Chenwen Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao Chenwen
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


