### Accession
PXD013408

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of induced and inhibited early Hh signaling in human medulloblastoma cells

### Description
Aberrant sonic hedeghog signaling is implicated in the development of various cancer entities such as medulloblastoma. The canonical signaling cascade has been studied for years. Activation of GLI transcription factors was revealed as the driving force upon pathway activation. Phosphorylation by Proteinkinase A, Casein Kinase 1 and Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 β has been found to influence the degradation of the GLI transcription factors. However, the deeper role of phosphorylation in the signal transduction remains unclear. We, therefore, applied comprehensive HPLC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics to reveal phosphorylation dynamics underlying the chemical activation and inhibition of sonic hedgehog signaling in human medulloblastoma cells. Human medulloblastoma cells were treated with SAG (Hh pathway induction) and Vismodegib (Hh pathway inhibition) for 5 and 15 minutes. Our phosphoproteomic profiling revealed a central role of phosphorylation in the regulation of ciliary assembly, trafficking and signal transduction after 5 minutes treatment. ERK/MAPK signaling besides protein kinase A signaling and mTOR signaling were differentially regulated. Activation of Polo-like kinase 1 and inhibtion of Caseinkinase 2A1 was characteristic for Vismodegib treatment while SAG treatment induced Aurora kinase A activity. Distinctive phosphorylation of central players of sonic Hh signaling such as Smoothened, SUFU, Gli2 and Gli3 was obtained after 15 minutes treatment.

### Sample Protocol
HPLC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics was applied to deeper analyse the phosphoproteome of DAOY cells after 5.0 and 15 minutes treatment. Smoothened Agonist (SAG) [48] was used to activate the Hedgehog pathway in vitro, whereas Vismodegib (Vismo) – an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of advanced basal cell carcinoma [49] - was used to inhibit the hedgehog pathway. The Hedgehog pathway was activated and inhibited in three biological replicates for 5.0 and 15 min, respectively. DMSO treatment was applied as a control treatment in three biological replicates. EGF treatment served as a single positive control treatment to induce extensive phosphorylation. TMT 10 plex labelling was used to quantitatively compare the different treatments of each time point relative to control treatment. A pool of 5 min and 15 min EGF treatment was included as positive control in each of the TMT 10 plex experiments to enable comparison between both time points. After cell lysis, reduction and alkylation, tryptic digestion, and labelling for relative quantification, phosphopeptides were enriched using metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC) based on titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads. After enrichment, phosphopeptides were fractionated using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) in the first dimension prior to reversed-phase HPLC-MS/MS analysis for detection and relative quantification of phosphopeptides. In parallel, a deep proteome profiling was performed using high pH fractionation to normalize the phosphoproteome data.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted to the open standard format mzML and centroided using MSConvert (3.0.11781). Further searched with an inhouse built pipeline in KNIME Analytics platform (Version 3.7.0 )[44] using OpenMS 2.4.0 [45, 46] using MSGF+. Spectra were searched against a Swissprot crap decoy human data base (# of entries: 20410, downloaded 17th of October 2018). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), TMT N-terminal and lysine labeling (+229.163 Da) were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of Met (+15.995 Da) was set as variable modification. For the HILIC fractions, phosphorylation of the Ser, Thr or Tyr (+79.966 Da) was included in the variable modifications. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.  Luciphor Adapter was used to run LuciPHOr2 (PMID: 25429062) for phosphosites localization. Here phosphopeptides with a False Localization Rate (FLR) smaller 0.05 were considered for further analysis. Phosphorylation data was normalized using the median of the Proteomics data for each respective channel. Ratios were then calculated using the mean of normalized intensities of respective treatment divided by the mean of normalized intensities of respective control.  For the global phosphoproteome, only peptides presented in all used TMT label channels (126, 127N, 128N, 128C, 128N, 129C, 130N, 130C) were considered.  LIMMA statistical testing (R package LIMMA) was applied on proteome normalized log2 intensity values and used to generate volcano plots using R version 3.5.1. Scripts are attached in the online supplementary.  Kinase Set Enrichment was performed using KSEA App [47] using the R package “KSEAapp” on CRAN using R version 3.5.1. Pathway enrichment was performed using Ingenuity pathway Analysis IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.quiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Medulloblastoma, Hedgehog signaling, Daoy cells

### Affiliations
Biosciences, Bioanalytical Research Labs, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
PhD Student

### Submitter
Tamara Scheidt

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
Biosciences, Bioanalytical Research Labs, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria


