### Accession
PXD023884

### Title
Method development and characterization of the low molecular weight peptidome of human wound fluids

### Description
Peptidomic analysis and methodological development of characterization of low molecular weight peptidome of human wound fluids and plasma.Data on wound fluid peptides is also found in PXD023244

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plasma and/or sterile acute wound fluids were defrosted and mixed with 3 parts freshly made 8 M urea (in 10 mM tris, pH 7.4, yielding a final urea concentration of 6 M) alone or supplemented with RapiGest SF (0.05% final concentration; Waters, USA) or trifluoroacetic acid (0.1% final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (RT) followed by size exclusion. For this purpose, centrifugal filters with 30 kDa cut-off (Microcon 30, regenerated cellulose, Millipore, Ireland) were first rinsed with 100 μL buffer and centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min at RT, then loaded with the incubated sample mixtures, followed by 30 min centrifugation (14000 g at RT) and a final filter washing step with 100 μL of extraction buffer (5 min, 14000 g). Due to large variations in protein content of the dressing extracts (between 2.8-16.5 mg/mL), protein concentrations were standardized. For this purpose, 10 mM Tris was added to 280 μg of each fluid to obtain a sample volume of 100 μl in total, which was then incubated with 300 μl 8 M urea supplemented with RapiGest SF for 30 min, followed by the size exclusion steps as described above. For all samples, the two filtrates containing the peptides were pooled and analysed by SDS-gel electrophoresis directly or stored at -20 °C before analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with PEAKS software. UniProt Human was used with nonspecific cleavage; 5 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment tolerance were used for the experiments conducted with the Fusion instrument and 0.02 Da for the fragments when the HFX was used. Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were treated as dynamic modification. Search result were filtered by using 1% FDR for the wound fluids, or a 23 score for the plasma samples, and at least 2 unique peptides for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
The normal wound healing process is characterised by proteolytic events, whereas infection results in dysfunctional activations by endogenous and bacterial proteases. Peptides, downstream reporters of these proteolytic actions, could therefore serve as a promising tool for diagnosis of wounds. Using mass-spectrometry analyses, we here for the first time characterise the peptidome of human wound fluids. Sterile post-surgical wound fluids were found to contain a high degree of peptides in comparison to human plasma. Analyses of the peptidome from uninfected healing wounds and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> -infected wounds identify unique peptide patterns of various proteins, including coagulation and complement factors, proteases, and antiproteinases. Together, the work defines a workflow for analysis of peptides derived from wound fluids and demonstrates a proof-of-concept that such fluids can be used for analysis of qualitative differences of peptide patterns from larger patient cohorts, providing potential biomarkers for wound healing and infection.

### Keywords
Peptidomics orbitrap

### Affiliations
Division of Mass Spectrometry, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund.
Lund University

### Submitter
sven kjellstrom

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Kjellström
Division of Mass Spectrometry, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund.


