### Accession
PXD031778

### Title
Identification of the expression of a novel protein in MCF7 cells

### Description
The novel protein GT3-INCP (GATA3-interacting cryptic protein) that were identified by mass spectrometry in the MCF7 cells stably expressing FLAG-tagged CDS, in the presence of the native 5’UTR.

### Sample Protocol
The immuno-precipitated samples were resolved on NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Gel (Life Technologies) and the molecular weight region from 8 to 18kD was excised and processed for in-gel digestion using trypsin enzyme. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer. The peptides were loaded on a two-column setup using a pre-column trap of 2cm X 100µm size (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and a 20cm x 75µm analytical column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a 110min gradient of 6-30% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200nl/min. The eluted peptides were directly electro-sprayed into mass spectrometer operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode along with Parallel Reaction monitoring (PRM) mode. For DDA mode, the full MS scan was acquired in Orbitrap in the range of 300-1400m/z at 120,000 resolution followed by MS2 in Ion Trap (HCD 30% collision energy) with 5sec dynamic exclusion time. For PRM mode, the target precursor ions for selected peptides corresponding to the new ORF were isolated in quadrupole with isolation width 2m/z for the whole duration. The MS2 was carried out in IonTrap (Rapid scan, AGC 1X105, max injection time 50ms) using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The RAW file from mass spectrometer was processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) with percolator against the novel protein sequence and the human protein NCBI refseq (updated 2020_0324). The precursor ion tolerance and product ion tolerance were set to 20ppm and 0.5Da respectively. Dynamic modification of oxidation on methionine, protein N-terminal Acetylation and destreak on cysteine was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR) and manually checked for correct assignment.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence suggests that cryptic translation within long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) may produce novel proteins with important developmental/physiological functions. However, the role of this cryptic translation in complex diseases (e.g., cancer) remains elusive. Here, we applied an integrative strategy combining ribosome profiling and CRISPR/Cas9 screening with large-scale analysis of molecular/clinical data for breast cancer (BC) and identified estrogen receptor &#x3b1;-positive (ER+) BC dependency on the cryptic ORFs encoded by lncRNA genes that were upregulated in luminal tumors. We confirmed the in vivo tumor-promoting function of an unannotated protein, GATA3-interacting cryptic protein (GT3-INCP) encoded by LINC00992, the expression of which was associated with poor prognosis in luminal tumors. GTE-INCP was upregulated by estrogen/ER and regulated estrogen-dependent cell growth. Mechanistically, GT3-INCP interacted with GATA3, a master transcription factor key to mammary gland development/BC cell proliferation, and coregulated a gene expression program that involved many BC susceptibility/risk genes and impacted estrogen response/cell proliferation. GT3-INCP/GATA3 bound to common cis regulatory elements and upregulated the expression of the tumor-promoting and estrogen-regulated BC susceptibility/risk genes MYB and PDZK1. Our study indicates that cryptic lncRNA-encoded proteins can be an important integrated component of the master transcriptional regulatory network driving aberrant transcription in cancer, and suggests that the "hidden" lncRNA-encoded proteome might be a new space for therapeutic target discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Gt3-incp, Brca, Orfs, Gata3, Er

### Affiliations
MDACC
Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Yanjun Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Yiwen Chen
Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


