### Accession
PXD012577

### Title
Time-dependent analysis of Paenarthrobacter nicotinovorans pAO1 nicotine-related proteome

### Description
We used nanoLC–MS/MS in a shotgun proteomics approach in order to identify the proteins expressed by P. nicotinovorans in the presence of nicotine at 3 different time intervals: 7, 10 and 24 hours post inoculation. A total of 915 proteins grouped 584 non-redundant clusters in were identified with an FDR of 0.3% when P. nicotinovorans was grown in on citrate medium alone and on citrate supplemented 0.05% nicotine. The differences in protein expression pattens at different time intervals allows us have a more dynamic picture on how the nicotine catabolic pathway is activated and to related it to the appearance of the known metabolic intermediates.

### Sample Protocol
Paenarthrobacter nicotinovorans pAO1 (DSM 420 Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen, Braunschweig, Germany) was grown on in 27 mM Na2HPO4-22 mM KH2PO4 buffer, pH 7.0, 0.2% (NH4)2SO4, supplemented with 5% mineral solution, 0.1 mg ml-1 biotin and 35 ug ml-1 kanamycin. As the carbon source 0.2% sodium citrate or 0.2% sodium citrate and 0.05% nicotine was used. Bacteria were collected at 7, 10 and 24 hours post inoculation by centrifugation at 4,500 × g, 20 min; the bacterial pellets were washed twice in 10 mM TRIS/HCl pH 7.4 for the removal of the nicotine-blue dye.  0.5 g of cells were resuspended in 5 ml 40 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 0.03% PMSF (w/v), 0.005% chloramphenicol (w/v), 18% sucrose (w/v) in the presence of 50 mg ml-1 lysozyme and incubated for 60 min at 37 °C. After centrifugation, cell pellets were washed with 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6 and resuspended in 5 ml lysis buffer containing 40 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 0.3% SDS (w/v), 60 mM DTT, 10 microg ml-1 DNase I and 10 microg ml-1 RNase A. Samples were incubated for 30 min at 95 °C with intervals of vigorous vortexing every 5 min and then centrifuged on an Eppendorf 5417R centrifuge at 14,000 g and 4°C for 30 minutes. The cell lysates were quickly placed on ice and stored at -200C until further processing.  Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA method, using an assay kit (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. One hundred microg of total proteins from the cell free lysates were separated on a home-made 9-16% SDS-PAGE maxi (20 x 20 cm) gradient gels and then stained by Commasie Brilliant Blue R250. The gel lanes for different growth conditions were divided into gel pieces and then subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin using a standard protocol. Briefly, each gel piece was washed under moderate shaking at room temperature (RT) in HPLC grade water for 60 min and then in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/HPLC grade water containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 60 min.    After a dehydration step with 100% ACN for 60 min, the gel pieces were dried under Speed Vac and the Cys residues were further reduced and alkylated using with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM ABC for 60 min. at 60°C and with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC for 60 min. in the dark. Gel pieces were dehydrated and dried again. The digestion was performed by rehydrating the gel pieces in 200 μl of a trypsin solution (10 ng/μl) and incubating overnight at 37°C. After incubation, peptide extraction was carried out with 5% formic acid (FA)/50 mM ABC/50% ACN and with 5% FA/100% ACN (60 min. each). Extracted peptides were dried and then cleaned by reversed phase chromatography using a C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). The resulting peptides mixture was analysed by reversed phase nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-TOF Xevo G2 MS (Waters), according to published procedures. The peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm × 10 mm NanoAquity BEH130 C18 1.7 μm UPLC column (Waters) and eluted over a 180-min. gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min as follows: 1–45% organic solvent B (ACN containing 0.1% FA) over 1–120 min., 45–85% B (120–140 min.), constant 85% B (140–160 min.), 85%-2% B (160–165 min.) and then return to the initial conditions of 1% B (165–180 min.). The aqueous solvent A was 0.1% FA in HPLC water. The column was coupled to a Picotip Emitter Silicatip nano-electrospray needle (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). MS data acquisition involved survey 0.5 sec. MS scans (m/z range 350–2000) and automatic data dependent analysis (DDA) of the top six ions with the highest intensity, with the charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+. The MS/MS (recorded over m/z of 50–2000) was triggered when the MS signal intensity exceeded 500 counts/sec. In survey MS scans, the six most intense peaks were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) and fragmented until the total MS/MS ion counts reached 6000 or for up to 1.1 sec. each. The entire procedure used was previously described. Ion intensity was adjusted using Leukine enkephalin (2 ng ul-1) in direct infusion ESI-MS at 0.5 L/min. Calibration was performed for both precursor and product ions using 1 pmole GluFib (Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B) standard peptide with the sequence EGVNDNEEGFFSAR and the theoretical monoisotopic (2+) peak with m/z of 785.84.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using ProteinLynx Global Server v.2.4 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and Mascot v.2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Peak list files were generated using the fallowing parameters: background subtraction of polynomial order five adaptive with a threshold of 30%, two smoothings with a window of three channels in Savitzky-Golay mode and centroid calculation of top 80% of peaks based on a minimum peak width of four channels at half height. Database searches were performed using a database containing the complete reference proteome of Paenarthrobacter aurescens strain TC1 (UP000000637), the proteome of Paenarthrobacter nicotinovorans strain Hce-1 (UP000078426) and the complete proteome of pAO1 megaplasmid (GenBank: AJ507836.1). Additionally, Mascot was set up to search for contaminants in the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine). Search parameters were strict trypsin specificity allowing for up to three missed cleavages sites, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 1.3 Da. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of Cys was specified as a fixed modification.  False positive levels were estimated via decoy database method with a reverse database appended at the end of the forward database. Scaffold (v.4.8.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.1%. Protein identifications were accepted if the protein contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. All hits from the contaminants database were manually filtered out. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from Gene Ontology Consortium. Label-free relative quantification was performed using Scaffold (v.4.8.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) using weighted spectra and outputted as fold change. Significance was assessed using the Fisher’s Exact test and the p-values were further adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg correction to account for multiple comparisons. An adjusted p-value of 0.05 was used to select proteins that were differentially expressed between compared groups.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Paenarthrobacter nicotinovorans</i> is a soil Gram-positive nicotine-degrading microorganism (NDM) that harbors a 165 kb pAO1 catabolic megaplasmid. The nicotine catabolic genes on pAO1 have been sequenced, but not all the details on the regulation and interplay of this pathway with the general metabolism of the cell are available. To address this issue at the protein level, a time-based shotgun proteomics study was performed. <i>P. nicotinovorans</i> was grown in the presence or absence of nicotine, and the cells were harvested at three different time intervals: 7, 10, and 24 h after inoculation. The cells were lysed, separated on SDS-PAGE, and digested by in-gel digestion using trypsin, and the resulting peptide mixture was analyzed using nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We found an extensive number of proteins that are both plasmidal- and chromosomal-encoded and that work together in the energetic metabolism via the Krebs cycle and nicotine pathway. These data provide insight into the adaptation of the bacterial cells to the nicotine metabolic intermediates and could serve as a basis for future attempts to genetically engineer the pAO1-encoded catabolic pathway for increased bioremediation efficiency or for the production of valuable chemicals. The mass-spectrometry-based proteomics data have been deposited to the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD012577.

### Keywords
Citrate medium, Metabolism, Nicotine, Paenarthrobacter nicotinovorans

### Affiliations
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Iasi
Biochemistry & Proteomics Group Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University 8 Clarkson Avenue, Potsdam, NY, 13699-5810, USA Office: (315) 268-7763; Lab: (315) 268-2348; Fax: (315) 268-6610

### Submitter
Marius Mihasan

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Biochemistry & Proteomics Group Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University 8 Clarkson Avenue, Potsdam, NY, 13699-5810, USA Office: (315) 268-7763; Lab: (315) 268-2348; Fax: (315) 268-6610


