### Accession
PXD039329

### Title
Mouse macrophage derived mirasome iTRAQ

### Description
To explore the mechanisms of migrasome-induced BBB damage, Aβ40 induced migrasome and PBS induced migrasome were subjected to isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (ITRAQ)

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (0.1%SDS, 1%Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 50mM Tris·HCl, pH7.4 and protease inhibitor cocktail) and one tablet of phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche), subsequently homogenized by sonication (Scientz, 2s on; 3s off) on ice. The homogenate was cleared using centrifugation at 12000rpm for 15min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into clean tubes prior to the determination of protein concentrations by BCA assays. Aliquots of lysates were mixed with 200ul of 8M urea in Nanosep Centrifugal Devices (PALL). The device was centrifuged at 14000g at 20°C for 20min. All following centrifugation steps were performed applying the same conditions allowing maximal concentration. The concentrate was diluted with 200ul of 8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH8.5, and the device was centrifuged. Proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 2h at 56°C. Subsequently, the samples were incubated in 5mM iodoacetamide for 30min in the dark to block reduced cysteine residues followed by centrifugation. The resulting concentrate was diluted with 200ul 8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH = 8.0, and concentrated again. This step was repeated 2 times, and the concentrate was subjected to proteolytic digestion overnight at 37°C. The digests were collected by centrifugation. The lyophilized peptide fractions were re-suspended in ddH2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and 2ul aliquots of which was loaded into a nanoViper C18 (3μm, 100A) trap column. The online chromatography was performed on the Easy-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher). The trapping and desalting procedure were carried out with a volume of 20μL 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Then, an elution gradient of 8-38% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60min was used on an analytical column (50μm × 15cm C18-3μm 100A). DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques were used to acquire tandem MS data on a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) fitted with a Nano Flex ion source. Data was acquired at an ion spray voltage of 1.9kV, and an interface heater temperature of 275°C. The MS was operated with FULL-MS scans. For DDA, survey scans were acquired in 250ms and up to 20 production scans (50ms) were collected. Only spectra with a charge state of 2-4 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation using Proteome discoverer (v2.5.0400). The local false discovery rate was 1.0% after searching against Mus musculus protein database with a maximum of two missed cleavages and one missed termini cleavage. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10ppm and 0.05Da, respectively. Differential expression analysis of two groups was performed with the software of R using the "limma" package (3.44.3). The statistically significant difference was set as P < 0.05 and FC > 1.5 or FC < 0.67 by "limma", and these genes were assigned as the differential expression genes which were visualized with the volcano plot by the “ggplot2” package. GO analysis was conducted to up-regulated proteins of two group, or the top 100 proteins according to the expression levels of each group with the software of R using the "clusterProfiler" package. GO-BP correlation of PBS-M and Aβ40-M was performed with the software of R using the "Venn diagram" package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mirasome, Itraq, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Mental and Neurological Disease Research Center, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University
The third affiliated hospital of Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Mengyan Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Mengyan Hu
Department of Neurology, Mental and Neurological Disease Research Center, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University


