### Accession
PXD005245

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of glioblastoma subpopulations

### Description
Three glioblastoma subpopulations were analyzed by quantitative proteomics, using dimethyl labeling approach. Deconvolution of mixture spectra using SuperQuant software was employed to increase the depth of quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Glioma spheroids were obtained from fresh tumor tissue from World Health Organization grade IV glioblastoma patients who underwent surgery essentially as previously described. Cells were cultured as free-floating spheroids in serum-free neural stem cell medium  at 36°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. A migration assay was performed at single spheroids. At highest migration speed the migrating cells were isolated by removing the “central” non-migrating cells with a micro-pipette. Cells (about 200000 for each cell type) were lysed and proteins were on-filter digested. Dimethyl labeling was performed according to a published protocol. Peptides were separated using Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC system, coupled to Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were focused on the precolumn (PepMap C18 10cm x 150µm i.d., 5µm) and eluted from analytical column (PepMap C18 50cm x 75µm i.d., 3µm) with 245 min long gradient. Mass spectrometer was configured to run in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle duration. MS1 spectra were recorded in Orbitrap mass analyzer from 400 to 1200 Th, with 120000 resolution at 200 Th, AGC target value – 5e5, maximum accumulation time – 60 ms. Ions were isolated using quadrupole mass filter with 2 Th wide isolation window and fragmented using CID in ion trap, spectra were acquired in Orbitrap, with 15000 resolution at 200 Th, AGC target – 1e4, maximum accumulation time – 40 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.0.0.644. Mascot 2.3 was used as the database search engine. SwissProt database (2014.04) restricted to Homo sapiens (20340 protein sequences) combined with common contaminants database (231 protein sequences) was used. Search parameters were: parent ion mass tolerance – 5 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance – 0.02 Th; fixed modifications – carboxamidomethylated cysteine, variable modifications – oxidized methionine and labeled N-terminal and lysine. Reversed decoy database was searched separately. In case of SuperQuant analysis all MS2 spectra were processed using home-built deconvolution node to produce fragmentation spectra consisting only of 1+ fragments. Next, deconvoluted spectra were processed with ComplementaryFinder node before database search. Database search results were evaluated using Percolator 2.05. All PSMs with q-value < 0.01 were grouped together using sequence and theoretical mass and the highest Percolator SVM score was used as the score for the group. Qvality 2.05 was used for the estimation of q-value on the PSM group level, PSM groups were filtered by q-value < 0.01. Each PSM group gives rise to one peptide. Proteins related to the filtered peptides were grouped using maximum parsimony principle. Quantification of peptides and proteins was performed using standard settings provided by Proteome Discoverer. The R environment was used to identify the significantly regulated proteins, using the limma test, and to perform hierarchical clustering analysis (Euclidean distance). The software Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen) was used to retrieve biologic and canonical functions. We used default settings except for the following instances: species = human; tissue & cell lines = astrocytes, microglia, neurons (all), stem cells (all), nervous system (all), CNS cell lines (all), neuroblastoma cell lines (all), tissues, primary cells and cells not otherwise specified; experimental p-value cutoff = 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly aggressive brain cancer with poor prognosis and low survival rate. Invasive cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) are responsible for tumor recurrence because they escape current treatments. Our main goal was to study the proteome of three GBM subpopulations to identify key molecules behind GBM cell phenotypes and potential cell markers for migrating cells. We used SuperQuant-an enhanced quantitative proteome approach-to increase proteome coverage. We found 148 proteins differentially regulated in migrating CSCs and 199 proteins differentially regulated in differentiated cells. We used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to predict upstream regulators, downstream effects and canonical pathways associated with regulated proteins. IPA analysis predicted activation of integrin-linked kinase (ILK) signaling, actin cytoskeleton signaling, and lysine demethylase 5B (KDM5B) in CSC migration. Moreover, our data suggested that microRNA-122 (miR-122) is a potential upstream regulator of GBM phenotypes as miR-122 activation was predicted for differentiated cells while its inhibition was predicted for migrating CSCs. Finally, we validated transferrin (TF) and procollagen-lysine 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 2 (PLOD2) as potential markers for migrating cells.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma, Lcms, Shotgun proteomics, Superquant, Cancer

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


