### Accession
PXD019853

### Title
Deep chemoproteomic analysis of LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cell proteome

### Description
Unanticipated regulatory protein modifications can be discovered from the unbiased comprehensive analysis of biological systems using SAMPEI. To explore this idea, we sought to map protein modifications induced during mammalian cell differentiation, modeled by the response of mouse RAW264.7 macrophage cells to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a potent inducer of macrophage activation and differentiation that involves extensive protein and metabolic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
We treated RAW264.7 cells with LPS using established methods, and proteolyzed the resultant proteomes with LysC and Trypsin proteases. We fractionated the peptides by two-dimensional strong cation exchange-reversed phase liquid chromatography, and analyzed them by high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using X!tandem for conventional database-driven peptide-spectral matching, followed by SAMPEI analysis to identify unpredicted modification from the spectra not matched by X!tandem

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have revealed diverse amino acid, post-translational, and noncanonical modifications of proteins in diverse organisms and tissues. However, their unbiased detection and analysis remain hindered by technical limitations. Here, we present a spectral alignment method for the identification of protein modifications using high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics. Termed SAMPEI for spectral alignment-based modified peptide identification, this open-source algorithm is designed for the discovery of functional protein and peptide signaling modifications, without prior knowledge of their identities. Using synthetic standards and controlled chemical labeling experiments, we demonstrate its high specificity and sensitivity for the discovery of substoichiometric protein modifications in complex cellular extracts. SAMPEI mapping of mouse macrophage differentiation revealed diverse post-translational protein modifications, including distinct forms of cysteine itaconatylation. SAMPEI's robust parametrization and versatility are expected to facilitate the discovery of biological modifications of diverse macromolecules. SAMPEI is implemented as a Python package and is available open-source from BioConda and GitHub (https://github.com/FenyoLab/SAMPEI).

### Keywords
Lc-msms sampei modifications ptm orbitrap macrophages lps scx

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


