### Accession
PXD032968

### Title
NAD kinase promotes Staphylococcus aureus pathogenesis by supporting production of virulence factors and protective enzymes

### Description
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is the primary electron donor for reductive reactions that are essential for the biosynthesis of major cell components in all organisms. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide kinase (NADK) is the only enzyme that catalyzes synthesis of NADP(H) from NAD(H). While the enzymatic properties and physiological functions of NADK have been thoroughly studied, the role of NADK in bacterial pathogenesis remains unknown. Here, we used CRISPR interference to knockdown NADK gene expression to address the role of this enzyme in Staphylococcus aureus pathogenic potential. We find that NADK inhibition drastically decreases mortality of zebrafish infected with S. aureus. Further, we show that NADK promotes S. aureus survival in infected macrophages by protecting bacteria from antimicrobial defense mechanisms. Proteome-wide data analysis revealed that production of major virulence associated factors is sustained by NADK. We demonstrate that NADK is required for expression of the quorum-sensing response regulator AgrA, which controls critical S. aureus virulence determinants. These findings support a key role for NADK in bacteria survival within innate immune cells and the host during infection.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro samples, overnight cultures of S. aureus/pSD1 and S. aureus/NADK sgRNA were diluted to an OD600nm 0.05 in BHI with 200 μM H2O2 when indicated, spread in a 24-well plate and incubated at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm. After 6 h, bacteria were centrifugated for 15 min at 10,000 g at 4°C and the bacterial pellets were stored at -80°C. For in vivo samples, zebrafish larvae were infected with S. aureus/pSD1 or S. aureus/NADK sgRNA strains (see above). At 12 hpi, 5 larvae of each condition were isolated, anesthetized with tricaine, washed with 1 mL of sterile water, dried, placed on dry ice and stored at -80°C. All samples were then resuspended in 1 mL of Tris 100 mM pH 7/urea 8M. Proteins were extracted using the Precellys kit SK38 (P000915-LYSK0-A0, Bertin), in a Cryolys homogenizer (Bertin) by 6 cycles of agitation at 6,500 rpm for 15 s and 30 s rest. Protein Digestion  Proteins were reduced using 5mM TCEP for 30 min at room temperature. Alkylation of the reduced disulfide bridges was performed using 10mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then digested in two steps, first with 1 µg r-LysC Mass Spec Grade (Promega) for 4 h at 30°C and then samples were diluted below 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and 1 µg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin was added for the second digestion overnight at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 5%. The resulting peptides were cleaned using AssayMAP C18 cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were concentrated to dryness and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA just prior to LC-MS injection. LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q ExactiveTM Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). One µg of peptides was injected onto a home-made 30 cm C18 column (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, ReproSil-Pur Basic C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Column equilibration and peptide loading were done at 900 bars in buffer A (0.1% FA). Peptides were separated with a multi-step gradient from 2 to 7 % buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 5 min, 7 to 23 % buffer B in 70 min, 23 to 45 % buffer B in 30 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Column temperature was set to 60°C. MS data were acquired using Xcalibur software using a data-dependent method. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and MS/MS scans (fixed first mass 100 m/z) at a resolution of 17,500. The AGC target and maximum injection time for the survey scans and the MS/MS scans were set to 3E6, 20ms and 1E6, 60ms respectively. An automatic selection of the 10 most intense precursor ions was activated (Top 10) with a 45 s dynamic exclusion. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z and normalized collision energy fixed to 28 for HCD fragmentation. We used an underfill ratio of 1.0 % corresponding to an intensity threshold of 1.7E5. Unassigned precursor ion charge states as well as 1, 7, 8 and >8 charged states were rejected and peptide match was disable.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Acquired Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Staphylococcus aureus Uniprot reference proteome (2,889 entries). All searches were performed with oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 8,000 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and to 20 ppm for the MS/MS match tolerance. Second peptides was enabled to identify co-fragmentation events. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate cut-off of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed as follows: Five biological replicates were acquired per condition. To highlight significantly differentially abundant proteins between two conditions, differential analyses were conducted through the following data analysis pipeline: (1) deleting the reverse and potential contaminant proteins; (2) keeping only proteins with at least three quantified values in one of the two compared conditions to limit misidentifications and ensure a minimum of replicability; (3) log2-transformation of the remaining intensities of proteins; (4) normalizing the intensities by median centering within conditions thanks to the normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR, (5) putting aside proteins without any value in one of both compared conditions: as they are quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another, they are considered as differentially abundant proteins and (6) performing statistical differential analysis on them by requiring a minimum fold-change of 2.5 between conditions and by using a LIMMA t test combined with an adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg correction of the p values thanks to the adjust.p function of the R package cp4p. The robust method of Pounds and Cheng was used to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated with an adjusted p value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore the proteins that emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those being quantitatively absent from one condition and present in another.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is the primary electron donor for reductive reactions that are essential for the biosynthesis of major cell components in all organisms. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide kinase (NADK) is the only enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of NADP(H) from NAD(H). While the enzymatic properties and physiological functions of NADK have been thoroughly studied, the role of NADK in bacterial pathogenesis remains unknown. Here, we used CRISPR interference to knock down NADK gene expression to address the role of this enzyme in <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> pathogenic potential. We find that NADK inhibition drastically decreases mortality of zebrafish infected with <i>S. aureus</i>. Furthermore, we show that NADK promotes <i>S. aureus</i> survival in infected macrophages by protecting bacteria from antimicrobial defense mechanisms. Proteome-wide data analysis revealed that production of major virulence-associated factors is sustained by NADK. We demonstrate that NADK is required for expression of the quorum-sensing response regulator AgrA, which controls critical <i>S. aureus</i> virulence determinants. These findings support a key role for NADK in bacteria survival within innate immune cells and the host during infection.

### Keywords
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide kinase, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Yersinia Research Unit Duclaux Building, Bertrand wing – Ground Floor Institut Pasteur,  28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Dussurget
Yersinia Research Unit Duclaux Building, Bertrand wing – Ground Floor Institut Pasteur,  28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris


