### Accession
PXD032284

### Title
Kinobead profiling of PITCOINs1-3

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase type 2a (PI3KC2a) and related class II PI 3-kinase isoforms are of rising biomedical interest because of their crucial roles in endocytic membrane dynamics, cell division and signalling, angiogenesis, and platelet morphology and function. Herein we report the development and characterization of PITCOINs, potent and highly selective small molecule inhibitors of PI3KC2 catalytic activity. PITCOIN compounds exhibit strong selectivity towards PI3KC2 due to their unique mode of interaction with the ATP binding site of the enzyme. We demonstrate that acute inhibition of PI3KC2-mediated synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphates by PITCOINs impairs endocytic membrane dynamics and membrane remodelling during platelet-dependent thrombus formation. To our knowledge PITCOINs are the first potent and selective cell permeable inhibitors of PI3KC2a function with potential biomedical applications ranging from thrombosis to diabetes and cancer.


### Sample Protocol
Kinobead pulldown assays were performed using a 5 mg/mL protein  HEK293 cell lysates in IGEPAL CA-630 containing buffer. Briefly, for each PITCOIN profiling, 12 wells of a 96-well plates were filled with the lysate (2.5 mg of total proteins/well) and incubated for 45 minutes at 4 °C in an end-over-end shaker with 0 nM (DMSO control), 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 μM, 3 μM, 3 μM, 10 μM, 30 μM, 100 μM, 300 μM and 1 mM of the PITCOINs dissolved in DMSO. Subsequently, the treated lysates were incubated with Kinobeads-ε for 30 min at 4 °C in 96-well filter plate on an end-over-end shaker. The beads were then washed before the bound proteins were denatured and alkylated with chloroacetamide. Addition of trypsin (300 ng/well) started the overnight on-bead digestion. Acidified peptide eluates were then subjected to C18 StageTip desalting for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an online Dionex Ultimate3000 equipped with micro flow Vanquish pump UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v.1.5.3.30.)/Andromeda was used to quantify the proteins using the Swissprot reference database containing all canonical protein sequences with standard settings. Dose-response curves, Kdapps and Kinome tree were derived from the proteinGroup.txt file using a set of R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase type 2&#x3b1; (PI3KC2&#x3b1;) and related class II PI3K isoforms are of increasing biomedical interest because of their crucial roles in endocytic membrane dynamics, cell division and signaling, angiogenesis, and platelet morphology and function. Herein we report the development and characterization of PhosphatidylInositol Three-kinase Class twO INhibitors (PITCOINs), potent and highly selective small-molecule inhibitors of PI3KC2&#x3b1; catalytic activity. PITCOIN compounds exhibit strong selectivity toward PI3KC2&#x3b1; due to their unique mode of interaction with the ATP-binding site of the enzyme. We demonstrate that acute inhibition of PI3KC2&#x3b1;-mediated synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphates by PITCOINs impairs endocytic membrane dynamics and membrane remodeling during platelet-dependent thrombus formation. PITCOINs are potent and selective cell-permeable inhibitors of PI3KC2&#x3b1; function with potential biomedical applications ranging from thrombosis to diabetes and cancer.

### Keywords
Pi3kc2a, Pulldowns, Kinobeads

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich,Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Polina Prokofeva

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich,Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany


