### Accession
PXD027007

### Title
Crotonylation of GAPDH regulates human embryonic stem cell endodermal lineage differentiation and metabolic switch

### Description
Post-translational modifications of proteins are crucial to the regulation of their activity and function. As a newly discovered acylation modification, crotonylation of non-histone proteins remains largely unexplored, particularly in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Here we report the investigation of induced crotonylation in hESCs, which resulted in hESCs of different pluripotency states differentiating into the endodermal lineage. We showed that increased protein crotonylation in hESCs was accompanied by transcriptomic shifts and decreased glycolysis. Through large-scale profiling of non-histone protein crotonylation, we identified metabolic enzymes as major targets of inducible crotonylation in hESCs. We further discovered GAPDH as a key glycolytic enzyme regulated by crotonylation during endodermal differentiation from hESCs, where crotonylation of GAPDH decreased its enzymatic activity thereby leading to reduced glycolysis. Our study demonstrates that crotonylation of glycolytic enzymes may be crucial to metabolic switching and cell fate determination in hESCs.

### Sample Protocol
to enrich for lysine crotonylated peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in Binding Buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 100×Cocktail) were incubated at 4℃ overnight with the pan anti-crotonyllysine antibody (4 μg/4 mg peptides)

### Data Protocol
Thermo Fisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA) fitted with a Nano Flex ion source using DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques. For full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 3×106 and the scan ranged from 350 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hescs

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Jingran Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Songyang
Sun Yat-sen University


