### Accession
PXD001364

### Title
Widespread Proteome Remodeling and Aggregation in Aging C. elegans

### Description
Aging has been associated with a progressive decline of proteostasis, but how this process affects proteome composition remains largely unexplored. Here, we profiled more than 5,000 proteins along the lifespan of the nematode C. elegans. We find that one-third of proteins change in abundance at least 2-fold during aging, resulting in a severe proteome imbalance. These changes are reduced in the long-lived daf-2mutant but are enhanced in the short-lived daf-16 mutant. While ribosomal proteins decline and lose normal stoichiometry, proteasome complexes increase. Proteome imbalance is accompanied by widespread protein aggregation, with abundant proteins that exceed solubility contributing most to aggregate load. Notably, the properties by which proteins are selected for aggregation differ in the daf-2mutant, and an increased formation of aggregates associated with small heat-shock proteins is observed. We suggest that sequestering proteins into chaperone-enriched aggregates is a protective strategy to slow proteostasis decline during nematode aging.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, worms were suspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA), incubated at 95°C for 5 min and further treated by ultra-sonication. Typically, an aliquot of lysate containing 40 ug of protein was mixed with an equal amount of a heavy lysine labeled lysate pool. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with endoproteinase LysC using the FASP method . Peptide mixtures were either analyzed without fractionation or after fractionation by isoelectric focusing.For aggregate analysis, proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and subjected to in gel digestion. Peptides were subjected to StageTip purification (Rappsilber et al., 2007) prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software environment (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peak lists were searched with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) against a database containing the translation of all predicted proteins listed in Uniprot (release January 15, 2012) as well as a list of commonly observed contaminants and the NCBI protein database of E. coli strain K12. The minimal required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and both protein and peptide identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Aging has been associated with a progressive decline of proteostasis, but how this process affects proteome composition remains largely unexplored. Here, we profiled more than 5,000 proteins along the lifespan of the nematode C. elegans. We find that one-third of proteins change in abundance at least 2-fold during aging, resulting in a severe proteome imbalance. These changes are reduced in the long-lived daf-2 mutant but are enhanced in the short-lived daf-16 mutant. While ribosomal proteins decline and lose normal stoichiometry, proteasome complexes increase. Proteome imbalance is accompanied by widespread protein aggregation, with abundant proteins that exceed solubility contributing most to aggregate load. Notably, the properties by which proteins are selected for aggregation differ in the daf-2 mutant, and an increased formation of aggregates associated with small heat-shock proteins is observed. We suggest that sequestering proteins into chaperone-enriched aggregates is a protective strategy to slow proteostasis decline during nematode aging.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Protein aggregation, Proteostasis, Aging

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany


