### Accession
PXD039007

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the cardiac relic of Blessed Pauline Jaricot

### Description
Proteomic analysis of the cardiac relic of Blessed Pauline Jaricot upon restoration of the cardiotaph of this  19th century missionary figure. Without any a priori metaproteomics interpretation allowed identification of the proteins and their taxonomical origins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by means of an Exploris 480 tandem mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent analysis mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The results were then parsed and spectral counts were extracted.

### Publication Abstract
Scientific examination of the heart of Blessed Pauline Jaricot-a French missionary figure-was carried out in 2022. As tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping has proven to be valuable to obtain the broad taxonomic repertoire of a given sample without any a priori information, we aimed at exploring the conditions of preservation of the relics and possible conditions of death. Metaproteomics and high-resolution microtomography imaging approaches were combined. A dataset comprising 6731 high-resolution MS/MS spectra was acquired and 968 of these spectra could be assigned to specific peptidic biomolecules. Based on the taxonomical information encompassed by the identified peptide sequences, 5 phyla were identified amongst eukaryota (94% of the biomass): Ascomycota (55%), with the species <i>Aspergillus versicolor</i>, <i>Trichophyton mentagrophytes</i> and <i>Aspergillus glaucus</i>, corresponding to expected cadaverous fungal flora; Chordata (42%), represented by a unique species, <i>Homo sapiens</i>; Streptophyta (3%); and Arthropoda (traces). Bacteria (6% of the biomass) were poorly represented. No trace of embalming substance could be retrieved, nor any pathogens. Imaging evidenced no heart defect nor embalming traces. No evidence that was inconsistent with natural and spontaneous conservation could be retrieved. This study prefigures the power of modern molecular techniques such as paleoproteotyping coupled to microtomography to gain insight into historical relics.

### Keywords
Heart, Proteins, Fungi, Microorganisms, Metaproteomics, Proteomics, Proteotyping, Paleoproteomics

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


