### Accession
PXD025734

### Title
Vitamin B12 stimulates 1,2-propanediol utilization in bacterial microcompartments of Listeria monocytogenes making anaerobic growth on rhamnose possible

### Description
This study was conducted in order to monitor whether or not Listeria monocytogenes is able to form bacterial microcompartment for rhamnose metabolism by deploying 1,2-propanediol bacterial microcompartment shell proteins and encapsulated enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
L. monocytogenes cultures were anaerobically grown at 30°C in rhamnose pdu-induced and rhamnose pdu non-induced condition. Samples were collected at 48 h of incubation and then washed twice with 100 mM Tris (pH 8). About 10 mg wet weight cells in 100 μl 100 mM Tris was sonicated for 30 s twice to lyse the cells. Samples were prepared according to the filter assisted sample preparation protocol (FASP) with the following steps: reduction with 15 mM dithiothreitol, alkylation with 20 mM acrylamide, and digestion with sequencing grade trypsin overnight. Each prepared peptide sample was analyzed by injecting (18 μl) into a nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo nLC1000 connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The foodborne pathogen Listeria monocytogenes can form proteinaceous organelles called bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) that optimize the utilization of substrates, such as 1,2-propanediol, and confer an anaerobic growth advantage. Rhamnose is a deoxyhexose sugar abundant in a range of environments, including the human intestine, and can be degraded in anaerobic conditions into 1,2-propanediol, next to acetate and lactate. Rhamnose-derived 1,2-propanediol was found to link with BMCs in some human pathogens such as Salmonella enterica, but the involvement of BMCs in rhamnose metabolism and potential physiological effects on L. monocytogenes are still unknown. In this study, we first test the effect of rhamnose uptake and utilization on anaerobic growth of L. monocytogenes EGDe without or with added vitamin B<sub>12</sub>, followed by metabolic analysis. We show that vitamin B<sub>12</sub>-dependent activation of <i>pdu</i> stimulates metabolism and anaerobic growth of L. monocytogenes EGDe on rhamnose via 1,2-propanediol degradation into 1-propanol and propionate. Transmission electron microscopy of <i>pdu</i>-induced cells shows that BMCs are formed, and additional proteomics experiments confirm expression of <i>pdu</i> BMC shell proteins and enzymes. Finally, we discuss the physiological effects and energy efficiency of L. monocytogenes <i>pdu</i> BMC-driven anaerobic rhamnose metabolism and the impact on competitive fitness in environments such as the human intestine. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen causing severe illness and, as such, it is crucial to understand the molecular mechanisms contributing to its survival strategy and pathogenicity. Rhamnose is a deoxyhexose sugar abundant in a range of environments, including the human intestine, and can be degraded in anaerobic conditions into 1,2-propanediol. In our previous study, the utilization of 1,2-propanediol (<i>pdu</i>) in L. monocytogenes was proved to be metabolized in bacterial microcompartments (BMCs), which are self-assembling subcellular proteinaceous structures and analogs of eukaryotic organelles. Here, we show that the vitamin B<sub>12</sub>-dependent activation of <i>pdu</i> stimulates metabolism and anaerobic growth of L. monocytogenes EGDe on rhamnose via BMC-dependent 1,2-propanediol utilization. Combined with metabolic and proteomics analysis, our discussion on the physiological effects and energy efficiency of BMC-driven rhamnose metabolism shed new light to understand the impact on L. monocytogenes competitive fitness in ecosystems such as the human intestine.

### Keywords
1, 2-propanediol utilization anaerobic growth, Listeria monocytogenes, Rhamnose metabolism, Bacterial microcompartment

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


