### Accession
PXD012894

### Title
Selective Binding of a Toxin and Phosphatidylinositides to a Mammalian Potassium Channel

### Description
G-protein-gated inward rectifying potassium channels (GIRKs) require Gβγ subunits and phosphorylated phosphatidylinositides (PIPs) for gating. Although studies have provided insight into these interactions, the mechanism of how these events are modulated by Gβγ and the binding affinity between PIPs and GIRKs remains poorly understood. Here, native ion mobility mass spectrometry is employed to directly monitor small molecule binding events to mouse GIRK2. GIRK2 binds the toxin tertiapin Q and PIPs selectively and with significantly higher affinity than other phospholipids. A mutation in GIRK2 that causes a rotation in the cytoplasmic domain, similarly to Gβγ-binding to the wild-type channel, revealed differences in the selectivity towards PIPs More specifically, PIP isoforms known to weakly activate GIRKs have decreased binding affinity. Additionally, denaturing mass spectrometry and tryptic digest liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis was performed to confirm phosphorylation to GIRK2.

### Sample Protocol
GIRK2-GFP fusion protein was expressed in KM71 Pichia Pastoris, and protein extracted and purified in DDM buffer following Ni-NTA purification and StrepII-Tag affinity purification. Then, TEV protease was used to remove tags to obtain the tetrameric potassium channel and then further purified by size-exclusion purification. This sample was then digested with trypsin overnight, and applied through a liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) system, consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC system (with a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column from Thermo) coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. LC system solvents were water + 0.1% FA (A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (B). Tryptic peptides were eluted over 60 minute gradient from 2% B from 0 to 5 min, 2% to 45% from 5 to 37 min, 45% to 90% from 38 to 46 min, and down to 2% from 46 to 60 min at a flow rate of 0.4 uL/min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer ion source were set to have a spray voltage of 2.3 kV, ion transfer tube temperature of 275 ºC, the scan range was m/z 400–1600 with a resolution of 120,000. MS/MS acquisition was performed with 3 s cycle time. The intensity threshold was set to 5000, Ions with charge states 1+ to 6+ were sequentially fragmented by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 60 s. Raw files were analyzed using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.81) software platform. The data were searched with Sequest using the GIRK2 sequence with the following parameters: trypsin is selected as the enzyme, dynamic modifications included protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. Fixed modification include carbamidomethylation of cysteine due to iodoacetamide treatment. Mass tolerances for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm, and fragment ions set to Δ 0.6Da. Limits for peptide length searched range from 6 to 144, maximum delta Cn is set to 0.05. Maximum number of allowed missed cleavages is 2.

### Publication Abstract
G-protein-gated inward rectifying potassium channels (GIRKs) require G<sub>&#x3b2;&#x3b3;</sub> subunits and phosphorylated phosphatidylinositides (PIPs) for gating. Although studies have provided insight into these interactions, the mechanism of how these events are modulated by G<sub>&#x3b2;&#x3b3;</sub> and the binding affinity between PIPs and GIRKs remains poorly understood. Here, native ion mobility mass spectrometry is employed to directly monitor small molecule binding events to mouse GIRK2. GIRK2 binds the toxin tertiapin Q and PIPs selectively and with significantly higher affinity than other phospholipids. A mutation in GIRK2 that causes a rotation in the cytoplasmic domain, similarly to G<sub>&#x3b2;&#x3b3;</sub>-binding to the wild-type channel, revealed differences in the selectivity towards PIPs. More specifically, PIP isoforms known to weakly activate GIRKs have decreased binding affinity. Taken together, our results reveal selective small molecule binding and uncover a mechanism by which rotation of the cytoplasmic domain can modulate GIRK&#x2022;PIP interactions.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lipid selectivity, Potassium channel, Lipid binding, Pip2, Girk2

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Texas  A&M University Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Yang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Laganowsky
Texas  A&M University Department of Chemistry


