### Accession
PXD039881

### Title
Iron limitation restores autophagy and increases lifespan in the yeast model of Niemann-Pick type C1

### Description
Niemann Pick Type C1 (NPC1) is an endolysosomal transmembrane protein involved in the export of cholesterol and sphingolipids to other cellular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membrane. NPC1 loss of function is the major cause of NPC disease, a rare lysosomal storage disorder characterized by an abnormal accumulation of lipids in the late endosomal/lysosomal network, mitochondrial dysfunction, and impaired autophagy. NPC phenotypes are conserved in yeast lacking Ncr1, orthologue of human NPC1, leading to premature ageing. Herein, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis to investigate the effect of Ncr1 loss on cellular functions mediated by the yeast lysosome-like vacuoles. Our results revealed changes in vacuolar membrane proteins that are associated mostly with vesicle biology (fusion, transport, organization), autophagy and ion homeostasis, including iron, manganese, and calcium. Consistently, the Cytoplasm to vacuole targeting (Cvt) pathway was increased in ncr1∆ cells and autophagy was compromised despite TORC1 inhibition. Moreover, ncr1∆ cells exhibited iron overload mediated by the low‑iron sensing transcription factor Aft1. Iron deprivation restored the autophagic flux of ncr1∆ cells and increased its chronological lifespan and oxidative stress resistance. These results implicate iron overload on autophagy impairment, oxidative stress sensitivity and cell death in the yeast model of NPC1.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in synthetic complete medium to exponential phase, vacuoles isolated by density centrifugations using Ficoll gradients and vacuolar membranes recovered after osmotically lysis of vacuoles. Proteins were solubilized with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide and incubated for 10 min at 95 ºC at 1,000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Each sample was processed for proteomics analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3). Enzymatic digestion was performed by adding Trypsin/LysC (2 microg) and incubating overnight at 37 ºC at 1,000 rpm. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS, using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the S. cerevisiae Proteome 2020_03 (6049 entries) together with a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, peptide N-terminus pyro-glutamine, protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss+acetylation, were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. The ptmRS node was used for localization of modification sites. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance based on intensity and normalization based on total peptide amount of annotated vacuolar membrane proteins. The percentage of phosphorylation for each residue was manually calculated by the ratio between the amount of phosphorylated peptide and the total peptide amount. To identify group differences concerning protein levels or the percentage of phosphorylation, first homogeneity of variances was assessed with Levene test. Afterwards, pairwise comparisons with Student t-test were performed.  Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS), version 26. The level of significance was set at α= 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Niemann-Pick type C1 (NPC1) is an endolysosomal transmembrane protein involved in the export of cholesterol and sphingolipids to other cellular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma membrane. NPC1 loss of function is the major cause of NPC disease, a rare lysosomal storage disorder characterized by an abnormal accumulation of lipids in the late endosomal/lysosomal network, mitochondrial dysfunction, and impaired autophagy. NPC phenotypes are conserved in yeast lacking Ncr1, an orthologue of human NPC1, leading to premature aging. Herein, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis to investigate the effect of Ncr1 loss on cellular functions mediated by the yeast lysosome-like vacuoles. Our results revealed changes in vacuolar membrane proteins that are associated mostly with vesicle biology (fusion, transport, organization), autophagy, and ion homeostasis, including iron, manganese, and calcium. Consistently, the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting (Cvt) pathway was increased in <i>ncr1</i>&#x2206; cells and autophagy was compromised despite TORC1 inhibition. Moreover, <i>ncr1</i>&#x2206; cells exhibited iron overload mediated by the low-iron sensing transcription factor Aft1. Iron deprivation restored the autophagic flux of <i>ncr1</i>&#x2206; cells and increased its chronological lifespan and oxidative stress resistance. These results implicate iron overload on autophagy impairment, oxidative stress sensitivity, and cell death in the yeast model of NPC1.

### Keywords
Ncr1; torc1; aft1; vacuoles; vesicle trafficking; iron; autophagy; oxidative stress; chronological aging

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
1- i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal  2- IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Universidade do Porto, Portugal 3- ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Vítor Costa
1- i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal  2- IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Universidade do Porto, Portugal 3- ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Portugal


