### Accession
PXD040493

### Title
Lead eliminating activity of Auricularia polytricha glycoprotein protects against lead acetate-induced hepatorenal toxicity in rats via positive immunoregulation pathway

### Description
Lead is a ubiquitous environmental and industrial pollutant. Its nonbiodegradable toxicity induces a plethora of human diseases. The current study was undertaken to purify a novel 252-kDa bioactive glycoprotein containing 1.15% carbohydrate from the edible fungus Auricularia polytricha with the ability of adsorbing lead and producing detoxification. The A. polytricha detoxifying glycoprotein (APL), which displayed unique molecular properties, was purified by ion exchange chromatography and gel filtration chromatography. For investigating the protective effects of A. polytricha, Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were divided into six groups which received daily intraperitoneal injection of lead acetate for 30 days, followed by gavage with APL (40, 80, 160 mg/kg B body weight) and EDTA (300 mg/kg body weight) for 30 days after successful establishment of an animal model of lead detoxification. The serum concentrations of lead and the liver biomarkers AST and ALT were significantly (p<0.05) improved by APL treatments, as well as treatment with the positive control EDTA. Likewise, results on lead residue showed that the clearance ratios of liver and kidney were respectively 44.5% and 18.1% at the high APL dosage, which was even better than the corresponding data for EDTA. Proteomics disclosed that 351 proteins differentially expressed due to lead exposure and the expression levels of 41 proteins enriched in the pathways mainly involved in cell detoxification and immune regulation were normalized after treatment with APL-H. Our results signify that APL may ameliorate lead-induced hepatorenal injury by positive regulation of immune processing, and suggest that APL be applied as a therapeutic intervention of lead poisoning in clinic treatment. This report represents the first demonstration of the protective action of a novel mushroom protein on lead-elicited hepatorenal toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
The liver powder sample was dissolved in lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% CHAPS, kept on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 10000 r/min for 5 min at 4 °C. The total protein concentration was measured by the Bradford protein assay.  Total protein from each sample (200 μg) was incubated with 200 mM reducing reagent and at 55 °C for 1 h., and mixed with 375 mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation for 10 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. The sample was digested with trypsin for 14 h at RT, then lyophilized and redissolved with 100 mM dissolution buffer. Subsequently, protein samples were labeled with TMT reagent, following the manufacturer’s recommendations. At the labeling terminal, the samples were lyophilized and stored. TMT labeling was performed in three independent experiments to ensure reproducibility.The labelled peptide fractions were suspended in buffer A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN) and centrifuged at 12,000 r/min for 10 min. The supernatants were injected into the nano UPLC-MS/MS system consisting of a Nanoflow HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000 system from Thermo Scientific) and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column and then separated by using an EASY-Spray C18 column. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode (source voltage 2.1 KV) and full MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap over the range of 300-1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. For MS/MS scans, the 20 most abundant ions with multiple charge states were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation following one MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
The database used in this experiment was Uniprot_RAT database. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Identification was set as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance, ± 15 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, ± 0.5 Da; max missed cleavages, 2; static modification, carboxyamidomethylation (57.021 Da) of Cys residues; dynamic modifications, oxidation modification (+15.995 Da) of Met residues. According to the p-value of the primary data, data with p ≤ 0.05 and difference ratio ≥1.2 were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Liver, Lead

### Affiliations
Institute of Agri-food Processing and Nutrition, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences

### Submitter
Shuang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Shuang Zhao
Institute of Agri-food Processing and Nutrition, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences


