### Accession
PXD009943

### Title
2nSILAC_incorporation efficiency and arg-pro-conversion

### Description
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a systems-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were cultured in synthetic complete (SC) medium containing 0.17% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.5% (w/v) ammonium sulfate, CSM-Arg-Lys amino acid dropout mix (Sunrise Science Products), L-arginine and L-lysine (50 mg/l each), and 3% (w/v) glycerol/0.02% (w/v) glucose, or 2% (w/v) galactose as carbon source. For growth on 2% (w/v) glucose, the medium was supplemented with L-histidine, L-leucine, L-methionine, L-tryptophan, adenine, and uracil (20 mg/l each) instead of the CSM amino acid dropout mix. To assess the extent of arginine-to-proline conversion, cells were grown in the presence and absence of L-proline (200 mg/l). Metabolic labeling was performed using stable isotope-coded 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4; Arg10) and lysine (13C6/15N2; Lys8) instead of the respective 'light' counterparts. Cells were pre-cultured in 30 ml of medium with an initial OD600 of 0.1 and grown overnight at 160 rpm and 30°C. Pre-cultured cells were diluted into 150 ml of fresh medium to reach an OD600 of 0.025. Cells were further cultivated at 160 rpm and 30°C. Precultured cells and cells from different time points during growth were harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 x g and washed with deionized water. Whole cell lysates were prepared by resuspending the cells in 500 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA) followed by cell lysis (bead-beating; twice for 4 min) using a MiniLys homogenizer (Peqlab/VWR) operated at 5,000 rpm. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 15,000 x g and 4°C. 10 µg of protein were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 10 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). The urea concentration was diluted to 1.6 M using 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were digested using trypsin (200 ng; incubation overnight at 37°C). Reactions were stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 0.5% [v/v] final concentration) and peptide mixtures were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 12,000 x g (RT). Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with PepMap C18 pre-columns (Thermo Scientific; length: 5 mm; inner diameter: 0.3 mm; loading flow rate: 30 µl/min) and an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (Thermo Scientific; length: 500 mm; inner diameter: 75 µm; particle size: 2 µm; packing density: 10 nm; flow rate: 0.25 µl/min) online coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on precolumns and subsequently separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA; solvent A) and 48% (v/v) MeOH/30% (v/v) ACN/4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with a multi-step gradient starting with 25 min at 5% solvent B followed by 5 - 30% B in 65 min, 30 - 45% B in 30 min, 45 - 70% B in 35 min, 70 - 99% B in 5 min, and 99% B for 5 min. The LTQ Orbitrap XL was equipped with a Finnigan Nanospray ion source with dynamic NSI probe (Thermo Scientific) and stainless steel (Thermo Scientific) or fused silica emitters (New Objective, Woburn, USA). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: full MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with a mass range of m/z 370 - 1,700, a resolution (R) of 60,000 at m/z 400, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5 x 10E5 ions, and a maximum ion time (IT) of 500 ms. The five most intensive peptide ions (z ≥ +2) were chosen for fragmentation by low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. A normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, and an activation time of 100 ms were applied. The AGC for MS/MS scans was set to 10E4, the maximum IT was 100 ms, the ion selection threshold was 2,500, and the dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was 45 s

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant with its integrated search engine Andromeda (version 1.5.2.8). MS/MS data were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/; downloaded September 2011) and a list of common contaminants included in the MaxQuant software. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity, a maximum number of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, and Pro6 as variable modifications. Proteins were identified with at least one unique peptide with a length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein identifications. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were disabled. The extent of Lys8 and Arg10 incorporation into the yeast proteome and the arginine-to-proline conversion were determined as described before (Oeljeklaus et al., 2014, Methods Mol Biol).

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a system-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide comparative quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions, making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Native silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


