### Accession
PXD010197

### Title
Farnesylated Heat Shock Protein 40 is a component of membrane-bound RISC in Arabidopsis

### Description
ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) binds directly to small regulatory RNA and is a key effector protein of post-transcriptional gene silencing mediated by microRNA (miRNA) and small interfering RNA (siRNA). The formation of an RNA induced silencing complex (RISC) of AGO1 and small RNA requires the function of the Heat Shock Protein 70/90 chaperone system. Some functions of AGO1 occur in association with endomembranes, in particular the rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER), but proteins interacting with AGO1 in membrane fractions remain unidentified. In this study, we show that the farnesylated Heat Shock Protein 40 homologs, J2 and J3, associate with AGO1 in membrane fractions in a manner that involves protein farnesylation. We also show that three changes in AGO1 function are detectable in mutants in protein farnesylation and J2/J3. First, perturbations of the HSP40/70/90 pathway by mutation of j3, hsp90 and farnesyl transferase affect the amounts of AGO1 associated with membranes. Second, miRNA association with membrane-bound AGO1, and with membrane-bound polysomes is increased in farnesyl transferase and farnesylationdeficient J2/J3 mutants. Third, silencing by non-cell autonomously acting short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) is impaired. These observations highlight the involvement of farnesylated J2/J3 in small RNA-mediated gene regulation, and suggest that the importance of chaperone-AGO1 interaction is not limited to the RISC assembly process.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for mass spectrometry After reducing the volume to 50 μL in a SpeedVac, samples were denatured in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0 in a final volume of 300 μL. Proteins were reduced with 1 mM DL-dithiothreitol for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 5 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature. Urea concentration was brought to below 2M by dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digestion was performed overnight with trypsin at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptides were then acidified to a final concentration of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted on in-house packed C18 StageTips (67). Non-crosslinked samples were denatured in 300 uL 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, after which they were processed identically to crosslinked samples. Analysis by LC-MS/MS Immediately prior to LC-MS/MS injection, samples were eluted from the StageTips in 40 μL 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% Formic acid (FA) and vacuum centrifuged to reduce the volume to 4 μL, after which 4 μL 2% ACN, 1% TFA was added to each sample for acidification. Peptides were loaded onto an Easy-Spray C18, 75 um x 50 cm column (Thermo, ES803) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) at 720 bar, using the Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) in a single-column setup and the column oven operating at 45°C, after which peptides were chromatographically separated using a 240 minutes gradient ranging from 6-60% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was operated in data-dependent mode and full MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap analyzer, scanning from 350 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4e5 ions or maximum injection time of 20 ms. MS2 spectra were obtained by isolation in the quadrupole with a 1.6 m/z window, and acquired by rapid scan analysis in the ion trap with an AGC target value of 1e4 and maximum injection time of 80ms (100ms for crosslinked samples) for all fragmentation methods. Precursors with charge states +2 or higher were retained, and were selected in Top Speed mode for decision-tree-based ion trap HCD (normalized collision energy of 35%) or ETD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45s (60s for crosslinked samples).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.0.30) (68) and searched against the complete protein database from The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were permitted, methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and STYphosphorylation were selected as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Minimum peptide length was set to 6. Peptide, site and protein FDR were all kept at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) binds directly to small regulatory RNA and is a key effector protein of post-transcriptional gene silencing mediated by microRNA (miRNA) and small interfering RNA (siRNA) in <i>Arabidopsis</i> The formation of an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) of AGO1 and small RNA requires the function of the heat shock protein 70/90 chaperone system. Some functions of AGO1 occur in association with endomembranes, in particular the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), but proteins interacting with AGO1 in membrane fractions remain unidentified. In this study, we show that the farnesylated heat shock protein 40 homologs, J2 and J3, associate with AGO1 in membrane fractions in a manner that involves protein farnesylation. We also show that three changes in AGO1 function are detectable in mutants in protein farnesylation and J2/J3. First, perturbations of the HSP40/70/90 pathway by mutation of <i>J3</i>, <i>HSP90</i>, and farnesyl transferase affect the amounts of AGO1 associated with membranes. Second, miRNA association with membrane-bound polysomes is increased in farnesyl transferase and farnesylation-deficient J2/J3 mutants. Third, silencing by noncell autonomously acting short interfering RNAs is impaired. These observations highlight the involvement of farnesylated J2/J3 in small RNA-mediated gene regulation, and suggest that the importance of chaperone-AGO1 interaction is not limited to the RISC assembly process.

### Keywords
Rough er, Small rna, Farnesylation, Polysomes., Argonaute, Chaperones

### Affiliations
Peter Brodersen, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Franziska Voellmy

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Brodersen
Peter Brodersen, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


