### Accession
PXD027714

### Title
Proteomic discovery and verification for the screening of biomarkers in different stages of mycosis fungoides: a pilot study

### Description
Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common T-cell lymphoma in cutaneous malignant lymphoma, which may involve multiple organs in the advanced stage with a poor prognosis. Till now, early identification of the disease is still urgent and also there is no optimal therapy for advanced MF. In the present study, quantitative proteomic analyses (Label Free Quantitation, LFQ) and a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assay were applied in tissue samples of different stages of MF and the control group, so as to conduct preliminary molecular analysis of the significantly expressed proteins which may involve in the pathogenesis of the disease. The results revealed that genes and proteins implicated in DNA replication initiation, nucleosome assembly, cell adhesion activity, together with the cellular component and molecules that connecting extracellular region part may be involved in the pathogenesis and metastasis of MF. Some special proteins expressed obviously differently from the early to advanced stage of MF, indicating that they may be the key molecules for the progression of the disease. We believe that proteomics is a powerful tool to identify potential biomarkers for diagnosis and these molecules may be promising therapeutic targets for MF. For that, further studies are still needed.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection. Tissue specimens were collected from patients with mycosis fungoides, eczema and normal subjects from August 2017 to January 2019 at the Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (Nanjing, China). In this study, , we selected 3 normal subjects (Group A), 3 eczema patients (Group B) as control group, and 3 patients of early stage (Group C), 3 patients of advanced stage of MF (Group D) as the main research objects.  Sample Preparation. The samples (6 from torso and 6 from limbs, each size was about 0.5cm in diameter) were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a pestle and mortar. Five times volume of TCA/acetone (1:9) was added to the powder and mixed by vortex. The mixture was placed at -20℃ for 4h, and centrifuged at 6000g for 40 min at 4℃. The supernatant was discarded. The pre-cooling acetone was added and washed for three times. The precipitation was air dried. Thirty times volume of SDT buffer was added to 20-30 mg powder, mixed and boiled for 5 min. The lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (P0012, Beyotime).  SDS-PAGE Separation. Twenty µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 6×loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion). Two hundred μg of proteins for each sample were reduced with 50 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) by repeated ultrafiltration (Sartorius, 30 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. Mass Spectrometry analysis. The peptide of each sample was desalted on C18 Cartridges, then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two μg peptide was loaded onto the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific，Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50um X 15cm, nano viper, P/N164943) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The linear gradient was as follows: 5% buffer B for 5 min, 5-28% buffer B for 90 min, 28-38% buffer B for 15 min, 38-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3e6 and a max IT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 2e5 and a max IT of 45 ms, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Only ions with a charge state between 2-6 and a minimum intensity of 2e3 were selected for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30s. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) was used for database search, and LFQ (Label Free Quantitation) algorithms[7] was used for quantitative analysis. Relevant parameters and instructions were as follows (Enzyme: Trypsin, Max Missed Cleavages: 2, Main search: 4.5 ppm, First search: 20 ppm, MS/MS Tolerance: 20 ppm, Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications: Oxidation(M), Acetyl(ProteinN-term),Database:Uniprot_HomoSapiens_20386_20180905, Database pattern: Target-Reverse, Include contaminants: True, Peptide FDR:≤0.01,Protein FDR:≤0.01).  Proteins with Fold change>1.2 and p value (Student’s t test) <0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation. At first, all protein sequences were aligned to Linux database downloaded from NCBI (ncbi-blast-2.3.0+), only the sequences in top 10 and E-value ≤ 1e-3 were kept. Secondly, the GO term (database version: go_201504.obo) of the sequence with top Bit-Score by Blast2GO was selected (http://www.geneontology.org). Then, the annotation from GO terms to proteins was completed by Blast2GO Command Line. After the elementary annotation, InterProScan[8] were used to search EBI database by motif and then add the functional information of motif to proteins to improve annotation. Then further improvement of annotation and connection between GO terms were carried out by ANNEX. Fisher’s Exact Test were used to enrich GO terms by comparing the number of differentially expressed proteins and total proteins correlated to GO terms. KEGG Pathway Annotation. Pathway analysis was performed using KEGG database and KOALA (KEGG Orthology And Links Annotation) software[9]. Fisher’s Exact Test were used to identify the significantly enriched pathways by comparing number of differentially expressed proteins and total proteins correlated to pathways. Clustering. The quantitative information of the target protein collection was firstly normalized. Secondly, Matplotlib software was used to classify the expression levels of samples and proteins (distance algorithm: Euclidean, linkage method: Average linkage), generating the hierarchical clustering heat map. Trend analysis. STEM (Short Time-Series Expresssion Miner)[10] was used to carry out significant analysis on  the expressed trends to obtain  trend models with significant changes. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). PRM-MS analysis was conducted following the manufacturer’s[11] method, aiming to verify the discovery results. The enzymatic hydrolysate was separated by nano-UPLC liquid phase system (EASY-nLC1200) and detected using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) for MS. Samples were directly loaded onto a 100μm ID×15 cm reversed phase chromatographic column Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-separated on the chromatographic column. Mobile phase A is 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution and liquid B is 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (acetonitrile is 80%). The column was balanced with 100% liquid A. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the gradient time was 120 min. Mobile phase B: 6-–-28% 92 min, 28-40% 20 min, 40-100% for 2 min, 100% for 2 min, 2% for 2 min. LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analysis time: 120 min/sample, positive ion detection mode. After nano-UPLC separation, PRM data were collected by MS and imported into Skyline for transition extraction (Method match tolerance: 0.055m/z). Above experiments were performed at Kangcheng Biotech (Shanghai, China). Identification of the differentially expressed peptide was set at P < 0.05 and fold-change >2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycosis fungoides; label free quantitation (lfq); parallel reaction monitoring (prm); pathogenesis; treatment

### Affiliations
Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College，Nanjing 210042, China.

### Submitter
lu gan

### Lab Head
Dr hao chen
Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College，Nanjing 210042, China.


