### Accession
PXD000705

### Title
Extending proteome coverage through an on-line 2D SCX-RP ultra-high pressure system

### Description
Ultra high pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) systems combined with state of the art mass spectrometers have pushed the limit of deep proteome sequencing to new heights making it possible to identify thousands of proteins in a single LC/MS experiment within a few hours. However, the relationship between gradient length and the number of proteins identified is not linear and as gradient time increases to several hours, performance gain diminishes. Proteome coverage can be extended using 2-dimensional chromatography, but traditionally this comes at the expense of sample losses and much longer analysis times. Here, we asked the question whether a fast and sensitive online 2D SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow, could compete with the current 1D long gradient analysis, making total analysis time- versus proteome coverage and sample used as benchmark parameters. Our new automated 2D-LC/MS system is robust and easy to use, consisting of a homemade SCX column, a trap column and a 50 cm analytical EASY-Spray column. We benchmark the system using small amounts of a human cell lysate digest. The 2D SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow allowed us to identify 56600 unique peptides and 5958 proteins in a total analysis time of just over 8 hours. On the same system a 1D RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow gave only 22000 peptides and 4200 unique proteins in 6 hours analysis time, increases of 157% and 42% at the peptide and protein level, respectively. These and other data reported here reveal that with this fast online SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow proteome coverage can be substantially extended without compromising too much analysis time and sample usage

### Sample Protocol
The 2D experiments were performed using the same UHPLC system, trap and analytical column as described for the 1D experiments (Figure 1). In order to implement a 2D setup we added a SCX trap column (Luna, 5 μm, 100 Å, 5 cm, Phenomenex, Utrecht, NL) (Dashed box in Figure 1) in between the sample line and the W valve (Figure 1). In all experiments   ̴10 µg of HEK293 digest was used. The sample was picked up from the auto-sampler and carried on the sample loop (Figure 1A) with solvent S (0.05% FA and 5% DMSO). The sample was loaded on the SCX trap column (Figure 1B) with 25 µl and at 1 µl/min flow rate. We observed that decreasing the flow rate for the SCX trapping and using a different composition of the solvent S (0.05% FA and 5% DMSO) for the pick-up, helped to quantitatively trap the peptides on the SCX trap column. The peptides that did not bind the SCX trap column (flow through) were trapped on the back-flushed column and after the W valve switch which connected the trap column with the analytical column, a gradient of solvent A and B as described above for the 1D experiments was applied for the separation (Figure 1C). We used 37 min gradients for one 2D experiment and 157 min gradients for the long 2D. Subsequently, the above described steps were repeated for each of the salt steps. The six salt plugs contained ammonium acetate at the concentration of 5mM, 10 mM, 20 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, 500 mM, 5% of ACN28 and 0.1% of FA. 18 µl of salt concentration was injected (Figure 1A) onto the SCX trap column. Total volume of sample loading (Figure 1B) was 40 µl (i.e. 18 µL of salt and 22 µL of solvent A) to ensure a more extensive washing due to the presence of salts. The total analysis time for the 2D short experiment amounted to 523 min while for the long 2D experiment to 1363 min.

### Data Protocol
Each raw data file was processed and quantified by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Scientific). Top N Peaks filter was selected, where the 10 most abundant peaks in a mass window of 100 Da alongside a signal-to-noise threshold of 1.5 were parsed. All generated peak lists were searched using Mascot software (version 2.4.1 Matrix Science). Data were searched against the Uniprot-Human database. The database search was performed with the following parameters: a mass tolerance of ±50 ppm for precursor masses; ±0.05 Da  fragment ions, allowing two missed cleavages and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal Acetylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modiﬁcations. The scoring of phosphorylation sites of the identiﬁed phosphopeptides was performed by the phosphoRS45 algorithm (version 2.0) implemented in Proteome Discoverer The enzyme was specified as trypsin while the fragment ion type as ESI-QUAD-TOF. Percolator28, 46 calculated the target FDR with a strict cut-off of 0.01. After identification and quantification, we combined all results and filtered them with the following criteria: Mascot ion score of at least 20 on peptides and proteins, maximum peptide rank 1, high peptide confidence, maximum search engine rank 1 and pRS isoform confidence probability of at least 75%. Precursor ion area detection node was added for the 1D 190 and 600 min triplicates and the 2D experiments (1363 min and 523 min total analysis times), in order to obtain the AUC (area under the curve) of the proteins as sum of the three most intense peptides of a given protein

### Publication Abstract
Ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) systems combined with state-of-the-art mass spectrometers have pushed the limit of deep proteome sequencing to new heights making it possible to identify thousands of proteins in a single LC-MS experiment within a few hours. The recently released EASY-spray technology allows one to implement nano-UHPLC with straightforwardness. In this work we initially characterized the EASY-spray containing a 50 cm column containing &lt;2 &#x3bc;m particles and found that the system allowed 3000 proteins to be identified in 90 minutes. We then asked the question whether a fast and sensitive online 2D SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow could compete with 1D long gradient analyses, using total analysis time versus proteome coverage and sample usage as benchmark parameters. The 2D LC-MS strategy consisted of the EASY-spray system that had been augmented by the addition of an SCX column. The conversion was made facile since no additional valves were required and by the use of components containing viper fittings. We benchmarked the system using a human cell lysate digest (&lt;10 &#x3bc;g). The 2D SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow allowed the identification of almost 37,000 unique peptides and 6000 proteins in a total analysis time of ~7 hours. On the same system a 1D RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow plateaued at only 20,000 peptides and 4400 unique proteins and required approx. 8 hours of analysis time. Furthermore, the 2D workflow could continue to increase the proteome coverage with longer analysis times, in fact with a 21 hour analysis we identified 56,600 unique peptides and &gt;7500 proteins. We report, here, that with this fast online SCX-RP UHPLC-MS/MS workflow, the proteome coverage can be substantially extended without significantly compromising the analysis time and sample usage.

### Keywords
Proteomics, 2d lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics groups, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Fabio Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics groups, Utrecht University


