### Accession
PXD006154

### Title
CDK and MAPK collaborate to regulate signaling dynamics via multi-site phosphorylation of the scaffold protein Ste5

### Description
CDKs and MAPKs phosphorylate similar sites yet generally have distinct functions/substrates. We report here an unanticipated system of cooperative regulation by CDK and MAPK, involving collaborative multi-site phosphorylation of a single substrate. The budding yeast protein Ste5 is a signaling scaffold for the pheromone-activated G1 arrest pathway. Upon cell cycle entry, CDK activity inhibits Ste5 via phosphorylation at numerous sites flanking its membrane-binding domain. Ste5 is also regulated by negative feedback from the pathway MAPK, though the mechanism was unknown. Using quantitative time-lapse microscopy, we examined Ste5 membrane recruitment dynamics at different cell cycle stages. Surprisingly, at stages where we expected Ste5 recruitment would be blocked, we observed transient recruitment followed by a steep decline, depending on both CDK and MAPK activities. The collective results of mutagenesis, mass spectrometry, and electrophoretic analyses suggest that the CDK and MAPK target shared sites, and that the substrate is most extensively phosphorylated when both kinases are active and able to bind their respective docking sites on Ste5. This collaborative phosphorylation can diversify regulatory options, ranging from mild tuning to strong blocking, and can yield distinct patterns of regulatory dynamics at different cell cycle stages.

### Sample Protocol
Using the cdc15-2 strain PPY2466, a Ste5-HTB fusion protein was purified from synchronized cultures to assess the effect of pheromone (G1 cells ± a factor) and cell cycle entry (G1 vs. S-phase cells). Three independent experimental replicates were performed. For each replicate, we inoculated three YPD cultures (1 L for replicate #1, or 500 mL for replicates #2-3), which were incubated (with shaking) overnight at 25°C until OD600 = 1. Then, each culture was diluted with an equal volume of pre-warmed (37°C) YPD, and incubated at 37°C for 2.5 hours; M-phase arrest was confirmed by microscopy. Next, cells in each culture were collected by filtration, suspended in 1 L of 25˚C YPD, and incubated at 25˚C. Aliquots were removed at several time points to monitor cell cycle progression by microscopy (budding index). The three cultures were treated and harvested as follows: (a) the first culture was released from M-phase arrest for 5 min., treated with 1.2 µM a factor for 5 min., then harvested; (b) the second culture was released for 5 min., treated with methanol (mock) for 5 min., then harvested; (c) the third culture was released for 70 min., then harvested (without a factor treatment). Cells were harvested by filtration. Protein purification via HTBeaq tandem affinity tagging from denatured lysates, preparation of samples for mass spectrometry (MS) and overnight tryptic digestion (Trypsin Gold, Promega) were performed as described previously (Reiter et al. 2012, Proteomics. 19-20: 3030 - 43. DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201200185). The overnight digest was stopped with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al. 2007, Nature Protocols; 2: 1896 - 1906. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 80% solvent B (solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A: 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. Peptides were subsequently analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective). The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380-1650 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3E6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at 27% collision energy. Multi-stage mass spectrometry (MSn) scans were obtained at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z, an AGC target value of 1E5, 500 milliseconds maximum ion injection time and 2 m/z isolation window. The intensity threshold for precursor selection was set to 4E4, peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to on, the exclude isotope feature was enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using in-house developed scripts utilizing the Python library Maspy [https://zenodo.org/record/345118] (release 1.1.3) and several additional external programs. Acquired Q Exactive Plus RAW files were converted to mzML files, using msConvert from the open source software Proteowizard [doi:10.1038/nbt.2377] (version 3.0.9992). Peak picking was performed on MS1 and MS2 level with the option “Prefer Vendor” activated, zlib compression was used and the binary encoding precision was set to 32 bit. The monoisotopic m/z value and charge state of MS2 precursors were recalculated and exported from RAW to MGF files using "Spectrum Selector" and "Spectrum Exporter" nodes of the software Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher). For peptide spectrum matching we used the open source program Comet [DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201200439] (version 2015011), in combination with Percolator [DOI: 10.1038/nmeth1113] (version 2.08) for estimation of the false discovery rate (FDR) and the Java standalone version of phosphoRS [DOI: 10.1021/pr200611n] for calculation of phosphorylation site localization probabilities. MS2 spectra were searched against a protein database from the SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database, www.yeastgenome.org, version 3rd February 2011) containing 6,717 entries, concatenated with a database of 248 common laboratory contaminants (provided with MaxQuant). A reverse database was generated by inverting protein amino acid sequences. Comet searches were performed separately against the forward and reverse databases. The following Comet search parameters were used for the initial search; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and n-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Up to two variable modifications per peptide were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment bin tolerance was set to 0.03 with an offset of 0. Enzyme specificity was set to full trypsin, with allowed cleavage after proline and up to two missed cleavage events. Variable removal of protein n-terminal methionine was allowed. For the main search, the number of allowed variable modifications per peptide was increased to three, and additional variable modifications were added; phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Percolator and phosphoRS were used with standard settings. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered to a q-value of 0.01, corresponding to an FDR of 1%. Phosphorylation sites with an isoform probability of greater than or equal to 70% were considered as confidently localized. The open source program Dinosaur [DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00016] (1.1.3) was used to define peptide LC-MS features on the MS1 level, standard settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
We report an unanticipated system of joint regulation by cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) and mitogen-activated&#xa0;protein kinase (MAPK), involving collaborative multi-site phosphorylation of a single substrate. In budding yeast, the protein Ste5 controls signaling through a G1 arrest pathway. Upon cell-cycle entry, CDK inhibits Ste5 via multiple phosphorylation sites, disrupting its membrane association. Using quantitative time-lapse microscopy, we examined Ste5 membrane recruitment dynamics at different cell-cycle stages. Surprisingly, in S phase, where Ste5 recruitment should be blocked, we observed an initial recruitment followed by a steep drop-off. This delayed inhibition revealed a requirement for both CDK activity and negative feedback from the pathway MAPK Fus3. Mutagenesis, mass spectrometry, and electrophoretic analyses suggest that the&#xa0;CDK and MAPK modify shared sites, which are&#xa0;most extensively phosphorylated when both kinases&#xa0;are active and able to bind their docking sites&#xa0;on Ste5. Such collaborative phosphorylation can broaden regulatory inputs and diversify output dynamics of signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Yeast, Phospho proteomics, Ste5, Pheromone response, Cdk, Mapk

### Affiliations
Department for Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, A-1030 Vienna, Austria
MAX F. PERUTZ LABORATORIES - University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Reiter
Department for Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, A-1030 Vienna, Austria


