### Accession
PXD035478

### Title
Immunization of mice with virus-like vesicles of Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus reveals a role of ORF4 in complement-mediated neutralization

### Description
The development of a prophylactic vaccine for Kaposi sarcoma-associated Herpesvirus (KSHV) would prevent consequences from infection including disorders such as Kaposi sarcoma and primary effusion lymphoma. Here, we study the immunogenicity of noninfectious virus-like vesicles (VLVs) of KSHV as a potential future vaccine platform. VLVs present a repertoire of viral structural proteins but are noninfectious due to a defect in capsid formation that prevents viral DNA packaging. Immunization of mice with adjuvanted VLVs results in virus-specific antibodies and T cells. These antibodies neutralize viral infection, and this neutralization is enhanced by the complement system. Complement-enhanced neutralization is dependent on antibodies targeting the SCR region of viral ORF4. However, this activity was not present in serum from KSHV-infected humans. Our study highlights an important role of antibody effector functions in the development of a future KSHV vaccine

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digest Aliquots from six viruses, three VLV strains, and three KSHV strains were digested. 20uL of each virus was diluted with 80uL of a master mix consisting of 43.0 uL HPLC water, 25 uL 8M urea, 10 uL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1 ul 100 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT). Samples were then incubated at 60C to all for DTT to reduce disulfide linkages for 30 minutes. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a 10mM final concentration to alkylate free cysteines, lysates were incubated in the dark at RT for 30 minutes. Lysates were next digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega), .4g of trypsin was added to each sample, and lysates were then incubated for 16 hours at 37C while being vortexed at 1000rpm. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA. Samples were then desalted on a C18 column (mini spin, Nest Group) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were eluted from these columns with 200 µL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80C until analysis.  Protein abundance MS All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. Immediately prior to analysis, lyophilized samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30 cm x 75 μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 120 minutes followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 3μL of mobile phase A. To build a spectral library VLV samples and KSHV samples were pooled and both pools were analyzed by a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. DDA data was collected by acquiring a full scan over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution resolving power (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument-controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, with a 10-ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. All individual samples were analyzed by a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. DIA was performed on all individual samples. An MS scan was performed at 60,000 resolution (@200m/z) over a scan range of 390-1010 m/z, an instrument controlled AGC target, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled maximum injection time, followed by DIA scans using 8 m/z isolation windows over 400-1000 m/z at a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%.

### Data Protocol
MS Data analysis: Spectral Libraries were built with Spectronaut factory settings from DDA pools and from DDA runs from a previous SARS-CoV-2 study (Higgins et al Biorvix https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.08.20.457146). Individual samples run with DIA methods were then analyzed against the before mentioned library with Spectronaut as previously described [PMID: 29070702]. False discovery rates were estimated using a decoy database strategy [PMID: 17327847]. All data were filtered to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches, peptide identifications, and protein identifications. Search parameters included a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications for N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. All other search parameters were defaults for the respective algorithms. Analysis of protein expression was conducted utilizing the MSstats statistical package in R. Output data from Spectronaut was annotated based on the human reference (SwissProt human reviewed sequences downloaded on 10/10/2019), Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV8) BAC16 strain (sequences were extracted from NCBI GenBank accession: GQ994935.1 on 03/15/2022). Technical and biological replicates were integrated to estimate log2fold-changes, p values, and adjusted p-values. All data were normalized by equalizing median intensities, the summary method was Tukey’s median polish, and the maximum quantile for deciding censored missing values was 0.999. Significantly dysregulated proteins were defined as those which had a fold change value >2 or <-2, with an adjusted p-value of <.0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kshv herpesvirus

### Affiliations
microbiology department at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Johnson
microbiology department at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


