### Accession
PXD000173

### Title
Immunoprecipitated proteins associated with foci-forming Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG or non-forming Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae under hypoxia

### Description
Yeast enolase (Eno2p) conjugated with EGFP and Flag-tag (Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG) and Eno2p with V22A substitution (Eno2V22Ap) conjugated with EGFP and Flag-tag (Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG) were produced in baker's yeast S. cerevisiae. After semi-anaerobic culture at 30 ˚C for 12h, cells producing Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG formed fluorescent foci, while cells producing Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG did not. The cells were collected and lysed, and proteins Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG or Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG and the associated proteins were coimmunoprecipitated using ANTI-FLAG M2 affinity gel and analyzed. Data contain two biological replicates and two technical replicates (n = 4). As the results, 96 proteins were detected with both recombinant Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG and Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG protein, 29 proteins were detected only with recombinant Eno2p-EGFP-FLAG protein, and 16 proteins were detected only with recombinant Eno2V22Ap-EGFP-FLAG protein. Data Processing/Data Analysis: The separated analytes were detected on an LTQ Velos linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For data-dependent acquisition, the method was set to automatically analyze the five most intense ions observed in the MS scan. The mass spectrometry data were used for protein identification by the Mascot search engine on Protein Discoverer software (ver. 1.2, Thermo Scientific) against the information in the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org). Search parameters for peptide identification included a precursor mass tolerance of 1.2 Da, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, a minimum of one tryptic terminus, and a maximum of one internal trypsin cleavage site. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) were set as a differential amino acid modification. The data were then filtered at a q value ≤ 0.01 corresponding to 1% FDR at the spectral level.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia has critical effects on the physiology of organisms. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, glycolytic enzymes, including enolase (Eno2p), formed cellular foci under hypoxia. Here, we investigated the regulation and biological functions of these foci. Focus formation by Eno2p was inhibited temperature independently by the addition of cycloheximide or rapamycin or by the single substitution of alanine for the Val22 residue. Using mitochondrial inhibitors and an antioxidant, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was shown to participate in focus formation. Focus formation was also inhibited temperature dependently by an SNF1 knockout mutation. Interestingly, the foci were observed in the cell even after reoxygenation. The metabolic turnover analysis revealed that [U-(13)C]glucose conversion to pyruvate and oxaloacetate was accelerated in focus-forming cells. These results suggest that under hypoxia, S. cerevisiae cells sense mitochondrial ROS and, by the involvement of SNF1/AMPK, spatially reorganize metabolic enzymes in the cytosol via de novo protein synthesis, which subsequently increases carbon metabolism. The mechanism may be important for yeast cells under hypoxia, to quickly provide both energy and substrates for the biosynthesis of lipids and proteins independently of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and also to fit changing environments.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Enolase, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Division of Applied Life Science,  Graduate School of Agriculture

### Submitter
Mitsuyoshi Ueda

### Lab Head


