### Accession
PXD009019

### Title
Proteomic analysis of California sea lion urine

### Description
It is often necessary to demonstrate measurement capabilities in fields not already using state of the art bioanalytical platforms in order to encourage metrological modernization and adoption of such technologies. Marine mammal proteomics is a burgeoning field with diverse stakeholders and rapid investment in *omic platforms (e.g., genome sequencing). Previous marine mammal proteomic studies have focused on tissues and biofluids such as plasma, serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Despite its utility in human research, to date there has not been a comprehensive proteomic analysis of marine mammal urine. Using best practice sample collection, a retrospective urine sample set was generated. These results serve as a proof of principle for development of assays in other species.

### Sample Protocol
Urine was collected aseptically via free catch, cystocentesis, or urethral catheterization while under isoflurane anesthesia, or via needle aspiration through the wall of the bladder during necropsy. Urine was stored in 2 mL cryovials at -20 to -80°C until further processing and analysis.Urines were thawed rapidly at 37°C in a water bath and vortexed for 5 mins prior to centrifugation at 3000 x g for 30 seconds. Urine protein concentration was determined using the pyrogallol method (QuanTtest® Red, Total Protein Assay System, Quantimetrix Corp.). In Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf), urine supernatant equal to 20 µg total protein was brought to a volume of 175 µL and spiked with 400 ng HIV GP80 as an internal standard to assess digestion.  Proteins were sequentially digested with proteases LysC and tTrypsin (Promega) following in-solution protocols with sodium deoxycholate as a detergent previously published. Briefly, sodium deoxycholate was added to the urine protein solution to a final concentration of 5%. Proteins were reduced with dithiotretitol  (final concentration 10 mM) for 30 min at 60°C for 30 min and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM) at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Samples were diluted 8 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, protease LysC was added at a 1:100 ratio, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. Trypsin was then added at a 1:20 ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. Trifluoroacetic acid [10% (v/v)] was added to the sample equivalent to 5% the sample volume.  The tryptic peptide solution underwent liquid:liquid extraction with water-saturated ethyl acetate and repeated four times. The peptide containing bottom layer was dried under vacuum to reduce the final volume to approximately 200 µL in a Speedvac.  One mL of 0.1% formic acid was added to the peptide solution, peptides were extracted using solid phase cartridges (Strata-x, Phenomenex), and eluted in 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were freeze-dried under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to separation and data acquisition by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 95% acetonitrile (v/v) and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) along with a spike-in of iRT peptides (Biognosys; Zurich, Switzerland) and analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to analysis the sample order was randomized. Resulting peptide mixtures (10 µl) were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 130 min gradient of 5% to 27.5% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) over 105 min followed by a ramp to 40% mobile phase B over 15 min and lastly to 95% mobile phase B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity and data dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 120,000 and the mass range was set to m/z 375-1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 1.0e4 was used for precursor selection. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 0.7 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 30,000, m/z 110 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 60 ms maximum injection time.  Raw files were converted to peak lists in the mgf format using Proteome Discoverer (v2.0.0.802). These data were searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.6.0; Matrix Science). The following databases specified within Mascot: Leptonychotes weddellii (Weddell seal), NCBI RefSeq Release 100, GCF_000349705.1_LepWed1.0, 25,718 sequences; Odobenus rosmarus divergens (Pacific walrus), NCBI RefSeq Release 101, GCF_000321225.1_Oros_1.0, 31,370 sequences; iRT peptide, 1 sequence; HIV envelope glycoprotein, 2 sequences (UniprotKB Q72502V and P04577V); and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine), 107 sequences. Databases are included in the PRIDE dataset. The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and deamidated (NQ) pyro-Glu (n-term Q), and oxidation (M) were variable modifications; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance; instrument type was specified as ESI-FTICR; the decoy setting was used within Mascot to provide local FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary markers for the assessment of kidney diseases in wild animals are limited, in part, due to the lack of urinary proteome data, especially for marine mammals. One of the most prevalent kidney diseases in marine mammals is caused by Leptospira interrogans, which is the second most common etiology linked to stranding of California sea lions ( Zalophus californianus). Urine proteins from 11 sea lions with leptospirosis kidney disease and eight sea lions without leptospirosis or kidney disease were analyzed using shotgun proteomics. In total, 2694 protein groups were identified, and 316 were differentially abundant between groups. Major urine proteins in sea lions were similar to major urine proteins in dogs and humans except for the preponderance of resistin, lysozyme C, and PDZ domain containing 1, which appear to be over-represented. Previously reported urine protein markers of kidney injury in humans and animals were also identified. Notably, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, osteopontin, and epidermal fatty acid binding protein were elevated over 20-fold in the leptospirosis-infected sea lions. Consistent with leptospirosis infection in rodents, urinary proteins associated with the renin-angiotensin system were depressed, including neprilysin. This study represents a foundation from which to explore the clinical use of urinary protein markers in California sea lions.

### Keywords
Urine, Marine mammal, California sea lion

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Marine Biochemical Sciences Group, Chemical Sciences Division, Material Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Adam Neely
Marine Biochemical Sciences Group, Chemical Sciences Division, Material Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA


