### Accession
PXD011139

### Title
Myh10 deficiency leads to defective extracellular matrix remodeling and pulmonary disease

### Description
Impaired alveolar formation and maintenance are features of many pulmonary diseases that are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. In a forward genetic screen for modulators of mouse lung development, we identified the non-muscle myosin II heavy chain gene, Myh10. Myh10 mutant pups exhibit cyanosis and respiratory distress, and die shortly after birth from differentiation defects in alveolar epithelium and mesenchyme. From omics analyses and follow up studies, we find decreased Thrombospondin expression accompanied with increased matrix metalloproteinase activity in both mutant lungs and cultured mutant fibroblasts, as well as disrupted extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Loss of Myh10 specifically in mesenchymal cells results in ECM deposition defects and alveolar simplification. Notably, MYH10 expression is down-regulated in the lung of emphysema patients. Altogether, our findings reveal critical roles for Myh10 in alveologenesis at least in part via the regulation of ECM remodeling, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of emphysema.

### Sample Protocol
- Sample preparation:  Cells were lysed by heating to 70°C for 10 minutes in SDS buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6).  DNA was sheared by sonication and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16.000 g for 10 minutes.  A colorimetric 660 nm protein assay (Pierce) was used to determine the concentration of solubilized proteins in the resulting supernatants.  Proteins were subsequently precipitated by addition of four volumes of acetone and incubation at -20°C overnight, followed by pelleting at 14.000 g for 10 minutes and washing the pellet with 90% acetone.  Samples were dried to remove acetone completely and dissolved in urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0).  Enzymatic digestion of proteins was performed by in-solution digestion.  Briefly, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide.  Proteins were then cleaved using Lys-C (50:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio) (Wako Chemicals GmbH) at room temperature for 3 hours, followed by overnight trypsination (50:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio) (Serva) at room temperature.  Peptide labeling by reductive dimethylation was performed as previously described67.  Peptide concentration in trypsin-digested samples was measured using the Fluorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce).  Samples containing equal amounts of peptides (75 µg) were subjected to the dimethyl (in-solution) labeling protocol.  In brief, peptide N-termini and lysine residues were methylated for 1 hour at RT by formaldehyde-H2 and cyanoborohydride (light, control mouse fibroblasts) and formaldehyde-13C–D2 and cyanoborodeuteride (heavy, Myh10-KD), respectively (all reagents: Sigma).  The reaction was quenched by acidification and differentially labeled samples were mixed in 1:1 ratio.  Mixed samples were fractionated using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions. - Liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry:  For mass spectrometry analysis, fractionated peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of solvent A (0.1% formic acid).  Peptides were separated using an UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 20 cm in-house packed C18 silica columns (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) coupled in line to a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an electrospray ionization source.  The gradient employed used linearly increasing concentrations of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) over solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) from 5% to 30% over 215 min, from 30% to 60%, from 60% to 17 95% and from 95% to 5% for 5 min each, followed by re-equilibration with 5% of solvent B.  The flow rate was set to a constant 400 nl/min. Full MS spectra were acquired for a mass range of 300 to 1750 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z.  The ion injection target was set to 3 x 106 and the maximum injection time limited to 20 ms. Ions were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window width of 2.2 m/z and an ion injection target of 5 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms.  Precursors with unassigned charge state and a charge state of 1 were excluded from selection for fragmentation.  The duration of dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec.  Resulting tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using data dependent mode with a loop count of 15 (top15).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed by MaxQuant (1.5.6.5) using the Uniprot mouse database (as of 20/04/2017) containing 89316 entries and the following parameters: a maximum of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the main search, trypsin as the digesting enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteins as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications.  For protein quantification based on dimethyl labeling, isotope labels were configured for peptide N-termini and lysine residues with a monoisotopic mass increase of 28.0313 and 36.0757 Da for the light and heavy labels, respectively.  Peptides with a minimum of seven amino acids and at least one unique peptide were included in protein identification.  MaxQuant was instructed to filter for 1% false discovery rate on both the peptide and protein levels.  Only proteins with at least two peptides and one unique peptide were considered as identified and were used for further data analysis.  The resulting data contained 2,949 protein groups and was subjected to differential expression analysis using the in-house R package autonomics (https://github.com/bhagwataditya/autonomics; version 1.0.21), which makes heavy use of functionality provided by the limma package68.  The analysis considered protein groups that were quantified in at least one of the triplicate samples, with lack of completeness strongly penalized by the underlying Bayesian-moderated t-testing.  To examine the biological significance of the differentially expressed proteins, we used autonomics to carry out overrepresentation analysis for Gene Ontology (GO) terms using a Fisher exact test.

### Publication Abstract
Impaired alveolar formation and maintenance are features of many pulmonary diseases that are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. In a forward genetic screen for modulators of mouse lung development, we identified the non-muscle myosin II heavy chain gene, Myh10. Myh10 mutant pups exhibit cyanosis and respiratory distress, and die shortly after birth from differentiation defects in alveolar epithelium and mesenchyme. From omics analyses and follow up studies, we find decreased Thrombospondin expression accompanied with increased matrix metalloproteinase activity in both mutant lungs and cultured mutant fibroblasts, as well as disrupted extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Loss of Myh10 specifically in mesenchymal cells results in ECM deposition defects and alveolar simplification. Notably, MYH10 expression is downregulated in the lung of emphysema patients. Altogether, our findings reveal critical roles for Myh10 in alveologenesis at least in part via the regulation of ECM remodeling, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of emphysema.

### Keywords
Myh10/nm iib; ecm remodeling; mmp; thbs; lung development; emphysema

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany

### Submitter
Anna Sokol

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Y.R. Stainier
Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany


