### Accession
PXD026609

### Title
Leucyl-tRNA synthetase is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer and enables tumor suppressive translation

### Description
In this study, we identify leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LARS) as a breast tumor suppressor. To identify the mechanism underlying LARS-mediated breast tumor suppression, we conducted TMT-proteomics in PyMT mouse tumors with monoallelic genetic deletion of LARS in the mammary tumor compartment. The analyses implicate LARS as a regulator of leucine-rich protein translation resulting in downregulation of candidate leucine-rich tumor suppressor genes.

### Sample Protocol
Flash frozen tissue samples were lysed in lysis buffer containing 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8, 0.5% NP-40 and cOmplete protease inhibitor and homogenized using a microtube homogenizer. For proteomic analysis, 100 μg of lysate was acetone precipitated and dissolved in 100 μl 8 M Urea/50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate/10 mM DTT. After 1 hour of incubation at room temperature, reduced cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 hour. Proteins were extracted by chloroform/water/methanol precipitation, and then were digested overnight using LysC endopeptidase and trypsin. TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) were dissolved in neat acetonitrile and samples were labeled for 1 hour at room temperature before quenching with 5% hydroxylamine. A label check was conducted to verify labeling efficiency and stoichiometry. Samples were mixed based on the results from the label check and the pooled sample was purified using a high-capacity Oasis HLB cartridge. Purified peptides were fractionated using a reversed-phase high pH fractionation spin column. Each fraction was separated by low-pH reversed-phase nano-flow chromatography across a 120-minute linear gradient and analyzed by SPS- MS3 acquisition using a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were queried against the Mus musculus proteome using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. Further statistical processing was performed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Lars, Breast cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Sohail Tavazoie
Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.


