### Accession
PXD024889

### Title
Sulfur-fueled chemolithoautotrophs replenish organic carbon inventory in groundwater

### Description
Metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) have revealed the existence of novel bacterial and archaeal groups and provided insight into their genetic potential. However, metagenomics and even metatranscriptomics cannot resolve how the genetic potential translates into metabolic functions and physiological activity. Here, we present a novel approach for the quantitative and organism-specific assessment of the carbon flux through microbial communities with stable isotope probing-metaproteomics and integration of temporal dynamics in 13C incorporation by Stable Isotope Cluster Analysis (SIsCA). We used groundwater microcosms labeled with 13CO2 and D2O as model systems and stimulated them with reduced sulfur compounds to determine the ecosystem role of chemolithoautotrophic primary production. Raman microspectroscopy detected rapid deuterium incorporation in microbial cells from 12 days onwards, indicating activity of the groundwater organisms. SIsCA revealed that groundwater microorganisms fell into five distinct carbon assimilation strategies. Only one of these strategies, comprising less than 3.5% of the community, consisted of obligate autotrophs (Thiobacillus), with a 13C incorporation of approximately 95%. Instead, mixotrophic growth was the most successful strategy, and was represented by 12 of the 15 MAGs expressing pathways for autotrophic CO2 fixation, including Hydrogenophaga, Polaromonas and Dechloromonas, with varying 13C incorporation between 5% and 90%. Within 21 days, 43% of carbon in the community was replaced by 13C, increasing to 80% after 70 days. Of the 31 most abundant MAGs, 16 expressed pathways for sulfur oxidation, including strict heterotrophs. We concluded that chemolithoautotrophy drives the recycling of organic carbon and serves as a fill-up function in the groundwater. Mixotrophs preferred the uptake of organic carbon over the fixation of CO2, and heterotrophs oxidize inorganic compounds to preserve organic carbon. Our study showcases how next-generation physiology approach like SIsCA can move beyond metagenomics studies by providing information about expression of metabolic pathways and elucidating the role of MAGs in ecosystem functioning.

### Sample Protocol
Groundwater sampling & setup of groundwater microcosms Groundwater was obtained in June 2018 from the Hainich Critical Zone Exploratory (CZE) well H41 (51.1150842N, 10.4479713E), accessing an aquifer assemblage in 48 m depth in a trochite limestone stratum. Groundwater from this well is oxic with average dissolved oxygen concentrations of 5.0 ± 1.5 mg L-1 (mean ± SD), pH 7.2, < 0.1 mg L-1 ammonium, 1.9 ± 1.5 mg L-1 dissolved organic carbon, and 70.8 ± 12.7 mg L-1 total inorganic carbon (Kohlhepp et al., 2017; Schwab et al., 2017). The recharge area of this aquifer assemblage is located in a beech forest (Fagus sylvatica). In total, 120 L of groundwater was sampled using a submersible pump (Grundfos MP1, Grundfos, Bjerringbro, Denmark). To collect biomass from the groundwater, 5 L each were filtered through twenty 0.2-μm Supor filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA). To replace the natural background of inorganic carbon in the groundwater by defined concentrations of 12C or 13C, two times 3 L of filtered groundwater were acidified to pH 4 in 5-L-bottles to remove the bicarbonate present. Following that, 12C- or 13C-bicarbonate was dissolved in the groundwater to a final concentration of 400 mg L-1, corresponding to 79 mg C L-1. The pH of the groundwater samples was adjusted to 7.2 by addition of 12C- or 13C-CO2 to the headspace of the bottles. Metaproteomics analysis Proteins extracted from the microcosms were first subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by in-gel tryptic cleavage as previously described (Taubert et al., 2018). After reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid (v:v), LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate source (Advion Ltd., Ithaca, NY, USA) in LC chip coupling mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw data files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using the Sequest HT search algorithm. Amino acid sequences derived from translation of the genes from all contigs of the metagenomes were used as reference database for protein identification, to allow the assignment of identified proteins to MAGs. Within Proteome Discoverer, the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with two missed cleavages allowed. A 5 ppm peptide ion tolerance and a 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerance were used. Oxidation (methionine) and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) were selected as modifications. Peptides were considered identified when they scored a q-value < 1% based on a decoy database and when their peptide rank was 1. Functional classification of peptides was done according to the gene annotation by Prokka, and taxonomic classification based on the dereplicated and refined MAGs.

### Publication Abstract
Current understanding of organic carbon inputs into ecosystems lacking photosynthetic primary production is predicated on data and inferences derived almost entirely from metagenomic analyses. The elevated abundances of putative chemolithoautotrophs in groundwaters suggest that dark CO<sub>2</sub> fixation is an integral component of subsurface trophic webs. To understand the impact of autotrophically fixed carbon, the flux of CO<sub>2</sub>-derived carbon through various populations of subsurface microbiota must first be resolved, both quantitatively and temporally. Here we implement novel Stable Isotope Cluster Analysis to render a time-resolved and quantitative evaluation of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub>-derived carbon flow through a groundwater community in microcosms stimulated with reduced sulfur compounds. We demonstrate that mixotrophs, not strict autotrophs, were the most abundant active organisms in groundwater microcosms. Species of Hydrogenophaga, Polaromonas, Dechloromonas, and other metabolically versatile mixotrophs drove the production and remineralization of organic carbon. Their activity facilitated the replacement of 43% and 80% of total microbial carbon stores in the groundwater microcosms with <sup>13</sup>C in just 21 and 70 days, respectively. The mixotrophs employed different strategies for satisfying their carbon requirements by balancing CO<sub>2</sub> fixation and uptake of available organic compounds. These different strategies might provide fitness under nutrient-limited conditions, explaining the great abundances of mixotrophs in other oligotrophic habitats, such as the upper ocean and boreal lakes.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Raman microspectroscopy, Stable isotope probing, Metaproteomics, Groundwater, Chemolithoautotrophy

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


