### Accession
PXD021643

### Title
Identifying the impact of cadmium stress on the pneumococcal metalloproteome

### Description
The toxicity of the heavy metal cadmium is well established. However, the molecular basis for how this toxicity perturbs cellular viability is still not well understood. This project investigates the cellular and molecular impacts of cadmium stress in the bacterial pathogen, Streptococcus pneumoniae. We find that cadmium depletes cellular manganese and zinc stores, leading to disruption of metalloproteins and the corresponding biochemical pathways. Furthermore, the over-accumulation of cadmium within the cells appears to facilitate mismetallation events, whereby native metal cofactors are displaced by cadmium, leading to reduced or abrogated enzymatic activity. These metalloproteomic analyses have been conducted in conjunction with transcriptomics and metabolomics to elucidate the global impacts of cadmium stress within a prokaryotic organism.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic lysate from cultures of S. pneumoniae grown with and without cadmium supplementation were fractionated using anion exchange chromatography (AEX) on an Agilent Infinity 12600 HPLC. Protein concentration of AEX fractions were determined by A280. Approximately 0.5 g of protein was added to an equal volume of HPLC grade acetonitrile (ACN), and trypsin digested. Proteins were harvested through evaporation of the liquid phase in a vacuum concentrator centrifuge for approximately 2 h. Samples were individually resuspended in 250 L of 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in ddH2O, and C18 treated using the default ‘Peptide Clean-up’ method on the automated BRAVO liquid handling robot (Agilent). Eluted peptides were harvested through evaporation of the liquid phase and resuspended in 10 L 2% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA in ddH20. Final protein concentration was determined by A280, with all samples having a final concentration of ~1.5 mg.mL-1. Samples were then run on the Q ExactiveTM Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was conducted using Matrix Scientific MASCOT Server. Data files (.mgf) were uploaded into MASCOT MS/MS ion search and analyzed using SwissProt database for matches to Streptococcus pneumoniae taxonomy. Parameters were as follows: Enzymatic cleavage by trypsin, allowing 1 missed cleavage site. Fixed Carbamidomethyl (C) modification and variable Oxidation (M) modification. Peptide tolerance of 1.2 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da with monoisotopic mass values. Peptide charges of +1, +2, +3 were allowed with an unrestricted protein mass. Significance threshold was set at P < 0.05. Ion scores of ≥24 were indicative of protein identity or extensive homology. Only proteins with > 2 peptide hits with ion scores ≥24 were considered true identifications in accordance with published literature.

### Publication Abstract
Metal ion homeostasis is essential for all forms of life. However, the breadth of intracellular impacts that arise upon dysregulation of metal ion homeostasis remain to be elucidated. Here, we used cadmium, a non-physiological metal ion, to investigate how the bacterial pathogen, Streptococcus pneumoniae, resists metal ion stress and dyshomeostasis. By combining transcriptomics, metabolomics and metalloproteomics, we reveal that cadmium stress dysregulates numerous essential cellular pathways including central carbon metabolism, lipid membrane biogenesis and homeostasis, and capsule production at the transcriptional and/or functional level. Despite the breadth of cellular pathways susceptible to metal intoxication, we show that S. pneumoniae is able to maintain viability by utilizing cellular pathways that are predominately metal-independent, such as the pentose phosphate pathway to maintain energy production. Collectively, this work provides insight into the cellular processes impacted by cadmium and how resistance to metal ion toxicity is achieved in S. pneumoniae.

### Keywords
Cadmium, Mismetallation, Metalloproteomics, Metal ion homeostasis, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Stephanie Neville

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher A. McDevitt
The University of Melbourne


