### Accession
PXD004912

### Title
SCAI promotes DNA double-strand break repair in distinct chromosomal contexts

### Description
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are highly cytotoxic DNA lesions, whose accurate repair by non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR) is crucial for genome integrity and is strongly influenced by the local chromatin environment. Here, we identify SCAI (Suppressor of Cancer Cell Invasion) as a 53BP1-interacting chromatin-associated protein that promotes the functionality of several DSB repair pathways in mammalian cells. SCAI undergoes prominent enrichment at DSB sites through dual mechanisms involving 53BP1-dependent recruitment to DSB-surrounding chromatin and 53BP1-independent accumulation at resected DSBs. Cells lacking SCAI display reduced DSB repair capacity, hypersensitivity to DSB-inflicting agents and genome instability. We demonstrate that SCAI is a mediator of 53BP1-dependent repair of heterochromatin-associated DSBs, facilitating ATM kinase signaling at DSBs in repressive chromatin environments. Moreover, we establish an important role of SCAI in meiotic recombination, as SCAI deficiency in mice leads to germ cell loss and subfertility associated with impaired retention of the DMC1 recombinase on meiotic chromosomes. Collectively, our findings uncover SCAI as a physiologically important component of both NHEJ- and HR-mediated pathways that potentiates DSB repair efficiency in specific chromatin contexts.

### Sample Protocol
SCAI-interacting proteins were identified by QUBIC, as described previously 2. HeLa BAC cells expressing GFP-tagged SCAI (NFLAP-SCAI) under the control of the endogenous promoter were cultured in DMEM. Pellets from ~107 cells were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 5% Glycerol; 1% NP-40; 1 mM MgCl2) containing 200 U Benzonase (Merck) and EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and incubated for 30 min on ice. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation and GFP-tagged proteins were bound to 50 µl magnetic beads coupled to monoclonal mouse GFP antibody (Miltenyi Biotec, #130-091-125) for 15 min on ice. Bound proteins were washed three times with 800 µl ice cold wash buffer I (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 5% Glycerol; 0.05% NP-40) and two times with 500 µl wash buffer II (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 5% Glycerol). Purified proteins were digested on beads at room temperature by adding 25 µl digestion buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 2 M urea) containing 150 ng Trypsin (Promega) and 1 mM DTT. After 30 min, peptides were eluted by adding twice 50 µl digestion buffer containing 5 mM chloracetamid. After overnight digestion at room temperature, peptides were acidified by addition of 1 µl trifluoroacetic acid and purified on C18 material. Peptides were separated on RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3µm resin (Dr. Maisch) columns (15 cm) and directly injected into a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) 2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant using the label-free algorithm 5. ProteinGroups were filtered to have at least three valid values in the LFQ intensities of the SCAI replicates. Missing values in the control pull-downs were imputed by values simulating noise around the detection limit. SCAI interactors were identified by comparing the LFQ intensities in the SCAI and mock pull-downs using a modified two-sided t-test (FDR < 0.01, S0=1, see www.maxquant.org for details).

### Publication Abstract
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are highly cytotoxic DNA lesions, whose accurate repair by non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR) is crucial for genome integrity and is strongly influenced by the local chromatin environment. Here, we identify SCAI (suppressor&#xa0;of cancer cell invasion) as a 53BP1-interacting chromatin-associated protein that promotes the functionality of&#xa0;several DSB repair pathways in mammalian cells. SCAI undergoes prominent enrichment at DSB sites through dual mechanisms involving 53BP1-dependent recruitment to DSB-surrounding chromatin and 53BP1-independent accumulation at resected DSBs. Cells lacking SCAI display reduced DSB repair capacity, hypersensitivity to DSB-inflicting agents and genome instability. We demonstrate that SCAI&#xa0;is&#xa0;a&#xa0;mediator of 53BP1-dependent repair of heterochromatin-associated DSBs, facilitating ATM kinase signalling at DSBs in repressive chromatin environments. Moreover, we establish an important role of SCAI in meiotic recombination, as SCAI deficiency in mice leads to germ cell loss and subfertility associated with impaired retention of the DMC1 recombinase on meiotic chromosomes. Collectively, our findings uncover SCAI as a physiologically important component of both NHEJ- and HR-mediated pathways that potentiates DSB repair efficiency in specific chromatin contexts.

### Keywords
Dna repair, Apms

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


