### Accession
PXD018793

### Title
Characterization of a novel two-component system TmrA/TmrB involved in multi-drug resistance of Pseudomonas fluorescens

### Description
It has been widely reported that bacteria can sense environment changes and coordinates its behaviors via two-component systems （TCSs） to survive in the complicated niche. A TCS was mainly composed of a sensor kinase and a transcriptional factor, working as a signaling-sensor and a gene transcription regulator respectively. Thriving in diverse ecological niches, Pseudomonas fluorescens inherently resists a wide spectrum of antibiotics and the operon emhABC encoding an efflux pump plays a major role in the resistance to antibiotic and toxic compounds. Here, we identified that TmrA, a responsive regulator of the TmrA/TmrB two-component system, directly activated the expression of emhABC in P. fluorescens and a consensus motif recognized by TmrA was identified upstream of the emhABC promoter. Consistently, the tmrA deletion mutant (ΔtmrA) conferred significant decrease of resistance to multiple antibiotics. Moreover, deletion of intra-cellular kinase domain of TmrB resulted in decreased drug resistance similar to ΔTmrA mutant, inferring that phosphorylation of TmrA is essential for activation of emhABC expression. It was further demonstrated that in vitro phosphorylation of TmrA led to enhanced (>10 fold) binding affinity to the promoter region of emhABC. The knock-in TmrAD52A mutant, which bore the mutation of the conserved phosphorylation site across the TmrA homologues, showed partially decreased antibiotic resistance and in vitro phosphorylation of TmrAD52A protein also improved the binding to the emhABC promoter, suggesting there should be other unidentified phosphorylation sites yet essential to the regulation role of TmrA. Lastly, we performed the label-free quantification analysis of the whole proteome of the wild-type and ΔtmrA mutant strains and found that TmrA is likely to be a global regulator participating in multiple physiological processes including the multidrug resistance, secondary metabolite synthesis and nitrate assimilation. The characterization of other potential phosphorylation sites of TmrA is currently being undertaken.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells from log phase (OD600=0.8) were collected and resuspended in 6 M Urea, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0) and digested with trypsin using the modified protocol of Matthias Mann et. al . Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 100 ng/μL and a 10 μL aliquot of each samples were subjected to nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an EASY-nLC 1200 system in the data-dependent mode. Using a 150mm×75 μm C18 colume with 2 μm particals, peptides were seperated on a 90 min nonlinear gradient: 5-35% buffer B for 60 min, 35–80% buffer B for 20 min, and 100% buffer B for 10 min (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min constant flow rate. Source voltage and current were set to 2.5 KV and 100 A, respectively. All MS measurements were performed in the positive ion mode and acquired across the mass range of 300–1800 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed by ProteinDiscovery (version 2.3) and MS/MS spectra was searched against the full protein sequences of P. fluorescens 2P24. Fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modification, methionine oxidation, were included. Other parameters were set up using the default values and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. Futher bioinformatic and statistical analyses, Student’s t test and Fisher’s-exact test with a cutoff p-value of 0.05, were performed using the software Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Efflux pumps, Two-component system, Multi-antibiotic resistance, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Tmra/tmrb

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cell Activities and Stress Adaptations, School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, P.R. China

### Submitter
Diyin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yongxing He
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cell Activities and Stress Adaptations, School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, P.R. China


