### Accession
PXD000886

### Title
Bacillus cereus proteomics -  Proteomic Evidences for Rex Regulation of Metabolism in Toxin-Producing Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579

### Description
This project contributes to the proteomic comparison of Bacillus cereus wild-type and Bacillus cereus mutant devoided of the Rex regulator. Aerobiosis and anaerobiosis conditions were assayed.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab

### Publication Abstract
The facultative anaerobe, Bacillus cereus, causes diarrheal diseases in humans. Its ability to deal with oxygen availability is recognized to be critical for pathogenesis. The B. cereus genome comprises a gene encoding a protein with high similarities to the redox regulator, Rex, which is a central regulator of anaerobic metabolism in Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria. Here, we showed that B. cereus rex is monocistronic and down-regulated in the absence of oxygen. The protein encoded by rex is an authentic Rex transcriptional factor since its DNA binding activity depends on the NADH/NAD+ ratio. Rex deletion compromised the ability of B. cereus to cope with external oxidative stress under anaerobiosis while increasing B. cereus resistance against such stress under aerobiosis. The deletion of rex affects anaerobic fermentative and aerobic respiratory metabolism of B. cereus by decreasing and increasing, respectively, the carbon flux through the NADH-recycling lactate pathway. We compared both the cellular proteome and exoproteome of the wild-type and &#x394;rex cells using a high throughput shotgun label-free quantitation approach and identified proteins that are under control of Rex-mediated regulation. Proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000886. The data suggest that Rex regulates both the cross-talk between metabolic pathways that produce NADH and NADPH and toxinogenesis, especially in oxic conditions.

### Keywords
Bacillus, Cereus, Rex regulator

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP


