### Accession
PXD030076

### Title
Distinct ribosome states trigger diverse mRNA quality control pathways

### Description
Key protein adapters couple translation to mRNA decay on specific classes of problematic mRNAs in eukaryotes. Slow decoding on nonoptimal codons leads to codon-optimality-mediated decay (COMD) and prolonged arrest at stall sites leads to no-go decay (NGD). The identities of the decay factors underlying these processes and the mechanisms by which they respond to translational distress remain open areas of investigation. We use carefully-designed reporter mRNAs to perform genetic screens and functional assays in S. cerevisiae. We characterize the roles of Hel2 and Syh1 in coordinating translational repression and mRNA decay on NGD reporter mRNAs, finding that Syh1 acts as the primary link to mRNA decay in NGD. Importantly we, observe that these NGD factors are not involved in the degradation of mRNAs enriched in nonoptimal codons. Further, we establish that key factors previously implicated in COMD, Not5 and Dhh1 , contribute modestly to the degradation of an NGD-targeted mRNA. Finally, we use ribosome profiling to reveal distinct ribosomal states associated with each reporter mRNA that readily rationalize the contributions of NGD and COMD factors to degradation of these reporters. Taken together, these results provide new mechanistic insight into the role of Syh1 in NGD and define the molecular triggers that determine how distinct pathways target mRNAs for degradation in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
TAP-tagged Syh1 and Smy2 strains were purchased from Dharmacon and grown as described above. TAP tag purifications were performed as previously published (Amberg, Burke, and Strathern 2006) replacing NP-40 for Triton X-100 and excluding TCA precipitation. Samples were submitted to the Johns Hopkins University Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core facility and processed by facility personnel as follows. Samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and FASP digested on a 30 kDa filter with 10 ng/µl trypsin in 25mM TEAB at 37° C overnight. Peptides were step-fractionated by basic reverse phase chromatography on a µ-HLB Oasis plate. Samples were loaded in 0.1% TFA, eluted with 10 mM TEAB containing 5%, 15%, 20%, 25%, or 50% acetonitrile and fractions were dried. Each fraction was reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and injected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data produced by the core facility was analyzed by MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016) searching against the UniProt yeast database and LFQ values for identified proteins were calculated without imputation, combining data from all fractions of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comd, Smy2, Syh1, No-go decay, Codon-optimality-mediated decay, Ngd, Rna decay

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Baltimore, MD, USA

### Submitter
Anthony Veltri

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Green
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Baltimore, MD, USA


