### Accession
PXD009270

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of proteomic landscape remodeling during carcinogenesis

### Description
We have performed a comprehensive analysis of how oncogenic transformation induced by v-Src kinase remodels the proteomic landscape of human breast epithelial (MCF10A) cells. We characterised the proteome of untransformed cells to a depth of ~14,000 proteins, spanning a wide dynamic range of expression levels. Changes in both protein abundance and protein turnover were analysed, in biological triplicate, at seven time points spanning 1-72 hours post v-Src activation, coincident with profound phenotypic changes in cell behaviour and morphology. These data are provided for interactive exploration via the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics database (www.peptracker.com/epd). We detect only a small subset (<3%) of mostly low copy number proteins showing altered abundance and/or half-life after transformation, including proteins regulated at the post-transcriptional level. Src activation modulated proteins with diverse cellular functions and with differential response kinetics. The resulting ‘Src signature’ is shown to be prognostic of reduced cancer patient survival post diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 2% SDS 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitors mini tablet (Roche) and 1x tablet phosStop (Roche), sonicated at 4C using a probe sonifier (Branson, 10% power, 30 s), and then the homogenate passed through a homogenisation filter (Qiashredder, Qiagen). The protein concentration of the filtrate was determined by BCA assay.  An aliquot of the lysate containing 500 µg protein was reduced using 25 mM TCEP (Pierce) and alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). The lysate was precipitated by chloroform-methanol. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea in digestion buffer (0.1 M Tris, pH 8.0 + 1 mM CaCl2). The pellet was then diluted to 4 M urea with digestion buffer, digested with 1:50 w:w LysC (Wako):protein overnight at 37 °C, diluted to 1 M urea with digestion buffer, and digested with 1:50 w:w trypsin (Pierce):protein for 4 hrs at 37 °C. The peptides were then desalted using 500 mg SepPak cartridges (Waters) using a vacuum manifold (Waters). Desalted peptides were then resuspended in 20% acetonitrile / 80% 0.1 M sodium borate buffer, pH 9.3. Peptides were fractionated by hydrophilic strong anion exchange chromatography (hSAX) (REF) as previously described (REF) into 32 fractions. These hSAX fractions were desalted using a tC18 96-well plate (Waters) using a positive pressure manifold (Waters). Peptides were then analysed by LC-MS/MS on RSLCnano-Ultimate3000-Q-Exactive Plus instruments. Peptides were trapped on a PepMap C18 precolumn (100 Å) connected to a PepMap C18 EasySpray column (2 µm particle size x 75 µm diameter x 50 cm) using 2 hr gradients (2% to 35% over 120 min) with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. A ‘Top15’ data-dependent acquisition method was used where the top 15 most abundant ions are selected for MS/MS fragmentation by HCD.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, which includes the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt reviewed human reference proteome (UniProt) accessed on April 15, 2017. Raw files for Exp A were subjected to additional database searches for phosphorylation (STY), methyl (KR), dimethyl (KR) and di-gly (K) post translational modifications. Evidence files from the separate searches were combined using an SQL script (see Supplementary File X) that removed redundant hits and filtered on 1% FDR at the PSM level. No FDR filtering was performed at the peptide and protein levels; however, protein-level FDR was estimated using the R factor and MAYU estimation methods (Shanmugam, Yocum, and Nesvizhskii, J. Proteome Res. 2014; Reiter et al. Mol. Cell Proteomics 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mcf10a, Human breast, Src kinase, Half-life, Epithelial

### Affiliations
Principal Investigator
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Scott Greig

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Principal Investigator


