### Accession
PXD045484

### Title
Identification of U1 snRNA associated proteins

### Description
In this project, we isolate U1 snRNA associated proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana. We used an antisense oligonucleotide specific for the U1 snRNA and analyzed associated proteins by mass spectrometry. As a control, the same experiments were performed with U2 snRNA- and lacZ-specifc antisense oligonucleotides.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses of eluted samples were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as decribed elsewhere (Franz-Wachtel et al, 2012). The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 49 minute segmented gradient of 10–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values were 5000 charges for MS/MS fragmentation and 106 charges for the MS scan. Due to high contamination of polymers in the samples it was decided to further purify the samples via PHOENIX Peptide Clean-up Kit (PreOmics) according to user manual.  Final measurements were performed after PHOENIX Kit purification as described above.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011), which is integrated in MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy Uniprot database from A. thalinana downloaded 2019-02-13 consisting of 91,457 protein entries from A. thalinana and 245 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminuns were set as variable modifications. Initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.5 dalton (Da) for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Match between runs was enabled for samples within one group, so for U1, U2 and control samples separately. iBAQ and LFQ settings were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comprehensive isolation by rna binding proteins (chirp), Arabidopsis, U2 snrna, U1 snrna

### Affiliations
University of Halle-Wittenberg Institute for Biology – General Genetics Weinbergweg 10 06120 Halle (Saale) Germany
Prof. Boris Macek
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University of Tuebingen
Auf der Morgenstelle 15
72076 Tuebingen

### Submitter
Irina Droste-Borel

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Laubinger
University of Halle-Wittenberg Institute for Biology – General Genetics Weinbergweg 10 06120 Halle (Saale) Germany


