### Accession
PXD029114

### Title
Pinus radiata heat stress subcellular proteomics

### Description
Heat exposure began each day of the stress treatment with an increasing temperature gradient from 15 °C to 45 °C over a period of 5 h, and this was then maintained at 45 °C for 6 h. During the following 5 h, the temperature was returned to 15 ºC and maintained for 8 h, thus mimicking a day-night scenario. Control plants (C) were sampled, and the following day the stress exposure began. Plant material was sampled at the end of the 6 h heat exposure on day 1 (T1), day 3 (T3), and day 5 (T5). To characterize the molecular mechanisms driving heat response, we accomplished a systems biology analysis combining two subcellular bottom-up proteomics assays.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear and chloroplast fractions for proteomics analyses were purified as described in (Lamelas, García, et al., 2020). In brief, samples were homogenized, incubated in their respective cellular lysis buffers, and then filtrated. Organelle enrichment was achieved with sucrose and sucrose-Percoll discontinuous gradients for intact nucleus and chloroplast isolation. Protein extraction was performed following phenol-SDS protocol (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). As protein samples were dissolved with the detergent SDS, an in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (Roche, cat. no. 03 708 969 001) according to the manufacturer’s indications. Peptides were extracted and desalted as previously described (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). The peptides were analyzed using a 1D nano-flow LC coupled to an MS/MS Orbitrap Fusion spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a 60 min gradient starting with 0.1% formic acid and with 80% acetonitrile as the mobile phase.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (ThermoFischer). A combined database was compiled with three protein databases  and used for protein identification, including the Pinus taeda genome v.1.01 (https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/plaza/versions/gymno-plaza/), UniProt/SwissProt Viridiplantae, and an in-house P. radiata transcriptome.

### Publication Abstract
The recovery and maintenance of plant homeostasis under stressful environments are complex processes involving organelle crosstalk for a coordinated cellular response. Here, we revealed through nuclear and chloroplast subcellular proteomics, biochemical cell profiles&#xa0;and targeted transcriptomics how chloroplasts and nuclei developed their responses under increased temperatures in a long-lived species (Pinus radiata). Parallel to photosynthetic impairment and reactive oxygen species production in the chloroplast, a DNA damage response was triggered in the nucleus followed by an altered chromatin conformation. In addition, in the nuclei, we found several proteins, such as HEMERA or WHIRLY, which change their locations from the chloroplasts to the nuclei carrying the stress message. Additionally, our data showed a deep rearrangement of RNA metabolism in both organelles, revealing microRNAs and AGO1 as potential regulators of the acclimation mechanisms. Altogether, our study highlights the synchronisation among the different stages required for thermotolerance acquisition in P. radiata, pointing out the role of chromatin conformation and posttranscriptional gene regulation in overcoming heat stress and assuring plant survival for the following years.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Pine, Needle, Orbitrap, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Universidad de Oviedo
Plant Physiology, Departemnt of Organisms and Systems Biology, University of Oviedo, Spain

### Submitter
Laura Lamelas

### Lab Head
Dr Mónica Meijón
Plant Physiology, Departemnt of Organisms and Systems Biology, University of Oviedo, Spain


