### Accession
PXD022832

### Title
Cocaine self-administration induces divergent protein expression in the nucleus accumbens of male and female mice to eliminate basal sex differences

### Description
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a chronic neuropsychiatric condition characterized by long-lasting alterations in the neural circuitry regulating reward and motivation. Substantial work has focused on characterizing the molecular substrates which underlie these persistent changes in neural function and behavior; however, this work has overwhelmingly focused on male subjects, despite mounting clinical and preclinical evidence that females demonstrate dissimilar progression to SUD and responsivity to drugs of abuse, such as cocaine. Here, we show that sex is a critical biological variable that defines drug-induced plasticity in the NAc. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we assessed the protein expression patterns altered by cocaine self-administration and demonstrate unique molecular profiles between males and females. We show that 1. Cocaine self-administration induces non-overlapping protein expression patterns in males and females and 2. Cocaine specifically acts on baseline sexual dimorphisms to exert these effects. Critically, we find that cocaine administration blunts not only basal sex-differences in the accumbens proteome, but also the pre-existing sex differences in behavior for natural rewards. Together, these data suggest that chronic cocaine is capable of rewriting baseline proteomic function to maintain cocaine-specific behaviors.

### Sample Protocol
24 hours following cocaine self-administration, NAc tissue was harvested (1mm x 14 gauge punch) and flash frozen on dry ice. NAc tissue was prepared for DIA MS as previously described55. Briefly, NAc tissue was lysed in Solubilization Buffer (8 M Urea; 0.4mM  Ammonium Bicarbonate;  pH 8.0) using a probe sonicator. Cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation and supernatant containing soluble proteins was collected. Soluble protein (50ug) was resuspended in Solubilization Buffer (volume to 100uL) and reduced in dithithreitol (DTT; 5uL, 200mM) at 37 °C for 30 min. Samples were alkylated in iodacetamide (IAM; 5uL, 500mM) and incubated at room temperature protected from light for 30 minutes. Samples were further diluted in water to a final urea concentration of 2M and incubated in sequencing-grade trypsin (1:20 trypsin:protein; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37C for 16 h. Digested proteins were acidified in 0.1% formic acid and desalted via column purification (C18 spin columns; The Nest Group, Inc; Southborough, MA, USA) and dried using a rotary evaporator. Purified samples were resuspended in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water.

### Data Protocol
DIA LC-MS/MS was carried out through a nano-ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific, San jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer. Samples were injected and loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column, 180 uM  x 20 mm) at 5uL/min. Peptides were subsequently separated using a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm). Mobile phases consisted of Mobile Phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) or Mobile Phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). Peptides were eluted with 6-35% gradient Mobile Phase B for 90 min, 85% Mobile Phase B for 15 min at 300nL/min, 37C. All sample injections were interspersed by column regeneration and three blank injections. Data were acquired under diata-independent mode with an isolation window of 25m/z. Full scan was in the 400-1000m/z range, “Use Quadrupole Isolation” enabled at an Orbitrap resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z and automatic gain control target value 4 x 105. MS2 fragment ions were generated in C-trap with higher-energy collision dissociation at 28% and Orbitrap resolution of 60,000. DIA spectra were searched against a mus musculus brain proteome fractionated spectral library generated from DDA LC MS/MS spectra (collected from the same Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer) using Scaffold DIA software v. 1.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Within Scaffold DIA, raw files were first converted to the mzML format using ProteoWizard v. 3.0.11748. The samples were then aligned by retention time and individually searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The data acquisition type was set to “Non-Overlapping DIA”, and the maximum missed cleavages was set to 2. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02). Dynamic modifications included phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.96), deamination of asparagine and glutamine (+0.98), oxidation of methionine and proline (+15.99), and acetylation of lysine (+42.01). Peptides with charge states between 2 and 4 and 6–30 amino acids in length were considered for quantitation, and the resulting peptides were filtered by Percolator v. 3.01 at a threshold FDR of 0.01. Peptide quantification was performed by EncyclopeDIA v. 0.6.1256, and six of the highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation. Proteins containing redundant peptides were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony, and proteins were filtered at a threshold of two peptides per protein and an FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a chronic neuropsychiatric condition characterized by long-lasting alterations in the neural circuitry regulating reward and motivation. Substantial work has focused on characterizing the molecular substrates&#xa0;that underlie these persistent changes in neural function and behavior. However, this work has overwhelmingly focused on male subjects, despite mounting clinical and preclinical evidence that females demonstrate dissimilar progression to SUD and responsivity to stimulant drugs of abuse, such as cocaine. Here, we show that sex is a critical biological variable that defines drug-induced plasticity in the nucleus accumbens (NAc). Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we assessed the protein expression patterns induced by cocaine self-administration and demonstrated unique molecular profiles between males and females. We show that 1. Cocaine self-administration induces non-overlapping protein expression patterns in significantly regulated proteins in males and females and 2. Critically, cocaine-induced protein regulation differentially interacts with sex to eliminate basal sexual dimorphisms in the proteome. Finally, eliminating these baseline differences in the proteome is concomitant with the elimination of sex differences in behavior for non-drug rewards. Together, these data suggest that cocaine administration is capable of rewriting basal proteomic function and reward-associated behaviors.

### Keywords
Nucleus accumbens, Mus musculus, Mouse, Cocaine

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt UniversityAssistant Professor of Pharmacology Assistant Professor of Pharmacology, Molecular Physiology and Biophysics Vanderbilt Brain Institute Vanderbilt Center for Addiction Research Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology and Inflammation
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Erin Calipari

### Lab Head
Dr Erin S. Calipari
Vanderbilt UniversityAssistant Professor of Pharmacology Assistant Professor of Pharmacology, Molecular Physiology and Biophysics Vanderbilt Brain Institute Vanderbilt Center for Addiction Research Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology and Inflammation


