### Accession
PXD010772

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of immunocaptured mitochondria from Purkinje Cells

### Description
Mitochondria vary in morphology and function in different tissues, however little is known about their molecular diversity among cell types. To investigate mitochondrial diversity in vivo, we developed an efficient protocol to isolate cell type-specific mitochondria based on a new MitoTag mouse. We profiled the mitochondrial proteome of three major neural cell types in cerebellum and identified a substantial number of differential mitochondrial markers for these cell types in mice and humans. Based on predictions from these proteomes, we demonstrate that astrocytic mitochondria metabolize long-chain fatty acids more efficiently than neurons. Moreover, we identified Rmdn3 as a major determinant of ER-mitochondria proximity in Purkinje cells. Our novel approach enables exploring mitochondrial diversity on the functional and molecular level in many in vivo contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for mass spectrometry were obtained from 8- to 9-week-old, male mice. Mitochondria were immunopurified from cerebellum according to the described protocol with the alteration that the final mitochondrial pellet was washed twice in IB without EDTA and BSA. Sample were lysed in 100 µL SDT lysis buffer (4% w:v SDS, 100 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) by heating for 5 min at 95°C and ultrasonication (Vialtweeter: 6 times for 30 s, 100% Amplitude, 50% cycle, max power; Hielscher Ultrasonics). Debris and non-dissolved material was removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000×g. Protein concentrations were estimated using the Pierce 660 nm assay supplemented with the ionic detergent compatibility reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a dilution series of bovine albumin in SDT buffer for calibration. An amount of 15 µg was subjected to protein digestion using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with small modifications. Briefly, 30 kDa Vivacon filters (Sartorius) were used. The alkylation step was followed by incubation with 50 units of benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 and 1 mM MgCl2. Afterwards, three washing steps with 100 µl of 8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 were implemented. Proteins were digested for 16 h with 0.3 µg of LysC (Promega) followed by 4 h incubation with 0.15 µg of trypsin (Promega). Peptides were eluted into collection tubes and desalted using C18 stop-and-go extraction. Samples were dried after elution by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC-1000 nano UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online via a Nanospray Flex electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to either a Q-Exactive or a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides were separated on self-packed C18 columns (300 mm × 75 µm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% FA (0 min, 2% B; 5 min, 5% B; 185 min, 25% B; 230 min, 35% B; 250 min, 60% B). The dataset from Purkinje cells was analyzed on a Q-Exactive MS. Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (AGC target: 3E+6). The 10 most intense peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution: 17.5 k, isolation width: 2 m:z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 25%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was applied for fragment ion spectra acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification, label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of proteins was performed with the software Maxquant (version 1.5.4.1 for Purkinje neuron; 1.5.5.1 for the dataset from granule cells and astrocytes) using default settings. In brief, a canonical database of the reviewed reference mouse proteome (UniProt, download: June 8, 2016; 16798 entries) was used for database search. The astrocyte data from cerebellum was analyzed together with data from a cortical astrocyte isolation. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy approach (concatenated forward:reverse database). The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled using a time window of 2 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria vary in morphology and function in different tissues; however, little is known about their molecular diversity among cell types. Here we engineered MitoTag mice, which express a Cre recombinase-dependent green fluorescent protein targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane, and developed an isolation approach to profile tagged mitochondria from defined cell types. We determined the mitochondrial proteome of the three major cerebellar cell types (Purkinje cells, granule cells and astrocytes) and identified hundreds of mitochondrial proteins that are differentially regulated. Thus, we provide markers of cell-type-specific mitochondria for the healthy and diseased mouse and human central nervous systems, including in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. Based on proteomic predictions, we demonstrate that astrocytic mitochondria metabolize long-chain fatty acids more efficiently than neuronal mitochondria. We also characterize cell-type differences in mitochondrial calcium buffering via the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (Mcu) and identify regulator of microtubule dynamics protein 3 (Rmdn3) as a determinant of endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria proximity in Purkinje cells. Our approach enables exploring mitochondrial diversity in many in vivo contexts.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Purkinje cells, Neurons

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuronal Cell Biology Technical University of Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Misgeld
Institute of Neuronal Cell Biology Technical University of Munich Germany


