### Accession
PXD025247

### Title
Large-scale plasma peptidomic profiling reveals a novel, non-toxic, Crassostrea hongkongensis-derived antimicrobial peptide against foodborne pathogens

### Description
Oyster plasma contains various soluble factors secreted by hemocytes and other cells, which were separated from the haemolymph and collected for antibacterial activity as-says. Plasma was collected after V. parahaemolyticus injection, with PBS injection being set as a control. Plasma of the V. parahaemolyticus challenged group was markedly more bac-tericidal than that of the PBS treated control。Peptidomics was herein employed to identify new bioactive peptides with antibacterial activity from plasma based on liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. To apply large-scale peptidomics to oyster plasma proteins, oyster plasma was extracted from the V. parahaemolyticus challenged group (P4, P5, P6) and PBS treated control (P1, P2, P3).

### Sample Protocol
Appropriate amounts of the samples were taken and centrifuged at a high speed of 20,000×g for 10 min to remove impurities such as precipitation. The supernatant was placed on ice and diluted with 8 M urea to a final concentration of 10 μg/μL, followed by incubation in the presence of 1×protease cocktail and 2 mM EDTA for 5min. Then, DTT (dithiothreitol) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, followed by incubation for 1 h at 56 °C IAM (iodoacetamide) at a final concentration of 55 mM was added to the mix-ture in a darkroom, followed by further incubation for 45 minutes at room temperature. Next, the samples were filtered in ultrafiltration tubes with a 10 kD filter membrane and centrifuged in a volume of 400 μL at a time at 14,000×g for 15 min. The resultant filtrates were collected, which were then further purified by a C18 solid-phase extraction column (following a standard protocol involving activation, balance, sample loading, washing, and elution). The eluent was cold-frozen and drained. The drained polypeptides were re-dissolved by 0.1% FA (Formic acid) of an appropriate volume, and their trace amounts were detected by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (MS) for quality control, followed by analysis by LC-MS/MS (Thermo Q-Exactive). MALDI-TOF analyzed samples were re-dissolved in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) in a volume of about 35 μL, and centrifuged at 20,000×g for 10 min to remove insoluble debris. Each resultant sample was separated by Shimadzu Nano-flow liquid chromatography (LC-20AD). The separation procedure was as follows: a sample was first loaded into a trap column at a flow rate of 8 μL/min within 4 min, followed by an analysis gradient at a total flow rate of 300 nL/min. The sample was then separated and transferred to the mass spectrometry system.

### Data Protocol
After liquid-phase separation, peptides were ionized by a nanoESI source and then transferred to a Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode detection. The main parameters used were: The ion source voltage was set to 1.6 kV, and the scanning range of primary mass spectrometry to 350~1600 m/z; resolution was set to 70,000; initial m/z of secondary mass spectrometry was fixed as 100, at a resolution of 17,500. The parent ion screening condi-tions for secondary fragmentation were: Charge, 2+ to 7+; peak strength of the parent ion, >10,000 and ranks in the first 20. Ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and fragmenta-tion ions were detected in Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. Peptide an-notation was based on a genome database of Crassostrea hongkongensis (unpublished).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oyster; plasma; peptidomics; antimicrobial peptides; cytotoxicity

### Affiliations
South China sea institude of Chinese academy of science
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Science. Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Liu Kunna

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Science. Guangzhou, China


