### Accession
PXD011551

### Title
Integrated Phosphoproteomics and Transcriptional Classifiers Reveal Hidden RAS Signaling Dynamics in Multiple Myeloma

### Description
A major driver of multiple myeloma is thought to be aberrant signaling, yet no kinase inhibitors have proven successful in the clinic. Here, we employ an integrated, systems approach combining phosphoproteomic and transcriptome analysis to dissect cellular signaling in multiple myeloma to inform precision medicine strategies. Collectively, these predictive models identify vulnerable signaling signatures and highlight surprising differences in functional signaling patterns between <I>NRAS</I> and <I>KRAS</I> mutants invisible to the genomic landscape. Transcriptional analysis suggests that aberrant MAPK pathway activation is only present in a fraction of <I>RAS</I>-mutated vs. WT <I>RAS</I> patients. These high-MAPK patients, enriched for <I>NRAS</I> Q61 mutations, have inferior outcomes whereas <I>RAS</I> mutations overall carry no survival impact. We further develop an interactive software tool to relate pharmacologic and genetic kinase dependencies in myeloma. These results may lead to improved stratification of MM patients in clinical trials while also revealing unexplored modes of Ras biology.

### Sample Protocol
<B>Phospho-Proteomics Sample Preparation</B>  We profiled eight human myeloma cell lines, RPMI-8226, INA-6, L363, KMS-11, KMS-34, MM.1S, AMO-1, and a bortezomib-resistant AMO-1, by phospho-proteomics. At harvest, 30 million cells were washed twice in room-temperature D-PBS (UCSF, CCFAL001) with 5-minute spins at 300g in between each wash. Cell pellets were then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C before processing. Replicates were obtained by harvesting cells every two weeks.  We lysed the samples in 6M guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl), 0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 5mM TCEP, 10mM 2-chloroacetamide and sonicated the lysate at 1Hz pulses for 45 seconds on ice. Protein concentrations were quantified using the 660nm Protein Assay (Pierce 22660). For each sample, 1 mg of protein was transferred into a clean tube and diluted to 1M GdnHCl by 0.1M Tris pH8.5. Next, we added 20 ug of trypsin (Thermo, PI90057) and incubated the mixture for 20 hours at 37°C.   We halted the trypsin digestion by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% (vol/vol). Any precipitate was removed by centrifugation at 17,200g for 5 minutes. The samples were then desalted on a SOLA C18 cartridge (Thermo, 03150391) assisted by vacuum. We washed twice with 0.1% TFA followed by another 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) wash. We eluted the peptides in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA.  Next, we enriched for phospho-peptides using a Fe3+-immobilized metal affinity column (IMAC). We prepared the column by stripping the nickel off Ni-charged agarose beads (VWR, 220006-720) using four washes of 100mM EDTA and re-charging them with Fe3+ from 150mM FeCl3. We then transferred the Fe3+-beads to a MicroSpin C18 column (Nest Group, SEM SS18V.25). After IMAC preparation, we transferred our tryptic peptides to the column and performed three washes, under vacuum, with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA to remove non-phosphorylated peptides and two washes with 0.5% FA to equilibrate the C18 resin. To mobilize the phospho-peptides onto C18, we washed twice with 500mM potassium phosphate at pH7. We then performed two final washes with 0.5% FA to eliminate any residual salt. The phospho-peptides were eluted in 50% ACN/0.1% FA, vacuum dried, and stored at -80°C for further analysis.  <B>Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis</B>  Enriched phospho-peptides were re-suspended in 2% ACN/0.1% FA. A total of 1.25 ug of peptides from each sample were injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument with a 15-cm Acclaim PEPMAP C18 (Thermo, 164534) reverse phase column. The samples were separated on a 3.5-hour non-linear gradient using a mixture of Buffer A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.1% FA). The initial flow rate was 0.5 uL/min at 3% B for 15 minutes followed by a drop in flow rate to 0.2 uL/min and a non-linear increase (curve 7) to 40% B for the next 195 minutes. The flow rate was then increased to 0.5 uL/min while Buffer B was linearly ramped up to 99% for the next six minutes. Finally, we maintained the peak flow rate and Buffer B concentration for another seven minutes before dropping the concentration back to 3%.  Eluted peptides were analyzed with a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The MS survey scan was performed over a mass range of 350-1500 m/z with a resolution of 70,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 100 ms. We performed a data-dependent MS2 acquisition at a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5e4, and MIT of 150 ms. The 15 most intense precursor ions were fragmented in the HCD at a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds to avoid over-sampling of highly abundant species.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the raw spectral data using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) to identify and quantify phospho-sites on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. We relied on default settings except for the inclusion of “Phospho (STY)” as a variable modification. We searched against the Swiss-Prot-annotated human proteome from Uniprot (downloaded August 2016 with 20,163 entries). We processed the “Phospho (STY) Sites” output file containing the phospho-sites data for downstream analyses in R (version 3.4.0). First, we filtered out proteins annotated as “Reverse” or “Potential contaminant” and retained sites with “localization probability” and “delta score” greater than 0.75 and 8, respectively. To remove poorly quantified phospho-sites, we required each site to be quantified in at least two replicates in one cell line. This reduced the number of identifications from 21,702 to 19,155. We then log2-transformed the intensity data and centered the median intensity of each sample at 0 by subtracting the sample median from each value. Missing values were imputed using a hybrid imputation approach, “MLE” setting for values missing at random and “MinProb” for those missing not at random (<I>imputeLCMD</I> package). Finally, we average the phospho-site intensities of the replicates.

### Publication Abstract
A major driver of multiple myeloma (MM) is thought to be aberrant signaling, yet no kinase inhibitors have proven successful in the clinic. Here, we employed an integrated, systems approach combining phosphoproteomic and transcriptome analysis to dissect cellular signaling in MM to inform precision medicine strategies. Unbiased phosphoproteomics initially revealed differential activation of kinases across MM cell lines and that sensitivity to mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition may be particularly dependent on mTOR kinase baseline activity. We further noted differential activity of immediate downstream effectors of Ras as a function of cell line genotype. We extended these observations to patient transcriptome data in the Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation CoMMpass study. A machine-learning-based classifier identified surprisingly divergent transcriptional outputs between NRAS- and KRAS-mutated tumors. Genetic dependency and gene expression analysis revealed mutated Ras as a selective vulnerability, but not other MAPK pathway genes. Transcriptional analysis further suggested that aberrant MAPK pathway activation is only present in a fraction of RAS-mutated vs wild-type RAS patients. These high-MAPK patients, enriched for NRAS Q61 mutations, have inferior outcomes, whereas RAS mutations overall carry no survival impact. We further developed an interactive software tool to relate pharmacologic and genetic kinase dependencies in myeloma. Collectively, these predictive models identify vulnerable signaling signatures and highlight surprising differences in functional signaling patterns between NRAS and KRAS mutants invisible to the genomic landscape. These results will lead to improved stratification of MM patients in precision medicine trials while also revealing unexplored modes of Ras biology in MM.

### Keywords
Signaling, Nras, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Ras, Machine learning, Proteomics, Kras, Mapk, Myeloma

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California, San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Yu-Hsiu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Paul Wiita
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California, San Francisco, USA


