### Accession
PXD042010

### Title
Cla4 catalyzed Set1 phosphorylation

### Description
H3K4me3 is catalyzed by the Set1/MLL family of methyltransferases, whose function in catalyzing H3K4me3 is unique. Impaired function of Set1/MLL family members can lead to many abnormalities, such as bone and nerve defects, leukemia, and even death. Although the Set1 family plays an important regulatory role in various biological processes, it is still unclear how the Set1 protein itself is regulated and how protein levels are maintained. Due to the numerous homologues, complex composition, and high molecular weight of Set1 in higher organisms, especially humans, related research is greatly limited. In brewing yeast, Set1 is the only methyltransferase that catalyzes H3K4me3 and is highly conserved between species. Therefore, yeast is an ideal model for studying the functions and mechanisms of the Set1 family. In addition, Set1 protein plays an important role in regulating gene transcription, promoting telomere silencing, and maintaining cell lifespan. The Set1 family also plays an important regulatory role in the occurrence and development of various cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains Reb1-Flag was harvested from 1 liter culture cultured in rich media overnight to an optical density at 600 (OD600) of 1.0 ,  washed and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cell pellets were ground with glass beads by using a Biospec bead beater [30 sec ON, 90 sec OFF] in cold room for ca. 45 min in IP buffer (40 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 50mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4), The lysate was centrifuged at 18,400g at 4 °C for 1.5 hr and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG IP Resin (GenScript, L00425) beads at 4 °C for 4 hr. The purified histone H3 protein form bacterial were immunoprecipitated with Ni-NTA Agarose (Abcolnal, AS045) at 4 °C for 4 hr. The beads were washed extensively in IP buffer for on-bead trypsin digestion. Briefly, immunoprecipitated protein was disulphide-reduced by adding DTT to final concentration of 25mM and reacted in an incubator shaker at 37℃ for 40min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final  concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Immunoprecipitated protein was digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme : substrate) ratio at 37℃ and the supernatant peptides ware then desalted using C18 columns (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid  and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z, with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 106. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 105. Determination of phosphorylation sites using mass spectrometry refers to previous research [1]. The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set for methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages and a false-detection rate of 1% using the percolator validator algorithms were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) is a conserved histone modification catalyzed by histone methyltransferase Set1, and its dysregulation is associated with pathologies. Here, we show that Set1 is intrinsically unstable and elucidate how its protein levels are controlled within cell cycle and during gene transcription. Specifically, Set1 contains a destruction box (D-box) that is recognized by E3 ligase APC/C<sup>Cdh1</sup> and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Cla4 phosphorylates serine 228 (S228) within Set1 D-box, which inhibits APC/C<sup>Cdh1</sup>-mediated Set1 proteolysis. During gene transcription, PAF complex facilitates Cla4 to phosphorylate Set1-S228 and protect chromatin-bound Set1 from degradation. By modulating Set1 stability and its binding to chromatin, Cla4 and APC/C<sup>Cdh1</sup> control H3K4me3 levels, which then regulate gene transcription, cell cycle progression, and chronological aging. In addition, there are 141 proteins containing the D-box that can be potentially phosphorylated by Cla4 to prevent their degradation by APC/C<sup>Cdh1</sup>. We addressed the long-standing question about how Set1 stability is controlled and uncovered a new mechanism to regulate protein stability.

### Keywords
Cla4 set1 phosphorylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China
hubei university

### Submitter
Yu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yu qi
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China


