### Accession
PXD020111

### Title
Saliva peptidome and proteome correlates with oral cancer prognosis

### Description
Protease activity has been associated with pathological processes that can lead to cancer development and progression. However, understanding the pathological unbalance in proteolysis is challenging since changes can occur simultaneously at protease, their inhibitor and substrate levels. Here, we present a pipeline that combines peptidomics, proteomics and peptidase predictions for studying proteolytic events in saliva associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) prognosis and lymph node metastasis. Our results suggest that cleavage products differentially abundant in the saliva of patients with (N+) or without (N0) nodal metastasis exhibit potential of prognostic value in oral cancer whereas reduced levels of peptidase inhibitors disturb the proteolytic balance in saliva of OSCC patients with worse prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
For bottom-up proteomics, saliva was first centrifuged for 5 min at 1,500 × g, 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined on the supernatant using Bradford assay. An aliquot with 10 µg of total protein was digested in solution using trypsin. In brief, samples were treated with urea buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM DTT) containing cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and the mixture sonicated in an ultrasound bath for 10 min. Following a centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 5 min, the supernatants were sequentially treated with 5 mM DTT (for 25 min, at 56 °C) and 14 mM iodoacetamide (for 30 min in the dark, at room temperature) for protein reduction and alkylation of cysteines. The mixture was then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to lower urea concentration to 1.6M, and calcium chloride added to 1mM final concentration. Samples were digested for 16h at 37 °C using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 - enzyme to protein – ratio.  After overnight incubation, more trypsin (1:50) was added and digestion continued for 5-6 hour. The reaction was terminated by acidification with TFA to 0.4%. Peptides were desalted with StageTips C18, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. peptides were analysed using the EASY-nLC II coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Approximately 750 ng were resolved using the analytical column PicoFrit C18 (20 cm x 75 µm id, 5 µm; New Objective) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were resolved over 212-min gradient (2-90% B; 35% B at 175 min). Eluting peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive mode. The minimum charge state of peptides ions selected for MS/MS analysis was set to +2. Precursor ions (m/z 300-1,600) were scanned in the Orbitrap with resolution defined to r=60,000 and 1E6 target ions. Up to 20 most intense ions (5E4 target ions) were isolated through a 3 Da window and activated by collision induced dissociation (CID), with normalized collision energy of 35%, activation Q=0.25 and activation time of 10 ms. Product ions were detected by the ion trap operating in the normal scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion list of up to 500 ions, an exclusion duration of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.5.8.0. was used for processing of bottom-up proteomics data. MS/MS spectra were searched against The Human UniProt database (93,599 protein sequences, 36,574,184 residues, release June 2018) using the Andromeda search engine. Search parameters included tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for product ions, trypsin/P enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02) was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) were considered variable modifications. A maximum of a 1% FDR was set for both the protein and peptide matches. Protein quantification was performed using the LFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant software, with a minimal ratio count of one and a 2-min window for matching between runs. Identified protein entries were processed excluding reverse sequences and those identified “only by site”. Differential proteins were assessed by two group comparison (N0 vs N+) using one-way ANOVA (p-value≤0.05) using Perseus v1.2.7.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protease inhibitors, Oral cancer, Proteolysis, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Peptidome

### Affiliations
National Laboratory of Biosciences - CNPEM. Brazil
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences - CNPEM. Brazil


