### Accession
PXD039087

### Title
An evolutionary conserved, immobility associated antithrombotic mechanism

### Description
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a main cause of morbidity and mortality that causes tremendous health care costs. Short term immobility related conditions arising from hospitalization, acute trauma and forced bed rest are major risk factors for the development of VTE. In contrast, chronically paralyzed patients with post-spinal cord injury are protected from VTE despite immobilization. Similarly, free-ranging brown bears (Ursus arctos) that hibernate (immobilize) have adapted to this threat through yet to be discovered mechanisms and do not develop VTE. This suggests that long-term immobility can induce antithrombotic mechanisms that are evolutionarily conserved. Here we aimed to identify these adaptive mechanisms of VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified platelet expressed heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47) as the most substantially downregulated protein during brown bear hibernation. In a clinical bed rest study and in spinal-cord injured humans, we likewise observed drastic reduction of platelet-expressed Hsp47. Genetic ablation and pharmaceutical inhibition of platelet Hsp47 attenuates deep vein thrombosis and thromboinflammatory responses in mice and human blood cells. This suggests that Hsp47 downregulation is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that also protects immobilized patients from VTE. Our translational approach thus identified an antithrombotic signature that may give rise to novel antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers.

### Sample Protocol
Phopshopeptide analysis: Proteomics sample preparation was carried out with the 96 well PreOmics iST kit (P.O.00027) following the manufacturers protocol. Purified peptide concentration was set to 0.2 mg/ml after determination of concentration by nanodrop. For phospho-peptide enrichment 27 ng of purified peptides were loaded on Fe-NTA cartridges and enriched on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent Technologies). LCM of FFPE tissue: FFPE tissue sections (thickness: 5 um) derived from three human and three bear specimens were prepared and stained by H.&E. as described earlier. Thrombi in the respective sample were located pathologically and extracted using Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM) on a Leica LMD7 instrument. Dissected tissue was collected in caps of 0.2 mL tubes and subsequently transferred to a 96-well plate (96 AFA-TUBE TPX Plate, Covaris) by centrifugation for 2 min at 1000g. Samples were lysed by consecutive heating at 90°C for 10 min and 80 min, interrupted by focused sonification (LE220-plus Covaris Focused-ultrasonicator; duration: 300 sec, peak power: 450.0, duty factor: 50%, cycles: 200, average power: 225) in lysis buffer (300 mM Tris, 5 mM TCEP and 25 mM CAA final concentration). Enzymatic protein digest was performed by adding 0.5 ug LysC for 4 h and was complement by 0.5 ug of trypsin overnight at 37°C and 1200 rpm. Thereafter, the reaction was quenched by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1%. The resulting peptides were purified using the iST protocol (Kulak et al.?). In brief, 20 ug of peptides were loaded onto in-house generate SDB-RPS (Empore™ SPE Disks, CDS Analytical, 98-0604-0226-4) tips by centrifugation, followed by consecutive washing steps using 1% TFA in Isopropanol and 0.2% TFA in MS-grade H2O, respectively. Peptides were eluted using 80% AcN, 1% NH4+ in MS-grade H2O, dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator Plus) and resuspended 2% acetonitrile (v/v) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (v/v) in MS-grade H2O.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with DIA-NN software version 1.8.1

### Publication Abstract
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Short-term immobility-related conditions are a major risk factor for the development of VTE. Paradoxically, long-term immobilized free-ranging hibernating brown bears and paralyzed spinal cord injury (SCI) patients are protected from VTE. We aimed to identify mechanisms of immobility-associated VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed an antithrombotic signature in platelets of hibernating brown bears with heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) as the most substantially reduced protein. HSP47 down-regulation or ablation attenuated immune cell activation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation, contributing to thromboprotection in bears, SCI patients, and mice. This cross-species conserved platelet signature may give rise to antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers beyond immobility-associated VTE.

### Keywords
Vte, Platelets

### Affiliations
Director at Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Director at Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried


