### Accession
PXD010991

### Title
Calcineurin dependent protein phosphorylation changes during egg activation in Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
In animals studied to date, the crucial process of egg activation, by which an arrested mature oocyte transits into an actively developing embryo, initiates with an increase of Ca2+ in the oocyte’s cytoplasm. This Ca2+ rise sets off a series of downstream events, including the completion of meiosis and the dynamic remodeling of the oocyte transcriptome and proteome, which prepare the oocyte to undertake embryogenesis. Calcineurin is a highly conserved phosphatase that is activated directly by Ca2+ upon egg activation and that is required for the resumption of meiosis in Xenopus, ascidians and Drosophila.  The molecular mechanisms by which calcineurin transduces the calcium signal to regulate meiosis and other downstream events are still unclear. In this study, we investigate the regulatory role of calcineurin during egg activation in Drosophila melanogaster. Using mass spectrometry, we quantify the phosphoproteomic and proteomic changes that occur during egg activation, and we examine how these events are affected when calcineurin function is perturbed in female germ cells. Our results show that calcineurin regulates hundreds of phosphosites and also influences the abundance of numerous proteins during egg activation. We find calcineurin-dependent changes in cell cycle regulators including Fzy, Greatwall (Gwl) and Endosulfine (Endos), protein translation modulators including PNG, NAT, eIF4G and eIF4B, and important components of signaling pathways including GSK3β and Akt1. Our results help elucidate the events that occur during the transition from oocyte to embryo.

### Sample Protocol
Mature stage 14 oocytes were dissected from virgin females (aged for 3-5 days) in hypertonic Isolation Buffer (IB) (Page & Orr-Weaver 1997). Activated but unfertilized eggs were collected from females (aged for 3-5 days) that had been mated to the spermless sons of tudor males. Collection of the unfertilized was conducted in 30 min periods using grape juice agar plates. For each sample, 500-600 oocytes or activated eggs were homogenized in Protease/ Phosphatase Inhibition Buffer (PPIHB) as described in Krauchunas et al (2012). The lysates were centrifuged at 20000xg at 4°C for 30 min, and the supernatants were collected.  For each TMT-10plex set, a total of 5 oocyte samples (2 replicates for control and 3 replicates for CanB2 kd or CnAact) and 5 activated egg samples (2 replicates for control and 3 replicates for CanB2 kd or CnAact) were prepared. TMT labeling of proteins was performed according to Thermo Fisher Scientific’s TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents protocol (http://www.piercenet.com/instructions/2162073.pdf) with a slight modification as described in previous publications (Yang et al 2018, Yang et al 2011) (See Supplementary Methods for additional details on the proteomics methods). Briefly, 110µg of protein for each sample was alkylated in iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 hour, then precipitated in ice-cold acetone overnight at -20ºC. Samples were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) and digested with 10µg trypsin for 18 hours at 35ºC. The TMT 10-plex labels were added with a 1:2 ratio to each of the tryptic digest samples for 1 hour at room temperature, and label incorporation was checked using the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  Samples were then pooled and cleaned by solid phase extraction. Two aliquots of eluted tryptic peptides (~550µg each) were evaporated to dryness, and one aliquot was used for dimensional LC fractionation via a high pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation, while the other was used for phosphopeptide enrichment with TiO2 beads.  TiO2 enrichment was conducted using a TiO2 Mag Sepharose kit (GE Healthcare). The reconstituted TMT 10-plex-tagged tryptic peptides aliquot was incubated with the TiO2 slurry for 30 minutes at 1,800rpm vortex. Beads were then washed with a buffer containing 80% acetonitrile and 1% TFA, and phosphopeptides were eluted three times in elution buffer (5% ammonium hydroxide). Eluted fractions were pooled and dried, then reconstituted in 50µl of  0.5% formic acid for nanoLC-MS.MS analysis.   column (3 µm, 100 µm ´ 20 mm, Dionex) at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting, and separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm).  The labeled peptides were eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 35% ACN in 0.1% FA at 300 nL/min, followed by an 8-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 9-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 25 min prior to the next run.  The Orbitrap Fusion was run in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed.  For global proteomics fractions, the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan to select precursor ions, followed by 3 seconds “Top Speed” data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 45 seconds of exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data were acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).  For the phosphoproteomics fractions, the instrument was operated in either the multiplestage activation (MSA)-based Synchronous Precursor Selection MS3 mode or the neutral loss (NL) triggered MS3 mode for phosphopeptides (Jiang et al 2017).  In the MSA SPS MS3 method, the orbitrap analyzer was used for acquiring CID MS2 spectra to increase confidence of phosphopeptide identifications and site location, while the multiple MS2 fragment ions isolated by SPS were subjected to HCD fragmentation at the MS3 level for reporter ion quantitation. In the NL-triggered MS3 method, a regular MS2 spectrum was first generated from the precursor using CID. If the neutral loss peak was detected, then an HCD MS3 scan was acquired on the most abundant ion to obtain both the sequence information and the quantitation.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT10-plex experiments were processed and searched using Sequest HT software within the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo-Fisher). The Drosophila melanogaster entries (21,015) in the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org) were used for database searches. The default search settings for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD2.2 for were: two mis-cleavage for full trypsin with fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation on asparagine/glutamine residues and acetylation of protein N-terminus. The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance values were 10 ppm and 50 mDa, respectively.  Identified peptides were filtered for maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.2 along with additional peptide confidence set to high. The TMT10-plex quantification method within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software was used to calculate the reporter ratios with mass tolerance ±10 ppm with applying the isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation. A precursor co-isolation filter of 50% was applied for minimizing ratio compression caused by co-isolation of precursor ions.  Protein and phosphopeptide abundances were analyzed for differential expression using the LIMMA package in R (v.3.30.13, Ritchie et al. 2015). In the global proteomics analysis, proteins with <2 unique peptides were removed from the analysis. A linear model function was applied to the abundance values, and an empirical Bayes method was used to perform moderated pair-wise t-tests (Kammer et al 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Calcineurin, Proteomics, Egg activation, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Cornell University

### Submitter
Zijing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Mariana Federica Wolfner
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY


