### Accession
PXD006776

### Title
Proteome Profiling Identifies Markers for Inflammation-Related Tumor-Fibroblast Interaction in Colorectal Cancer

### Description
Inflammation has been identified as an important factor in cancer development and progression, including colorectal cancer [CRC]. To determine the role of inflammation and the specific contribution of activated fibroblasts in cancer development and progression we analyzed six human CRC tissue specimens and paired normal adjacent mucosa samples by LS/MS-MS. Amongst other, indeed several inflammation associated proteins were found differentially expressed compared to normal colonic mucosa. Two candidate molecules, SPARC and THBS2 were recently identified as proteins of a fibroblast inflammation signature. Analysis of public available RNA expression datasets revealed, that the mRNA of both SPARC and THBS2 are upregulated in CRC, typically in association with the CRC consensus molecular subtype 4 [CMS4]. Immunohistochemistry staining also demonstrated upregulation of SPARC and THBS2 in the tumor stroma compared to normal adjacent mucosa and indicated co-localization with the mesenchymal marker [alpha]SMA. In vitro 3D co-culture experiments with human colon derived fibroblasts and CRC cell lines resulted in enhanced SPARC and THBS2 protein levels when both cell types were cultivated in direct physical contact, compared to fibroblasts or cancer cells alone. This study demonstrates the feasibility of detecting tumor-specific signatures by LC-MS/MS and compatibility with RNA expression datasets. We identified an inflammation signature in CRC tissue and the data emphasized the contribution of activated fibroblasts in these events.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue acquisition The study was approved by the Ethics Commission of the Medical University of Vienna (application number 1659/2012). Patients suffering from colorectal cancer and underwent surgery at the General Hospital of Vienna were asked for their informed consent to use part of the resected tissue for analysis of tumor protein markers. Tumor tissue and mucosa from the resection margin (control tissue) were classified according to standard histological evaluation methods and used for protein extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis.  Extraction and digestion of proteins  Frozen tissue samples were incubated in sample buffer (7.5M urea, 1.5M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol) for 10min. Subsequently, proteins were extracted by means of an ultrasonic stick. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). Thereafter, in-solution digestion of proteins was performed using trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany), as described previously (Bileck, Kreutz et al. 2014, Slany, Bileck et al. 2016). LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% FA containing 10fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA). 5µl were injected into the nano HPLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) loading peptides on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted to a 50cmx75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300nl/min, using a gradient from 8 to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235min. The nano HPLC system was coupled to a QExactive orbitrap with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400 to 1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200), MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200), using a top 12 method and applying HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Q exactive orbitrap

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


