### Accession
PXD000497

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of melanoma BRAF

### Description
Proteomics and phosphosproteomics analysis of BRAF mutant cells.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. Protein and peptide false discovery rates were set at 1% and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was required. In addition, Andromeda minimum score was set to 60 (~ Mascot score 20 (PMID: 21254760)). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing up to two missed cleavages. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of STY as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with an mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation were set to 0.05 Da for FTMS and 0.6 Da for ITMS.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of BRAF mutant melanomas with specific BRAF inhibitors leads to tumor remission. However, most patients eventually relapse due to drug resistance. Therefore, we designed an integrated strategy using (phospho)proteomic and functional genomic platforms to identify drug targets whose inhibition sensitizes melanoma cells to BRAF inhibition. We found many proteins to be induced upon PLX4720 (BRAF inhibitor) treatment that are known to be involved in BRAF inhibitor resistance, including FOXD3 and ErbB3. Several proteins were down-regulated, including Rnd3, a negative regulator of ROCK1 kinase. For our genomic approach, we performed two parallel shRNA screens using a kinome library to identify genes whose inhibition sensitizes to BRAF or ERK inhibitor treatment. By integrating our functional genomic and (phospho)proteomic data, we identified ROCK1 as a potential drug target for BRAF mutant melanoma. ROCK1 silencing increased melanoma cell elimination when combined with BRAF or ERK inhibitor treatment. Translating this to a preclinical setting, a ROCK inhibitor showed augmented melanoma cell death upon BRAF or ERK inhibition in vitro. These data merit exploration of ROCK1 as a target in combination with current BRAF mutant melanoma therapies.

### Keywords
Phospho proteome, Melanoma, Braf, Whole proteome

### Affiliations
Utrecht Univeristy

### Submitter
Teck Yew Low

### Lab Head


