### Accession
PXD033616

### Title
Druggable Serine Proteases of Leishmania by Activity‐Based Protein Profiling

### Description
Leishmaniasis are a group of diseases caused by parasitic protozoa of the genus Leishmania. Current treatments are limited by difficult administration, high cost, poor efficacy, toxicity, and growing resistance. New agents, with new mechanisms of action, are urgently needed to treat the disease. Although extensively studied in other organisms, serine proteases (SPs) have not been widely explored as antileishmanial drug targets. Herein we report for the first time an activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) strategy to investigate new therapeutic targets within the SPs of the Leishmania parasites. Active site directed fluorophosphonate probes (rhodamine and biotin‐conjugated) were used for the detection and identification of active Leishmania serine hydrolases (SHs). Significant differences were observed in the SHs expression levels throughout the Leishmania life cycle and between different Leishmania species. Using iTRAQ-labelling-based quantitative proteomic mass spectrometry, we identified two targetable SPs in Leishmania mexicana: carboxypeptidase LmxM.18.0450 and prolyl oligopeptidase LmxM.36.6750. Druggability was ascertained by selective inhibition using the commercial serine protease inhibitors chymostatin, lactocystin and ZPP, which represent templates for future anti-leishmanial drug discovery programs. Collectively, the use of ABPP method complements existing genetic methods for target identification and validation in Leishmania.

### Sample Protocol
Labelling of active serine hydrolases in Leishmania spp. was performed using a biotin-conjugated fluorophosphonate probe (Biotin-FP). Unreacted Biotin-FP probe in the probe-labelled whole-cell extracts of Leishmania mexicana parasites was removed by passing the soluble fractions of the extracts through 7K MWCO Zeba Spin desalting columns containing 5 mL resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluates were denatured with 0.5% SDS at 95oC for 5 minutes, allowed to cool to room temperature and diluted with PBS to yield an SDS concentration of 0.2%. NeutrAvidin-Agarose beads (50 µL per sample), freshly washed three times with 0.1% SDS buffer (0.1% SDS in PBS), were added to each of the sample and the samples were rotated on an end-over-end rotating shaker for 1.5 hours at room temperature. The beads were then washed 3 times with 1% SDS in PBS, 2 times with PBS and once with 25 mM TEAB buffer. Each washing was performed with 10 volumes of the washing solutions with respect to the bead volume and centrifugation of the beads between washing steps were carried out at 2,000 g for 1 minute at room temperature. Thoroughly washed beads from the affinity enrichment step were resuspended in 200 µL of 25 mM TEAB buffer and treated with 10 mM TCEP (200 mM stock solution in water) for 45 minutes at 30 oC. The beads were washed once with 25 mM TEAB buffer and resuspended in 200 µL of 25 mM TEAB buffer and treated with 15 mM chloroacetamide (CAA; 200 mM stock solution in water) in dark for 20 min at RT. The beads were again washed with 25 mM TEAB buffer and resuspended in 200 µL of fresh 50 mM TEAB buffer and treated with 5 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin at 37 oC for 16 hours. The samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 minutes at RT to collect the supernatant. The beads were washed with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA; 50 µL for each wash) and mixed with the previous supernatant. The collected tryptic peptides were acidified to pH 3 using FA and evaporated to dryness. The peptides were then redissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA solution in water and subjected to desalting on Pierce C-18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific; CN: 89873) following manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were evaporated to complete dryness under a vacuum. The iTRAQ labelled peptides were resolved on an ekspertTM nanoLC 425 with Low Micro Gradient Flow module (Eksigent) using a YMC-Triart C18 column (12 nm, S-3 µm, 150 x 0.3 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S03-15H0RU). A C-18 trap column (Trap-YMC-Triart 12 nm S-5 µm, 5 x 0.5 mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S05-E5J0RU) was connected prior to the main separating column. 5 µL of peptides were separated by mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. over 87 min. The gradient used was the following, 3% B to 5% B (0 to 2 min.), 5% B to 30% B (2 to 68 min.), 30% B to 35% B (68 to 73 min.), 35% B to 80% B (73 to 75 min.), at 80% (75 to 78 min.), 80% B to 3% B (78 to 79 min.), at 3% B (79 to 87 min.). The MS analyses were performed on a TripleTOF 6600 system (Sciex) in high-resolution mode. The MS acquisition time was set from gradient time 0 to 85 min. and the MS1 spectra were collected in the mass range of 400 to 1600 m/z with 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Further fragmentation of each MS1 spectrum occurred with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle and 33 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor across the range of 100 to 1500 m/z with ion selection +2 to +5, 500 cps intensity threshold, and dynamic exclusion for 15 sec. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the .wiff files from the Sciex TripleTOF 6600 system were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB. Database search employed the following parameters: Reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 4plex, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, minimum peptide length of 6, and protein FDR 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual iTRAQ channels for both peptide N-terminal labelling and lysine side-chain labelling as per the iTRAQ Reagent Multiplex Kit were also configured into the database search. The proteinGroups.txt file from the MaxQuant search output was processed using Perseus software version 1.6.2.3. Potential contaminants, reverse sequences, sequences only identified by site and endogenous biotinylated proteins were filtered off. For each identified protein, ratios of the probe-treated Reporter Intensity Corrected values to the vehicle-treated Reporter Intensity Corrected values was calculated yielding the fold change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Serine protease, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
Teesside University
School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, UK

### Submitter
Karunakaran Kalesh

### Lab Head
Dr Karunakaran Kalesh
School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, UK


