### Accession
PXD001520

### Title
Geodermatophilus obscurus DSM43160 proteomics

### Description
This project contributes to the proteomic comparison of different bacteria. A whole proteome catalogue was obtained for Geodermatophilus obscurus  DSM43160 grown in standard conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
The Geodermatophilaceae are unique model systems to study the ability to thrive on or within stones and their proteogenomes (referring to the whole protein arsenal encoded by the genome) could provide important insight into their adaptation mechanisms. Here we report the detailed comparative genome analysis of Blastococcus saxobsidens (Bs), Modestobacter marinus (Mm) and Geodermatophilus obscurus (Go) isolated respectively from the interior and the surface of calcarenite stones and from desert sandy soils. The genome-scale analysis of Bs, Mm and Go illustrates how adaptation to these niches can be achieved through various strategies including 'molecular tinkering/opportunism' as shown by the high proportion of lost, duplicated or horizontally transferred genes and ORFans. Using high-throughput discovery proteomics, the three proteomes under unstressed conditions were analyzed, highlighting the most abundant biomarkers and the main protein factors. Proteomic data corroborated previously demonstrated stone-related ecological distribution. For instance, these data showed starvation-inducible, biofilm-related and DNA-protection proteins as signatures of the microbes associated with the interior, surface and outside of stones, respectively.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; proteogenomics; bacteria; stone

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


