### Accession
PXD002800

### Title
Improved functional annotation of posttranslationally modified proteins

### Description
Identification of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) by mass spectrometry is biased towards abundant proteins, skewing our understanding of PTMs towards readily detected proteins. To uncover specifically enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms associated with PTMs, we developed a method to account for protein abundance bias when performing GO term enrichment analyses on PTM datasets.  GO term enrichment analysis is frequently used to examine “-omics” datasets for overrepresented functional terms within a subset of the dataset, such as regulated genes or modified proteins. However, the identification of PTMs is biased to abundant proteins that are more readily detected in the mass spectrometer. Therefore, GO enrichment analyses comparing posttranslationally modified proteins (referred to here as modified proteins) to unmodified proteins are likely to reveal overrepresented GO terms associated with abundant proteins, rather than modified proteins specifically. The method we developed here provides more accurate GO term enrichment analysis of PTMs and identifies terms whose enrichment results from the bias to identify PTMs on abundant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Denatured proteins from both yeast and HeLa cells were reduced with 1 mM DTT (45 min, RT), and alkylated by 5.5 mM chloracetamide (45 min, RT). ~100 mg proteins were digested by endoproteinase Lys C (1:200 w/w; Wako) and, after 4-fold dilution with HEPES buffer (50 mM; pH 7.5), by modified sequencing grade trypsin (1:200 w/w; Sigma-Aldrich). Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Digested protein samples were cleared for precipitates by centrifugation (2,500 x g, 5 min) and loaded onto reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), pre-equilibrated with 5 ml acetonitrile and 2 x 5 ml 0.1% TFA. Peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA and H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and mixed with 100 µl 10x IAP buffer (500 mM MOPS; pH 7.2, 100 mM Na-phosphate, 500 mM NaCl). Subsequently, ACN was removed and the volume of samples was adjusted to 1 ml by H2O. For proteome analysis, small aliquots of total peptides were fractionated using micro-SCX columns in a stage-tip format1,2. Peptide fractions were purified and concentrated with reversed-phase StageTips as described1. Enrichment of acetyl-lysine-, succinyl-lysine-, ubiquitin-lysine-, and phospho-peptides was performed essentially as described2,3. Enriched lysine modified peptides were eluted via 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and directly loaded onto a microtip SCX column and fractionated as described1,2. Phospho-peptides were eluted via 5% NH4OH followed by 10% NH4OH in 25% acetonitrile. Subsequently, eluates were combined, ammonia was removed by centrifugal evaporation at 45 °C, peptides were acidified with TFA (final conc. 0.15%), and loaded onto a microtip SCX column and fractionated as described above. Organic solvent of all peptides was removed in a SpeedVac concentrator and peptides were concentrated on C18 stage‐tips as described1.

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Q‐Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. The Q‐Exactive was operated using Xcalibur 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition as described4,5. Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (developer version 1.2.7.1) as described (http://www.maxquant.org/). Parent ion (MS) and fragment (MS2) spectra were searched against the organism-specific UniProt fasta files from the January 23, 2014 release. The search was performed using the integrated Andromeda search engine6, using a target-decoy based strategy7 to allow a maximum false discovery rate of <1%. Mass recalibration was performed using high confidence identifications based on an initial “first search” using a 20 parts per million (ppm) mass tolerance for parent ion masses and 20 ppm (HCD) for fragment ions. Spectra were subsequently searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm for parent ions and 20 ppm (HCD) for fragment ions, with strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. When appropriate, phosphorylation, ubiquitylation (di-glycine), acetylation, or succinylation were added as variable modifications. Phosphorylation sites were filtered for a localization probability > 75%, while all other modifications were filtered for a localization probability > 90%. All posttranslationally modified peptides were filtered for an Andromeda score > 40. Relative protein abundance was determined using the default “iBAQ” setting in MaxQuant, which essentially divides the summed peptide intensity for a given protein identification by the number of theoretical observable peptides8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Ubiquitylation, Succinylation, Acetylation, Di-gly

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Chuna Choudahry University of Copenhagen Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Tate Weinert
Chuna Choudahry University of Copenhagen Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


