### Accession
PXD013838

### Title
Enamel proteome shows that Gigantopithecus was an early diverging pongine

### Description
Gigantopithecus blacki was a giant hominid that inhabited Southeast Asia during the Pleistocene. Its evolutionary relationship to other great ape species, and their divergence during the Middle and Late Miocene (16-5.3 Mya), remains disputed. In part, this is due to the absence of cranial and postcranial remains and size-induced allometry. Proposed hypothesis on the phylogenetic positions of Gigantopithecus have therefore been wide-ranging among hominoids, but none has received independent validation based on molecular evidence. To clarify the phylogenetic placement of Gigantopithecus blacki, we retrieved enamel proteome sequences from a 1.9 million years (Mya) old molar found in Chuifeng Cave, China. We demonstrate that Gigantopithecus is most closely related to orangutans (genus Pongo). We also estimate the Gigantopithecus-Pongo divergence to about 10-12 Mya, implying its speciation is part of the Miocene radiation of great apes. These sequences are approximately 6 times older, in a normalized thermal context, than any previously published mammalian proteome or genome. The survival of an Early Pleistocene dental enamel proteome in the subtropics further expands the scope of palaeoproteomic analysis into geographic areas and time periods previously considered incompatible with biomolecular preservation.

### Sample Protocol
Ancient protein extractions took place in facilities at the Natural History Museum of Denmark dedicated to the extraction of ancient DNA and ancient proteins. These include clean rooms fitted with filtered ventilation and positive air pressure. A negative extraction blank was processed alongside the ancient extractions, with the additional inclusion of injection blanks during MS/MS analysis to monitor potential protein contamination during all stages of analysis. Two enamel and one dentine sample were removed from the same molar using a sterilized drill and crushed to a rough powder. One enamel and the dentine sample were demineralized in 1.2 M HCl at 3°C, while the other enamel sample was demineralized at the same temperature using 10% TFA. After this, solubilized protein residues were cleaned, concentrated and immobilized on C18 Stage-Tips. The extracts were consequently analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter, packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch)) on an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was searched per tissue (enamel, dentine, extraction blank and injection blanks) against a sequence database containing all common enamel proteins for all extant hominids. We used PEAKS (v. 7.5) and MaxQuant (v. 1.6.20). The de novo and error-tolerant implementations of PEAKS and the dependent peptide approach implemented in MQ were used to generate possible additional single-amino acid polymorphism (SAP) variation in enamel protein sequences present in Gigantopithecus and outside the variability observed for extant hominids. Next, these were added to a newly constructed sequence database and verified in separate searches in both PEAKS and MQ. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, proline hydroxylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation, pyro-glutamic acid, pyro-glutamine, and phosphorylation (STY). We did not use an enzymatic protease, and so digestion mode was set to “unspecific” for both PEAKS and MaxQuant. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. For PEAKS, peptide matches were only accepted with an FDR ≤ 1.0 %. For MaxQuant, peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) and protein FDR were set at ≤ 1.0 %, with minimum scores of 40 for all peptides. Protein matches were accepted with a minimum of two unique peptide sequences in at least one of the MaxQuant or PEAKS searches, including the removal of non-specific peptides after BLASTp searches of peptides matching to non-enamel proteins against UniProt and GenBank databases.

### Publication Abstract
Gigantopithecus blacki was a giant hominid that inhabited densely forested environments of Southeast Asia during the Pleistocene epoch<sup>1</sup>. Its evolutionary relationships to other great ape species, and the divergence of these species during the Middle and Late Miocene&#xa0;epoch (16-5.3 million years ago), remain unclear<sup>2,3</sup>. Hypotheses regarding the relationships between Gigantopithecus and extinct and extant hominids are wide ranging but difficult to substantiate because of its highly derived dentognathic morphology, the absence of cranial and post-cranial remains<sup>1,3-6</sup>, and the lack of independent molecular validation. We retrieved dental enamel proteome sequences from a 1.9-million-year-old G. blacki molar found in Chuifeng Cave, China<sup>7,8</sup>. The thermal age of these protein sequences is approximately five times greater than that of any previously published mammalian proteome or genome. We demonstrate that Gigantopithecus is a sister clade to orangutans (genus Pongo) with a common ancestor about 12-10&#xa0;million years ago, implying that the divergence of Gigantopithecus from Pongo forms part of the Miocene radiation of great apes. In addition, we hypothesize that the expression of alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein, which has not been previously observed in enamel proteomes, had a role in the biomineralization of the thick enamel crowns that characterize the large molars in Gigantopithecus<sup>9,10</sup>. The survival of an Early Pleistocene dental enamel proteome in the subtropics further expands the scope of palaeoproteomic analysis into geographical areas and time periods previously considered incompatible with the preservation of substantial amounts of genetic information.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Enamel, Gigantopithecus, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.


