### Accession
PXD010179

### Title
Spatiotemporal proteomics uncovers cathepsin-dependent host cell death during bacterial infection

### Description
Immune cells need to swiftly and effectively respond to invading pathogens. This response relies heavily on rapid protein synthesis and accurate cellular targeting to ensure pathogen destruction. In return, pathogens intercept this response so they can survive and proliferate. To gain insight into this dynamic interface, we combined click-chemistry with pulsed stable isotope labelling of amino acids (pSILAC-AHA) and quantified the newly synthesised host proteome during macrophage infection with the model intracellular bacterial pathogen, Salmonella enterica Typhimurium (STm). We monitored newly synthesized proteins across different compartments and during different infection stages, and used available proteomics data in response to LPS to deconvolute the STm-specific response. Within this rich resource, we detect aberrant trafficking of lysosomal proteases to the extracellular space and the nucleus, the latter of which correlates with signatures of cell death. Pharmacological cathepsin inhibition suppressed caspase-11 dependent macrophage cell death, thus demonstrating an active role for cathepsins during STm induced pyroptosis. Our study illustrates the utility of resolving the host proteome dynamics during infection to drive the discovery of novel biological mechanisms at the host-microbe interface.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 18-20 h prior to infection, RAW264.7 cells were seeded in DMEM containing 10% FBS (DMEM+FBS) at a cell density of 0.9x105 per well in 6 well plates. Cell density from overnight bacterial cultures grown in LB Broth (Lennox) at 37℃ were measured (OD578) and normalised to OD578. = 1. Cells were then washed in PBS and pelleted at 8,000 xg for 5 min. To opsonize bacteria, pellets were resuspended in DMEM containing 10% mouse serum and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. Opsonized bacteria and mock inoculum, were added directly to wells containing RAW264.7 cells at an MOI 100:1 and centrifuged at 170 g for 5 min to promote bacterial uptake. Infected cells were incubated at 37℃ at 5% CO2 for 25 min. Infected cells were then washed once and media and replaced with DMEM+FBS containing 100 µg/mL gentamicin and returned to the incubator for 1 hour. Media was then replaced with DMEM+FBS containing 16 µg/mL gentamicin for the remainder of the experiment; this step denotes t = 0 h. Therefore, for all experiments, t = time since addition of DMEM+FBS containing 16 µg/mL gentamicin.

### Data Protocol
Pulse labelling of cells with AHA and SILAC  To deplete the cells of methionine, lysine and arginine, roughly 3.5 hours prior to harvest, infected and corresponding control cells were washed thrice with prewarmed PBS followed by a 30 min incubation in DMEM dropout media; DMEM containing 10% dialysed FBS, 4.5 g/L glucose, 40 mM L-glutamine, 60 μg/mL L-cysteine and 16 μg/mL gentamicin, but lacking L-methionine, L-lysine and L-arginine (GIBCO). This was then replaced with DMEM dropout media media supplemented with 100 μM L-azidohomoalanine and either 84 μg/ml [13C6,15N4] L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [13C6,15N2]L-lysine or 84 μg/ml [13C6]L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [4,4,5,5-D4]L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc). Cells were then pulse labelled for 3 hours to allow sufficient time for protein translation and subsequent trafficking throughout the cell.

### Publication Abstract
The interplay between host and pathogen relies heavily on rapid protein synthesis and accurate protein targeting to ensure pathogen destruction. To gain insight into this dynamic interface, we combined Click chemistry with pulsed stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture to quantify the host proteome response during macrophage infection with the intracellular bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. We monitored newly synthesized proteins across different host cell compartments and infection stages. Within this rich resource, we detected aberrant trafficking of lysosomal proteases to the extracellular space and the nucleus. We verified that active cathepsins re-traffic to the nucleus and that these are linked to cell death. Pharmacological cathepsin inhibition and nuclear targeting of a cellular cathepsin inhibitor (stefin B) suppressed S. enterica Typhimurium-induced cell death. We demonstrate that cathepsin activity is required for pyroptotic cell death via the non-canonical inflammasome, and that lipopolysaccharide transfection into the host cytoplasm is sufficient to trigger active cathepsin accumulation in the host nucleus and cathepsin-dependent cell death. Finally, cathepsin inhibition reduced gasdermin&#x2009;D expression, thus revealing an unexpected role for cathepsin activity in non-canonical inflammasome regulation. Overall, our study illustrates how resolution of host proteome dynamics during infection can drive the discovery of biological mechanisms at the host-microbe interface.

### Keywords
Infection, Salmonella, Cathepsin, Pulse silac, Azidohomoalanine (aha)

### Affiliations
DKFZ German Cancer Research Center
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
DKFZ German Cancer Research Center


