### Accession
PXD037297

### Title
Chemoproteomic profiling to identify activity changes and functional inhibitors of DNA-binding proteins

### Description
DNA-binding proteins are promising therapeutic targets but notoriously difficult to drug. Here, we evaluate a chemoproteomic DNA interaction platform as a complementary strategy for parallelized compound profiling. To enable this approach, we determined the proteomic binding landscape of 92 immobilized DNA sequences. Perturbation-induced activity changes of captured transcription factors in disease-relevant settings demonstrated functional relevance of the enriched sub-proteome. Chemoproteomic profiling of >300 cysteine-directed compounds against a coverage optimized bead mixture, which specifically captures >150 DNA binders, revealed competition of several DNA-binding proteins, including the transcription factors ELF1 and ELF2. We also discovered the first compound which displaces the DNA-repair complex MSH2-MSH3 from DNA. Compound binding to cysteine 252 on MSH3 was confirmed using chemoproteomic reactive cysteine profiling. Overall, these results suggested that chemoproteomic DNA bead pull-downs enable the specific read-out of transcription factor activity and can identify functional “hot-spots” on DNA binders towards expanding the druggable proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Immobilized dsDNA on streptavidin beads was used to enrich DNA binders from cancer cell line lysate. Cells were lysed in NP-40-containing buffer. Pull downs were conducted in 96-well format. After reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion, peptides were either labeled with tandem mass tags or left label-free. An Orbitrap Lumos or an Orbitrap HF was used for mass spectrometry measurements.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed in MaxQuant followed by statistical analysis in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-binding proteins are promising therapeutic targets but are notoriously difficult to drug. Here, we evaluate a chemoproteomic DNA interaction platform as a complementary strategy for parallelized compound profiling. To enable this approach, we determined the proteomic binding landscape of 92 immobilized DNA sequences. Perturbation-induced activity changes of captured transcription factors in disease-relevant settings demonstrated functional relevance of the enriched subproteome. Chemoproteomic profiling of &gt;300 cysteine-directed compounds against a coverage optimized bead mixture, which specifically captures &gt;150 DNA binders, revealed competition of several DNA-binding proteins, including the transcription factors ELF1 and ELF2. We also discovered the first compound that displaces the DNA-repair complex MSH2-MSH3 from DNA. Compound binding to cysteine 252 on MSH3 was confirmed using chemoproteomic reactive cysteine profiling. Overall, these results suggested that chemoproteomic DNA bead pull-downs enable the specific readout of transcription factor activity and can identify functional "hotspots" on DNA binders toward expanding the druggable proteome.

### Keywords
Reactive side chain profiling, Dna binding, Covalency, Pull-down, Drug screening, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Merck Research Laboratories, Boston, MA, USA
Merck

### Submitter
benjamin ruprecht

### Lab Head
Dr An Chi
Merck Research Laboratories, Boston, MA, USA


