### Accession
PXD034192

### Title
Human fetal left and right frontal lobes LC-MSMS

### Description
Inherent hemispheric asymmetry is significant for cognition, language and other functions. An understanding of normal brain and asymmetry development in the early period will further the knowledge of how different hemispheres prioritize specific functions, which is still unknown. We analysed the developmental changes in and asymmetry of the proteome in the bilateral frontal lobes of three foetal specimens in the late first trimester of pregnancy (9, 11, 13 gestational weeks). We found that during this period, the difference in expression between gestational weeks increased, and the difference in asymmetric expression decreased. The patterns of protein expression changes in the bilateral frontal lobes were different. Our results show that brain asymmetry can be observed in the early stage. Researchers can use these findings to further investigate the mechanisms of brain asymmetry.

### Sample Protocol
Discarded brain tissues of GW 9, 11 and 13 foetuses were collected. The number of specimens for proteomics was one at each gestational week. The whole brains were harvested, and the left and right cerebral hemispheres were separated. Each hemisphere was dissected immediately with a scalpel, and tissues from the front part of the frontal lobes were collected. The samples were prepared for label-free experiments using the SDT lysis method. An appropriate amount of SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) was added to the human foetal frontal lobe tissues, and the samples were transferred to Lysing Matrix A tubes and homogenized twice using a FastPrep-24 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) (24 × 2, 6.0 m/s, 60 s) twice60. The homogenates were then placed in a boiling water bath for 10 min and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min. After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and filtered through 0.22 μm Spin-X centrifuge tube filters. The protein concentration was quantified using the BCA method61 (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Beyotime), and 20 μg of each protein sample was subjected to 12% SDS–PAGE at 220 V for 40 min. The protein extracts were mixed with 6x sample buffer (Beyotime, P0015F) and put into a boiling water bath for 5 min. Coomassie Brilliant Blue was used for staining.DTT was added at a final concentration of 100 mM to 200 μL of each protein solution, and the samples were placed in a boiling water bath for 5 min and then cooled to room temperature. Then, 200 μL of UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was added, the samples were transferred to 30 kD ultrafiltration centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min, and the filtrates were discarded. Then, this process was repeated once. Next, 100 μL IAA (100 mM IAA in UA) was added, and the samples were shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min, incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min. Then, 100 μL UA buffer was added, and the samples were centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min at room temperature. This process was repeated twice. After that, the samples were treated 100 μL 40 mM NH4HCO3 solution and centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min at room temperature, and this process was repeated 2 times. A 40 μL aliquot of trypsin buffer (4 μg trypsin in 40 μL 40 mM NH4HCO3 buffer) was added, and then the samples were shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min and incubated at 37 °C for 16–18 hours. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min, treated with 20 μL of 40 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, and centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 15 min, and the filtrate was collected. The peptides were desalted with a C18 cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the peptide fragments were lyophilized and reconstituted, and the peptide concentration was quantified (OD280).

### Data Protocol
The samples were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography (Easy nLC, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B consisted 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The chromatographic column was equilibrated at 100% A, and LC separation was performed using a 50 µm X 15 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC nano Viper column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptide fragments were separated by chromatography and analysed by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The scanning range of the parent ions was 350–1,500 m/z, the resolution of first-order mass spectrometry was 70,000, the automatic gain control (AGC) target was 3e6, and the first-order maximum IT was 50 ms. The mass-to-charge ratios of polypeptides and polypeptide fragments were obtained as follows. Twenty fragment patterns (MS2 scan, HCD) were collected after each full scan. The MS2 activation type was HCD, the isolation window was 2 m/z, the resolution of secondary mass spectrometry was 17,500, the microscan was 1, the secondary maximum IT was 45ms, and the normalized collision energy was set to 27eV. Raw data were searched against the UniProt_HomoSapiens_20386_20180905 database. Protein identification and quantification were performed in MaxQuant63 version 1.5.5.1 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) using the following parameters64: the enzyme was set to trypsin, two missed cleavages were allowed, the fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethyl (C), the variable modifications were set to oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term), and the first and main search mass tolerances were set to 20 and 4.5 parts per million (ppm), respectively. A common contamination database was included to eliminate the effect of contamination proteins among the identified proteins. The identified peptides and proteins were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. LFQ of proteins was performed using unique and razor peptides. The LFQ minimum ratio count was set to two.

### Publication Abstract
Inherent hemispheric asymmetry is important for cognition, language and other functions. Describing normal brain and asymmetry development during early development will improve our understanding of how different hemispheres prioritize specific functions, which is currently unknown. Here, we analysed developmental changes in and asymmetry of the proteome in the bilateral frontal lobes of three foetal specimens in the late first trimester of pregnancy. We found that during this period, the difference in expression between gestational weeks (GWs) increased, and the difference in asymmetric expression decreased. Changes in the patterns of protein expression differed in the bilateral frontal lobes. Our results show that brain asymmetry can be observed in early development. These findings can guide researchers in further investigations of the mechanisms of brain asymmetry. We propose that both sides of the brain should be analysed separately in future multiomics and human brain mapping studies.

### Keywords
Fetal frontal lobe

### Affiliations
Shandong University
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Research Center for Sectional and Imaging Anatomy, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorder, Shandong Key Laboratory of Digital Human and Clinical Anatomy, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, China

### Submitter
Xiaotian Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Shuwei Liu
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Research Center for Sectional and Imaging Anatomy, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorder, Shandong Key Laboratory of Digital Human and Clinical Anatomy, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, China


