### Accession
PXD036361

### Title
Proteomics analysis of lysosomes and whole cell lysates from H4 cellsLysosome, H4, glucocerebrosidase

### Description
Studies have shown that the majority of Parkinson's disease patients have at least one putative damaging variant in a lysosomal storage disorder gene (60%) and in about 10% of sporadic PD subjects, the disease is associated with mutations in GBA1, a gene coding for glucocerebrosidase, a lysosomal hydrolase. However, the precise cellular and lysosome-specific alterations upon loss of glucocerebrosidase are not established. The aim of this study is to characterize the proteome-wide changes at the cellular and lysosomal level in H4 cells upon loss of the GBA gene. Moreover, we tested if reinstating glucocerebrosidase activity by treating cells with our in-house GCase-BS (glucocerebrosidase-brain shuttle) can revert these changes, both at the cellular and lysosomal level.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of lysosomes (Lyso-IP method) for proteomic and lipidomic analysis H4 cells (WT and GBA knock-out) stably expressing TMEM192-3XHA were seeded in 10/15 cm cell culture dish such that sufficient cells (≅ 2E7 cells for proteomics and ≅ 5E7 cells for lipidomics/replicate) are available on the day of lysosome isolation. GBA knock-out cells were treated with 1nM hGCase-hBS for 24 h. On the day of lysosome isolation, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, gently scraped, and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1000 µl of ice-cold PBS and gently lysed using a rotary dounce homogeniser at medium speed. Homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 min to remove cell debris. Part of the supernatant was preserved for quality control analysis. The remaining supernatant (≅ 900 µl) was incubated with 500 ul of anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce/Thermo: 88836/88837) for 20 min at room temperature in a rotator shaker. Magnetic beads were separated using a magnetic rack and the flow-through was collected for quality control analysis. The magnetic beads carrying lysosomes were washed with ice-cold PBS. For the proteomic samples, 200 ul of 1X RIPA buffer was added to magnetic beads carrying lysosomes and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. The resulting protein samples from lysosomes were acetone precipitated and used for further analysis. For the lipidomic samples, lysosomes were separated from magnetic beads using competitive elution due to the presence of high concentration of HA peptide. Magnetic beads carrying lysosomes were incubated with 500 ul of 1mg/ml HA peptide (in PBS) and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C. Magnetic beads were removed using a magnetic rack and the remaining lysosome containing samples were immediately frozen at -80 °C for further analysis. For corresponding whole-cell lysate samples, cells were seeded in 10 cm culture dish (≅ 8E6 cells per replicate) and treated with hGCase-hBS wherever applicable. Cells were gently scraped and cell pellets were collected by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 2 min.  Proteomics sample preparation Samples were denatured using Biognosys’ Denature Buffer, reduced using Biognosys’ Reduction Solution for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated using Biognosys’ Alkylation Solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, digestion to peptides was carried out using 0.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted using a C18 MicroSpin plate (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried down using a SpeedVac system Peptides were resuspended in 20 µl LC solvent A (1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides. Peptide concentrations were determined using a UV/VIS Spectrometer (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech).   HRM mass spectrometry acquisition for proteomics For DIA LC-MS/MS measurements, 1 µg of peptides per sample were injected to an in house packed reversed phase column (PicoFrit emitter with 75 µm inner diameter, 60 cm length and 10 µm tip from New Objective, packed with 1.7 µm Charged Surface Hybrid C18 particles from Waters) on a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-nLC ™ 1200 nano liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source. LC solvents were A: 1% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% FA; B: 20% water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % FA. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1 - 59% solvent B in 55 minutes followed by 59 - 90% B in 10 seconds, 90 % B for 8 minutes, 90% - 1% B in 10 seconds and 1% B for 5 minutes at 60 °C and a flow rate of 250 nl/min The DIA method consisted of one full range MS1 scan and 21 DIA segments was adopted from Bruderer et al. 2017 (see 76).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Proteins with low intensities and NA values were filtered, and subsequently analysed using the edgeR Bioconductor package. Protein name to HUGO gene symbol mapping was performed using Bioconductors org.Hs.eg.db package. Libraries were normalised using TMM to remove composition bias, and we fitted a negative binomial generalised log-linear model to the log2 intensities of each protein, taking into account genewise, trended and common dispersion estimates. Testing for differential expression of proteins between comparison groups was tested with a log likelihood ratio test. For comparison and ranking of interesting hits resulting from the contrasts of interest, we introduced a comparison metric which combines significance and change in protein abundance: metric = -Log10(p.value) * Log2(FC). A metric threshold of 6 was used for filtering the top differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucocerebrosidase, Lysosome, H4

### Affiliations
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexandra Gehrlein

### Lab Head
Dr Ravi Jagasia
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland


