### Accession
PXD025478

### Title
Complexome profiling of brain mitochondrial membranes from Clpp-/- mouse

### Description
The autosomal recessive Perrault syndrome with juvenile ovarian failure, progressive sensorineural deafness, ataxia and leukoencephalopathy can be caused by loss of function mutations in CLPP. This gene encodes a peptidase that is conserved since bacteria and localizes to mitochondrial matrix in eukaryotes. Here, assembly and stability of mitochondrial complexes from adult Clpp-/- mouse brains were analyzed by Complexome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of brain tissue were essential done as described [1). Briefly: Brains were taken and further disrupted using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2,000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 15 min at 22,000 g. Mitochondria-enriched membranes from 10 mg brain tissue were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7.50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 20 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).  Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600 g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37 °C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70,000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17,500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) [2] using default settings. Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database (Download February 2016, 79950 entries). The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between controls and deletion mutants. Protein abundance profiles were generated by software tool NOVA [3].  Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex III dimer (483272 Da), complex IV (213172 Da), complex V (553155Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing complex I, III dimer and one copy of complex IV (1676021Da) was used for native mass calibration.  [1] Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1(1):418-28. [2] Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. [3] Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial dysfunction may activate innate immunity, e.g. upon abnormal handling of mitochondrial DNA in TFAM mutants or in altered mitophagy. Recent reports showed that also deletion of mitochondrial matrix peptidase ClpP in mice triggers transcriptional upregulation of inflammatory factors. Here, we studied ClpP-null mouse brain at two ages and mouse embryonal fibroblasts, to identify which signaling pathways are responsible, employing mass spectrometry, subcellular fractionation, immunoblots, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Several mitochondrial unfolded protein response factors showed accumulation and altered migration in blue-native gels, prominently the co-chaperone DNAJA3. Its mitochondrial dysregulation increased also its extra-mitochondrial abundance in the nucleus, a relevant observation given that DNAJA3 modulates innate immunity. Similar observations were made for STAT1, a putative DNAJA3 interactor. Elevated expression was observed not only for the transcription factors Stat1/2, but also for two interferon-stimulated genes (Ifi44, Gbp3). Inflammatory responses were strongest for the RLR pattern recognition receptors (Ddx58, Ifih1, Oasl2, Trim25) and several cytosolic nucleic acid sensors (Ifit1, Ifit3, Oas1b, Ifi204, Mnda). The consistent dysregulation of these factors from an early age might influence also human Perrault syndrome, where ClpP loss-of-function leads to early infertility and deafness, with subsequent widespread neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Protein complex assembly, Lc-msms, Neurodegeneration, Quality control

### Affiliations
Experimental Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Auburger
Experimental Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


