### Accession
PXD017033

### Title
Hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines LC-MS/MS

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) ranks sixth among the most common malignancies and fourth in mortality among all kinds of cancers in the world. Recent advances in early diagnosis and therapeutics have led to improved survival of HCC patients, but the recurrence and metastasis are still main reasons for the poor prognosis and high mortality of HCC. Many researches on the mechanism of HCC deterioration have uncovered the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as a major trigger for HCC metastasis and invasion.In this study, in order to systematically investigate the dynamic site-specific glycosylation alterations associated with the EMT process of HCC, two hepatoma cell lines SMMC-7721 and HepG2 were treated using HGF and the cell proteins were harvested at six treatment time points. Using TMT-labeling, solid phase extraction and mass spectrometry, we not only detailly profiled N-glycoproteome of both cell lines at site-specific glycosylation level, but also dynamically quantified those intact glycopeptides among six increasing HGF-treated time points. By dynamically quantifying enriched glycopeptides and proteins among six HGF-treated time points in two cell lines, we identified 20 up-regulated intact glycopeptides during the process of EMT, with the majority changed at the glycosylation level instead of protein expression level. The site-specific glycosylation change of those glycoproteins was related to the process of EMT, which was further verified by a series of molecular biology methods, mass spectrometry, and migration and invasion assay in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines SMMC-7721 and HepG2 were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C in a humid atmosphere of 5% CO2 for the first three generations. Then the medium was changed to the basic medium (without FBS) for the next eight hours before adding 10 ng/ml HGF. Cellular proteins were then harvested at six different time pointswithin 72 hours (0, 6, 12, 24, 48 and 72 h).The cellular proteins were denatured in 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3 buffer,and reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature in the dark for 30 mins. Another 2.5 mM DTT was then added and incubated at room temperature for 10 mins. The solutions were diluted two times with deionized water prior to the first cycle of protein digestion by incubating the samples with the sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, USA, WI; proteins: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) at 37 °C for 2 h with shaking. The solutions were further diluted four-fold with deionized water and the same relative amount of trypsin (proteins: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) was then added and incubated at 37 °C overnight with shaking. The pH of the solution was adjusted with 10% TFA till pH < 2. The samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 mins to remove any particulate matter and the peptides in supernatants were desalted by the HLB columns (Waters, USA). Peptides were eluted from HLB column in 60% ACN/0.1% TFA solution. The peptide concentrations were measured by BCA reagent. The tryptic peptides from different time points of HGF-treated cells were dried and re-dissolved in 50 mM HEPES solution (pH 8.5). The same amount of peptides from different time points were labeled by two sets of 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) (Thermo Fisher, USA) reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Set #1 and Set #2 were cellular proteins from SMMC-7721 and HepG2 cell lines. TMT reagents at 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N labeled 0 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h HGF-treated samples, respectively. The labeled samples within each TMT set were then pooled and desalted by HLB columns.The intact glycopeptides were enriched from TMT labeled samples using an anion exchange reversed phase (MAX) column . Briefly, the TMT labeled peptides eluted from HLB column were diluted by 100% ACN and TFA to the final concentration of 95% ACN/1% TFA. The MAX column (Waters, USA) were washed three times each by 100% ACN, 100 mM triethylammonium acetate buffer, deionized water, and 95% ACN/1% TFA, followed by sample loading twice and washes four times with 95% ACN/ 1% TFA. The glycopeptides bounding to the column were eluted in 400 μL of 50% ACN / 0.1% FA. The sample was dried by SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
The peptides and enriched glycopeptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The peptides were first separated on EASY-nLC™ 1200 instrument (Thermo Scientific, Germany) with a 75μm50cm acclaim PepMap separating C18 column (Thermo Scientific, Germany). For global peptide data, the MS/MS spectra were searched against reviewed human protein database downloaded from Uniprot website (www.uniprot.org/) at May 15, 2017, by Thermo Proteome Discover 2.2 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The search parameters were set as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites permitted for trypsin digestion, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.06 Da fragment mass tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) and deamidation (N, +0.98 Da) as dynamic modifications. The results were filtered with 1% FDR and at least two peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were required for a peptide. TMT labeling was used to quantify the peptides identified from LC-MS/MS data.The intact N-glycopeptide MS data were first converted to ‘mzML’ format using Trans-Proteome Pipline (TPP) and searched by an in-house software. The search parameters were set as follows: at least two oxonium ions out of the top 10 fragment ions in the MS/MS spectra were used for extraction of intact glycopeptide MS/MS spectra. The mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 20 ppm were allowed for precursor ions and fragmentation ions. The false discovery rate of identified intact glycopeptides was estimated by the decoy peptide method and 1% FDR was used as the identification cutoff. The identified intact glycopeptides were further filtered by ≥4 matched b/y ions of the peptide portion in the MS/MS spectra. The quantification information of glycopeptides were extracted from their identified MS/MS spectra based on intensities of their TMT reporter ions. The medium ratios of given glycopeptides were used as quantitation result, and the ratios between samples were further normalized by the normalization factors obtained from the global proteomic results.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been recognized as an important step toward high invasion and metastasis of many cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), while the mechanism for EMT promotion is still ambiguous. <b>Methods:</b> The dynamic alterations of site-specific glycosylation during HGF/TGF-&#x3b2;1-induced EMT process of three HCC cell lines were systematically investigated using precision glycoproteomic methods. The possible roles of EMT-related glycoproteins and site-specific glycans were further confirmed by various molecular biological approaches. <b>Results:</b> Using mass spectrometry-based glycoproteomic methods, we totally identified 2306 unique intact glycopeptides from SMMC-7721 and HepG2 cell lines, and found that core-fucosylated glycans were accounted for the largest proportion of complex <i>N</i>-glycans. Through quantification analysis of intact glycopeptides, we found that the majority of core-fucosylated intact glycopeptides from folate receptor &#x3b1; (FOLR1) were up-regulated in the three HGF-treated cell lines. Similarly, core-fucosylation of FOLR1 were up-regulated in SMMC-7721 and Hep3B cells with TGF-&#x3b2;1 treatment. Using molecular approaches, we further demonstrated that FUT8 was a driver for HGF/TGF-&#x3b2;1-induced EMT. The silencing of FUT8 reduced core-fucosylation and partially blocked the progress of HGF-induced EMT. Finally, we confirmed that the level of core-fucosylation on FOLR1 especially at the glycosite Asn-201 positively regulated the cellular uptake capacity of folates, and enhanced uptake of folates could promote the EMT of HCC cells. <b>Conclusions:</b> Based on the results, we proposed a potential pathway for HGF or TGF-&#x3b2;1-induced EMT of HCC cells: HGF or TGF-&#x3b2;1 treatment of HCC cells can increase the expression of glycosyltransferase FUT8 to up-regulate the core-fucosylation of <i>N</i>-glycans on glycoproteins including the FOLR1; core-fucosylation on FOLR1 can then enhance the folate uptake capacity to finally promote the EMT progress of HCC cells.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, Site-specific glycosylation, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Intact glycopeptide, Emt, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Northwest University

### Submitter
Li Jia

### Lab Head
Dr Li Jia
Northwest University


