### Accession
PXD007542

### Title
The immune receptor TLR2 directly binds and signals immune activation to oligomeric chitin

### Description
Chitin is the second most abundant polysaccharide in nature and a biomolecule intimately linked to fungal infection and allergic asthma, conditions that affect millions of patients worldwide. Chitin is known to stimulate multiple mammalian immune cells, but the precise molecular sensing mechanism has not been elucidated, hampering strategies to specifically target chitin-mediated pathologies. Using defined chitin oligomers we here identify six chitin subunits as the smallest immunologically active chitin motif and the innate immune receptor TLR2 as the molecular chitin sensor on human and murine immune cells, in vitro and in vivo. Chitin oligomers directly bound TLR2 with nanomolar affinity and elicited overlapping yet distinct signaling outcomes compared to canonical TLR2 ligands. Conversely, chitin oligomers composed of five chitin subunits acted as antagonists of chitin-TLR2 immune activation, hinting to an anti-inflammatory loop already known from plants, to also operate in humans. Of note, small chitin oligomers and biological-based blocking of the TLR2-chitin interaction effectively prevented chitin-mediated inflammation not only in vitro but also in vivo. Collectively, our study elucidates the molecular basis of how chitin is sensed by mammalian immune cells, which has broad impact for chitin-associated inflammatory pathologies. From a translational perspective, our findings further suggests that differently sized chitin oligomers could be developed into novel vaccine adjuvants or immuno-modulatory antagonists for the prevention or treatment of chitin-driven diseases in humans.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were grown in complete RPMI medium and differentiated with 300 ng/ml PMA. Cells were rested for 48 h before stimulation with PBS, 5 µM chitin or 5 µM Pam2 for 30 minutes. ). Cells were lysed in 800 µl of lysis buffer (6 M Guanidinium hydrochloride, 5 mM tris(2-carboxymethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) heated to 99°C for lysis, reduction and alkylation. Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight and the samples desalted on an Sep-Pak C18 cartridge and dimethyl-labeled as published (Boersema et al., 2009). The samples were mixed 1:1:1 and fractionated on an offline Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system equipped with xBridge BEH C18 130A, 3.5 µm, 4.6 x 250 mm column operated under high pH using 5 mM NH4OH buffers. 60 fractions were collected and each fraction was analysed by LC-MS/MS for full proteome analysis. The residual of the 60 fractions were concatenated into 15 pools and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide pools were reconstituted in 1 ml of 80% ACN, 6% TFA and enriched with TiO2 spheres for 30 minutes in a protein to bead ratio of 2:1. Pelleted beads were washed with 100µl of 30% ACN, 1% TFA followed by 80% ACN, 1%TFA. Elution from the beads was performed two times with 100 µl of 5% ammonia hydroxide solution in 60% acetonitrile (pH > 10.5) and once with 10 µl 1% formic acid in 80% ACN. Acetonitrile was eliminated by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptides desalted on Stagetips prior LC-MS/MS measurements. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 equipped with a 20 cm and 75 µm ID PicoTip fused silica emitter inhouse packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch Ltd.) coupled to an Q Exactive HF (both Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptide enriched samples were separated using a 87 minute segmented gradient of 5-50% solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min while high pH LC fractions were separated by an 35 minute gradient. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive mode. Full scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 1,650 with a resolution of 60,000. For proteome measurements the 20 most intense ions and for phosphoproteome the seven most intense ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and MS/MS spectra recorded with a resolution of 30,000 and 60,000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed using default parameters of the MaxQuant software suite (v1.5.5.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Extracted peak lists were submitted to database search using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) to query a target-decoy database of H. sapiens proteome (release 2014_02; 88,692 entries). In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Overall light-, medium- and heavy- demethylation labeling on lysine residues and peptide N-termini were defined. “Re-quantify”, calculating ratios for isotope-patterns not assembled into labeling triplets, was enabled. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the precursor ion and 20 ppm at the fragment ion level. False discovery rates were set to 1% at peptide, phosphorylation site, and protein group level.

### Publication Abstract
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important sentinels of bacterial and viral infection and thus fulfil a critical sensory role in innate immunity. Polo-like kinases (PLKs), a five membered family of Ser/Thr protein kinases, have long been studied for their role in mitosis and thus represent attractive therapeutic targets in cancer therapy. Recently, PLKs were implicated in TLR signaling in mice but the role of PLKs in TLR signaling in untransformed primary immune cells has not been addressed, even though PLK inhibitors are in clinical trials. We here identified several phospho-serine and phospho-threonine residues in the known TLR pathway kinases, Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) 2 and IRAK4. These sites lie in canonical polo-box motifs (PBM), sequence motifs known to direct recruitment of PLKs to client proteins. Interestingly, PLK1 was phosphorylated and PLK 2 and 3 mRNA induced upon TLR stimulation in primary immune cells, respectively. In whole blood, PLK inhibition disparately affected TLR mediated cytokine responses in a donor- and inhibitor-dependent fashion. Collectively, PLKs may thus potentially interface with TLR signaling in humans. We propose that temporary PLK inhibitor-mediated blockade of TLR-signaling in certain patients receiving such inhibitors during cancer treatment may cause adverse effects such as an increased risk of infections due to a then compromised ability of the TLR recognition system to sense and initiate cytokine responses to invading microbes.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Pam2csk4, Chitin, Tlr, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology University of Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander N.R. Weber
Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology University of Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen Germany


