### Accession
PXD003450

### Title
Anopheles culicifacies species A salivary gland  proteome

### Description
Background: Anopheles culicifacies is a rural vector of malaria in tropical and sub tropical South East Asian region. The salivary gland of the mosquito is the target for sporozoite interaction, blood feeding behavior, haemostasis and vector-parasite interactions.  Malaria parasite matures inside the salivary gland, gain competence and transmitted to the host along with the saliva during biting. The importance of the proteins expressed in salivary gland is the first step in understanding the physiology of blood feeding and may provide insights into vector- parasite interactions.  Since, no genomic or transcriptomics information is available of Anopheles culicifacies, therefore locally expressed functional proteins in salivary glands are of much importance. .  Method: In this study, 1DE protein and in solution digestion was combined with tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS) and computational bioinformatics for data mining was employed to study the proteome profile of salivary glands of sugar fed An. culicifacies mosquito species. Functional annotation of all the identified proteins was carried out using gene ontology tools, CELLO and SMART analysis software. Results: Total 102 proteins were identified and analysed by SEQUEST algorithm against mosquito protein database from Uniprot/NCBI. Out of which 81 proteins were identified using gel free approach and 21 proteins using in-gel approach and 15 were common among these two approaches. All the identified proteins were categorized in to 23 groups of biological processes using GO tool. 7 proteins were depicted to be secretary in nature by investigating the signal peptide present. Potential proteins with unknown function were predicted by analyzing their functional association with other characterized proteins by STRING algorithm and were categorized in cell adhesion, cytoskeleton and membrane trafficking networks.  Conclusion: Our study elucidates the first proteomic dataset of An. culicifacies salivary gland proteins. Functional annotation of salivary proteins and complementary gene ontology assignments in An. culicifacies species may contribute towards understanding the complex physiology of the tissues in this species. This proteome baseline data may facilitate the discernment of salivary glands and parasite correlation during blood feeding. Furthermore, this mass spectrometry based proteomic data may also provide insights into the elucidation of role of differential functional proteins present in refractory An. culicifacies mosquito and may be useful for development of effective malaria control strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Mosquito  An. culicifacies species A mosquitoes were successfully maintained and reared for many consecutive generations in our insectaries at National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, INDIA and were used in this study.  Mosquitoes were maintained in stable conditions of temperature 270C ± 20C and 70 % ± 10 % relative humidity and a photoperiod of 12:12 (light/dark) hours. These female adult mosquitoes were maintained on a 10% sucrose solution diet. Adult female mosquitoes aged between 2-3 days after emergence and fed only on sucrose solution were used in this study.   Salivary Gland dissection Adult An. culicifacies species A female mosquitoes were first cold anesthetized on ice before salivary gland dissection. Salivary glands were then dissected under stereomicroscope and pooled in 100 µl Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS; 10mM Na2SO4, 145mM NaCl (pH 7.2) containing protease inhibitors  and were stored at -80 0C until further use.  Salivary gland extract preparation Total 100 pairs of salivary glands of female An. culicifacies were pooled after dissection for the preparation of salivary gland extract (SGE) and homogenised by ultrasonication (3 pulses of 20 sec each) on ice. Salivary gland homogenate suspension was then centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 rpm at 40C. Afterwards cell debris pellet was discarded and supernatant containing salivary gland protein extract was stored in a fresh tube. Protein concentration in the salivary gland extract (SGE) was quantified by Lowry’s method. SGE was stored at -800C until further investigations. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS In solution trypsin digestion Salivary gland protein extract (SGE) solution were digested with proteomic grade trypsin before LC/MS/MS analysis. Briefly, 50 ug of protein lysates was first denatured using 4M urea. After that disulphide bonds of the proteins were reduced by adding DTT (10mM) and incubating at 56 0C for 1 hour. Following reduction, proteins were alkylated with 25mM IAA at room temperature in dark for 30 min at 250 C. Subsequently, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.1) was added to the protein solution to reduce the urea concentration by 0.5M. Finally, the proteins were digested in to peptides by incubating with enzyme trypsin: substrate ratio of 1:50 at 370C overnight. This trypsin digest obtained was dried in a speed vac till complete dryness. Sample was then cleaned and desalted using C18 packed ziptip prior to nano LC-MS/MS. 1D gel electrophoresis SDS PAGE experiment was performed for fractionation of SGE samples. Briefly, 27 ug of SGE sample was loaded on to SDS PAGE mini gel consisting of 12% resolving gel of 1-mm thickness along with the protein molecular weight marker and subjected to electrophoresis Each gel band was cut and collected in separate eppendorf tube in 50 µl of stop solution (2% acetic acid) and further stored at -200C for trypsin digestion approach. In gel trypsin digestion Silver stained gel pieces were first destained. They were then dehydrated using acetonitrile (ACN) and speed vac till complete dryness. These dried gel pieces were incubated with 10mM DTT in 100mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hour at 560C for reduction of proteins. For subsequent alkylation, DTT was removed and 55mM IAA in 100mM NH4HCO3 was added and the solution was kept for 45 min at ambient temperature in dark with occasional vortexing. Afterwards the gel pieces were washed with 100mM NH4HCO3 (50µl) for 10 mins and then dehydrated with ACN followed by rehydration with 100mM NH4HCO3 and then further subjected to dehydration with ACN. Further gel pieces were completely dried using speed vac. Digestion buffer was then added to gel pieces along with trypsin (12.5  ng/ul) in an ice cold bath for 45 mins. Further to keep gel pieces wet again digestion buffer was mixed but this time without trypsin at 370C overnight. After digestion, the digest solution was transferred to fresh eppendorff tubes. The gel pieces were extracted thrice with extraction buffer (5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, 20 min for each change) at room temperature. Further, speed vac was used for complete dryness and samples were finally reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for further LC/MS/MS analysis. Nano LC-MS/MS In solution and in gel digested samples were further subjected to LC/MS/MS analysis. Samples were loaded onto a PicoFrit C18 nanospray column (New Objective) using a Thermo Scientific Surveyor Autosampler operated in the no waste injection mode. Peptides from the in-solution digests were eluted from the column using a linear acetonitrile gradient from 2 to 35% acetonitrile over 240 minutes and for in-gel digests 2 to 32% acetonitrile over 85 minutes followed by high and low organic washes for another 5 minutes into an LTQ XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray source. A data-dependent Top 7 method was used for peptide sequencing where a full MS scan from m/z 350-1500 was followed by MS/MS scans of the seven most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis  Raw m/z data files derived from LC-MS/MS were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). SEQUEST algorithm was used against the most recent species-specific fasta database for Mosquito from NCBI. The search parameters entries selected were enzyme trysin with 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance ± 5000 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ± 2 Da. Further, the dynamic modification and static modification selected were oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine respectively and the peptide level filter was used for high confidence peptides only. Results were further interpreted manually and proteins were selected on the basis of score, % similarity and number of peptides.   Bioinformatics and Data analysis  Bioinformatics analysis were carried out using Blast P and and SMART algorithm (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/) in order to find out functions and conserved domains. Signal P server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) was used to depict signal peptides and hence secreted protein. Gene ontology (GO) software (http://www.geneontology.org/) was exploited for further identification of biological process and molecular function of all identified annotated putative functional proteins. The cellular component was predicted using CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) (Yu et al, 2006) and GO search engines. Network pathways were also analyzed using STRING database (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
In order to understand the importance of functional proteins in mosquito behavior, following blood meal, a baseline proteomic dataset is essential for providing insights into the physiology of blood feeding. Therefore, in this study as first step, in solution and 1-D electrophoresis digestion approach combined with tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS) and computational bioinformatics for data mining was used to prepare a baseline proteomic catalogue of salivary gland proteins of sugar fed An. culicifacies mosquitoes. A total of 106 proteins were identified and analyzed by SEQUEST algorithm against mosquito protein database from Uniprot/NCBI. Importantly, D7r1, D7r2, D7r4, salivary apyrase, anti-platelet protein, calreticulin, antigen 5 family proteins were identified and grouped on the basis of biological and functional roles. Secondly, differential protein expression and annotations between salivary glands of sugar fed vs blood fed mosquitoes was analyzed using 2-Delectrophoresis combined with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The alterations in the differential expression of total 38 proteins was observed out of which 29 proteins like beclin-1, phosphorylating proteins, heme oxygenase 1, ferritin, apoptotic proteins, coagulation and immunity like, serine proteases, serpins, c-type lectin and protein in regulation of blood feeding behavior were found to be up regulated while 9 proteins related to blood feeding, juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase ii, odorant binding proteins and energy metabolic enzymes were found to be down regulated. To our knowledge, this study provides a first time baseline proteomic dataset and functional annotations of An. culicifacies salivary gland proteins that may be involved during the blood feeding. Identification of differential salivary proteins between sugar fed and blood fed mosquitoes and their plausible role may provide insights into the physiological processes associated with feeding behavior and sporozoite transmission during the process of blood feeding.

### Keywords
Anopheles culicifacies, 1d electrophoresis, Proteomics, Salivary gland, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lab No. 125, Protein biochemistry lab, National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka , New Delhi-110077, India
*Dr. Arun Sharma Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Division National Institute of Malaria Research (ICMR) Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi- 110077

### Submitter
Ritu Rawal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Arun Sharma
*Dr. Arun Sharma Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Division National Institute of Malaria Research (ICMR) Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi- 110077


