### Accession
PXD002037

### Title
Reanalysis of spike-in samples

### Description
Two samples in submission PXD001091 were reanalysed 22 months later on the same instrument.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic peptides were spiked in at different levels in a trypsin digested cell lysate.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was converted to MGF and mzML using Proteowizard. The MGF files were searched using Mascot and X!Tandem and the search results were combined in Proteios. The results were exported in PRIDE XML format from Proteios.

### Publication Abstract
Label-free LC-MS methods are attractive for high-throughput quantitative proteomics, as the sample processing is straightforward and can be scaled to a large number of samples. Label-free methods therefore facilitate biomarker discovery in studies involving dozens of clinical samples. However, despite the increased popularity of label-free workflows, there is a hesitance in the research community to use it in clinical proteomics studies. Therefore, we here discuss pros and cons of label-free LC-MS/MS for biomarker discovery, and delineate the main prerequisites for its successful employment. Furthermore, we cite studies where label-free LC-MS/MS was successfully used to identify novel biomarkers, and foresee an increased acceptance of label-free techniques by the proteomics community in the near future.

### Keywords
Label free, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University


