### Accession
PXD040154

### Title
Phycocyanin-Allophycocyanin LC-MSMS

### Description
In this study, a co-expressed E.  coli strain of phycocyanin-allophycocyanin was constructed, and co-expressed with chromophore in E.  coli.  Different molecular weights of phycocyanin and allophycocyanin were detected in the recombinant strains, indicating that the expressed polymers are different.  The 66kDa dimer and the 300kDa multimer contained phycocyanin and allophycocyanin, identified by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The target band detected in Native-PAGE was excised and detected by mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was performed using a Triple TOF 5600+ system (AB SCIEX) combined with a nanoliter spray III ion source (AB SCIEX, USA). The scanning method was the information-dependent acquisition mode (IDA, Information Dependent Analysis), the scanning time of the first-level TOF-MS single map was 250ms, and a maximum of 26 charges of 2+ to 5+ were collected in each IDA cycle. The secondary spectrum with a second count greater than 200cps, the accumulation time of each secondary spectrum was 80ms. Each cycle time was fixed at 2.5s, the collision cell energy was set for collision-induced dissociation (CID) of all precursor ions, and the dynamic exclusion was set at 3s. In order to further judge whether there was a polymer of the target protein.

### Data Protocol
The original wiff map file of the mass spectrometer was imported into ProteoWizard software for data processing and converted into a mgf format file, and then the mgf file was imported into the mascot (V2.3.02) search engine for protein identification.  The search parameters are as follows: the database is the species protein database or theoretical amino acid sequence information provided by the customer; the enzyme is trypsin; the maximum allowable missed cleavage site is 1 (the specific items may be slightly different, please refer to Search parameters-Max missed cleavages in the search results parameter setting); fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Gln-&gt;pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu-&gt;pyro-Glu (N-term E) and Oxidation (M) (the specific items may be slightly different, you can check the Search parameters-Variable modifications parameter settings in the search results); MS tolerance is 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance is: 0.05Da.  Protein score CI% greater than 95% was identified as successful.

### Publication Abstract
Phycocyanin and allophycocyanin are important active substances in <i>Arthrospira platensis</i>, because of their fluorescent characteristic and antioxidant capacity. In order to solve the problem of insufficient production and inconvenient modification of natural protein, recombinant expression was performed and the fluorescence activity and antioxidant activity was analyzed to meet the demand for phycocyanin and allophycocyanin. A total of seven recombinant strains were constructed in this study, including individual phycocyanin or allophycocyanin, co-expression of phycocyanin-allophycocyanin, and their co-expression with chromophore, and the expression strain for individual chromophore. Different molecular weights of phycocyanin and allophycocyanin were detected in the recombinant strains, which indicated the different polymers expressed. Through mass spectrometry identification, phycocyanin and allophycocyanin may form a dimer of 66 kDa and a polymer of 300 kDa. The results of fluorescence detection showed that phycocyanin and allophycocyanin combined with phycocyanobilin to show fluorescence activity. The fluorescence peak of recombinant phycocyanin was mainly concentrated at 640 nm, which was similar to natural phycocyanin, the fluorescence peak of purified recombinant allophycocyanin was at about 642 nm. The fluorescence peak of the co-expressed recombinant phycocyanin-allophycocyanin is located at 640 nm, and the fluorescence intensity is between the recombinant phycocyanin and the recombinant allophycocyanin. After purification, the fluorescence peak of the recombinant phycocyanin is more concentrated and the fluorescence intensity is higher, which is about 1.3 times of recombinant phycocyanin-allophycocyanin, 2.8 times of recombinant allophycocyanin, indicating that phycocyanin may be more suitable to be used as fluorescence probe in medicine. The antioxidant capacity was measured by using total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) and DPPH (2,2'-diphenyl-1-triphenylhydrazino) free radical scavenging method, and the recombinant phycobiliprotein showed antioxidant activity. Phycocyanobilin also has certain antioxidant activity and could enhance the antioxidant activity of phycobiliprotein to a certain extent. Recombinant phycocyanin-allophycocyanin polymer has stronger T-AOC, which is about 1.17-2.25 times that of the other five recombinant proteins. And recombinant phycocyanin has stronger DPPH antioxidant activity, which is about 1.2-2.5 times that of the other five recombinant proteins. This study laid the foundation for the application of recombinant phycocyanin and allophycocyanin in medical detection and drug development.

### Keywords
Phycocyanin, Arthrospira, Lc-msms, Escherichia coli, Allophycocyanin

### Affiliations
Ocean University of China

### Submitter
Menghui SHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaonan ZANG
Ocean University of China


