### Accession
PXD023604

### Title
Yeast mitochondrial succinylome: Implications for mitochondrial DNA maintenance

### Description
Together with other post-translational modifications, acylation of proteins is a powerful means of regulation of their activity. Some acylation types occur nonenzymatically and are driven by an increase in the concentration of acyl group donors. Lysine succinylation has a profound effect on the corresponding site within the protein as it changes the charge of the residue. In eukaryotes it predominantly affects mitochondrial proteins because the donor of succinate, succinyl-coenzyme A, is primarily generated in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Although numerous succinylated mitochondrial proteins were identified in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a detailed characterization of yeast mitochondrial succinylome is lacking. Here we performed a proteomic mass spectrometry analysis of purified yeast mitochondria and detected 313 succinylated mitochondrial proteins with 1762 novel succinylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
6 mg of mitoplasts (per WT and dLsc1 biological triplicates) were freeze-thawed, proteins precipitated with 5 volumes of -20°C acetone and sedimented (16,100 x g, 30 min, 4°C). Pellets were washed 3 times and air dried. Proteins were dissolved in 6.4 M urea, reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide. After dilution in 3 volumes of triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8 (50 mM final concentration), the proteins were trypsin-digested (1:20 w/w) overnight. Acidified (0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and oxidised (100 mM hydrogen peroxide) peptide solution was clarified by centrifugation and purified on a reverse phase column (Supelclean™ LC-18 SPE; pre-washed with acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 0.1% TFA). 0.1% TFA-washed peptides were eluted from matrix by TA70 (70% ACN, 0.03% TFA). After adjusting pH using Tris-HCl, pH 8, the eluate was divided, so that 5% of sample could be used for mass spectrometry analysis of protein background and 95% for Ksucc enrichment. The peptide aliquots were vacuum dried. Peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.5% (v/v) NP-40) with cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and the suspension was cleared by centrifugation. Peptides were incubated overnight at 6°C with 30 μl of drained and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-washed Pan anti-succinyllysine antibody agarose conjugated resin (PTM Biolabs). The resin-bound peptides were washed using IP buffer with and without 0.5% (v/v) NP-40 and by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Succinylated peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA and vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
Obtained datasets were processed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.30 with built-in Andromeda search engine with carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) set as permanent modifications. In case of the protein background, unmodified(K) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications permitting 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Variable search parameters for Ksucc enriched samples were succinylation(K) and protein N-terminal acetylation permitting 4 missed tryptic cleavages. The search was performed against S. cerevisiae protein database downloaded from https://www.uniprot.org/ and containing 6049 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Acylation modifications, such as the succinylation of lysine, are post-translational modifications and a powerful means of regulating protein activity. Some acylations occur nonenzymatically, driven by an increase in the concentration of acyl group donors. Lysine succinylation has a profound effect on the corresponding site within the protein, as it dramatically changes the charge of the residue. In eukaryotes, it predominantly affects mitochondrial proteins because the donor of succinate, succinyl-CoA, is primarily generated in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Although numerous succinylated mitochondrial proteins have been identified in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a more detailed characterization of the yeast mitochondrial succinylome is still lacking. Here, we performed a proteomic MS analysis of purified yeast mitochondria and detected 314 succinylated mitochondrial proteins with 1763 novel succinylation sites. The mitochondrial nucleoid, a complex of mitochondrial DNA and mitochondrial proteins, is one of the structures whose protein components are affected by succinylation. We found that Abf2p, the principal component of mitochondrial nucleoids responsible for compacting mitochondrial DNA in S.&#xa0;cerevisiae, can be succinylated in&#xa0;vivo on at least thirteen lysine residues. Abf2p succinylation in&#xa0;vitro inhibits its DNA-binding activity and reduces its sensitivity to digestion by the ATP-dependent ScLon protease. We conclude that changes in the metabolic state of a cell resulting in an increase in the concentration of tricarboxylic acid intermediates may affect mitochondrial functions.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Ptm, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia

### Submitter
Peter Barath

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barath
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia


