### Accession
PXD037036

### Title
Proteomes of wood decay Basiomycetes Phanerochaete chrysosporium RP78 [Taxon ID 273507], Rhodonia placenta MAD-698-R-SB12 [Taxon ID 670580] and Jaapia argillacea MUCL33604 [Taxon ID 933084]

### Description
Culture filtrates from three wood decay fungi were analyzed after five- and 10-days growth in submerged cultures containing 0.75 % (w/v) finely ground lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta). Significant differences in proteome profiles were observed among the species.

### Sample Protocol
One-liter flasks containing 100 ml of media containing (g/L) 2% NH2NO3, 2% KH2PO4, 0.5% MgSO4.7H2O, 0.1% CaCl2.2H2O, 1% Yeast extract, 2% Polypeptone, and 0.75% ground pine. One-hundred ul 1000X trace metals solution (Teknova) was added after autoclaving at 121/15m. Triplicate flasks were inoculated with macerated mycelium and placed on a rotary shaker (100 RPM). After five- and ten-days incubation at 22-24C, cultures were filtered through Whatman GF/C filters followed by Corning 0.22 um polystyrene filters (cat.430531). Filtrate proteins were precipitated with 10% (wt/vol) trichloroacetic acid and washed 3X with acetone. Protein pellets were trypsin/LysC digested, OMIX C18 SPE purified (Agilent Technologies), and 1.5µg was loaded for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, using an Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source. Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using a capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3µM, 100Å, 150x0.075mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) onto which 2µl of purified peptides was automatically loaded. The nanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual  gradient from 0% (v/v) B to 30% (v/v) B over 280 minutes and concluded  with 10 minute fast gradient from 30% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 7 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, followed by MS2 fragmentation of the 20 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 380 to 1800 m/z, with redundancy limited by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed protein databases downloaded from the JGI portal (https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/mycocosm/home) with a list of common lab contaminants (available at http://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) to establish False Discovery Rates using an in-house Mascot search engine 2.7.0 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were selected. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 91.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 12.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wood decay fungi, Spectral counting, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, Forest Products Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Cullen
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, Forest Products Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture


