### Accession
PXD010333

### Title
Analysis of intact mannose-6-phosphate glycopeptides

### Description
We have repurposed standard phosphoproteomics workflow based on Fe3+IMAC for enrichment ofmannose-6-phosphate modified glycopeptides. This worklfow was used to profile lysosomal acid hydrolases in HeLa and CHO cell lines. We have combined this approach with CRISPR/Cas9 KO of acid phosphatases 2 and 5 responsible for dephosphorylation of mannose-6-phosphate glycopeptides in the lysosome. This combined approach enabled significantly deeper coverage of CHO mannose-6-phosphate glycoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa, CHO wild type and CHO KO cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (Sigma-Aldrich), 7M urea, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich), 30 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich), Triton X-100 (1%) (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM magnesium sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich), Benzonase (1%) (Merck Millipore), phosphoSTOP (Roche) and complete mini EDTA free (Roche). Then, cells were disrupted by sonication for 45 min (20 s on, 40 s off) using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 1 h at 4°C and the supernatant was kept. Impurities were removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as follows: 1 mL of supernatant was mixed with 4 mL of methanol (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mL chloroform (Sigma-Aldrich) and 3 mL ultrapure water with thorough vortexing after each addition. The mixture was then centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000 rpm at room temperature (RT). The upper layer was discarded, and 3 mL of methanol was added. After sonication and centrifugation (5,000 rpm, 10 min at RT), the solvent was removed, and the precipitate was allowed to air dry. The pellet was resuspended in digestion buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.5% Rapigest (Water), 5 mM TCEP and 30 mM CAA. Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and Lys-C (Wako) were added to a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio (w/w), respectively. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. After acidic precipitation of Rapigest with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), peptides were cleaned by Sep-Pak C18 1cc vac cartridge, dried and stored at -80°C until Fe3+-IMAC enrichment.Fe3+-IMAC was performed in technical triplicates for each  biological group.Tryptic peptides (2 mg) were re-suspended with ice-cold buffer A and the pH was adjusted to 2.3 using 10% TFA before injection into the Fe3+-IMAC column (Propac IMAC-10 4 × 50 mm column, ThermoFisher Scientific). Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 30% acetonitrile and 0.07% TFA, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.3% NH4OH in water. Loading was performed at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min for 7 min with 0% B and non-phosphorus or non-phosphomannose peptides were washed out using a flow rate of 1 mL/min for 5 min with 0% B, phosphopeptides and phosphomannose peptides were eluted by a flow rate of 1 mL/min with 50% B for 1.5 min, followed 0.5 mL/min for 2.5 min with 50% B,  and finally held at 1 mL/min of 0% B for 9 min. Collected phosphopeptides and phosphomannose peptides were dried down using a lyophilizer. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an Agilent 1290 (Agilent Technologies, Middelburg, Netherlands) to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for the analysis of peptides enriched by Fe3+-IMAC. After resuspension in 0.1% TFA, peptides were separated by using a 100 µm inner diameter 2 cm trap column (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm) (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) coupled to a 50 µm inner diameter 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm) (Agilent Technologies, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in ACN. Trapping was performed at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 5 min with 0% B and peptides were eluted using a passively split flow of 300 nl/min for 85 min with 8% to 40% B over 75 min, 40% to 100% B over 3 min, 100% B for 1 min, 100% to 0% B over 1 min, and finally held at 0% B for 10 min. Peptides were ionized using 2.0 kV spray voltage and a capillary temperature of 320 °C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (375–1700 m/z) for a maximum injection time of 50 ms at a mass resolution of 60,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s at exclusion window of 10 ppm with a cycle time of 3s. Charge-state screening was enabled, and precursors with +2 to +6 charge states and intensities >1e5 were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). HCD MS/MS (150-1800 m/z) acquisition was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 (isolation window of 1.6 Th) and an AGC target value of 5e4 or a maximum injection time of 75 ms with a normalized collision energy of 30%. When the oxonium ion of phosphomannose (Man P, 243.026+) was observed, EThcD MS/MS on the same precursor was triggered (isolation window of 1.6 Th) and fragment ions (150-2100 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000, AGC target value of 2e5 or a maximum injection time of 200 ms with activation of ETD and supplemental activation with a normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files of peptides enriched by Fe3+-IMAC were processed using Byonic software (ver 2.15.10) (Protein Metrics Inc.) with the following search parameters: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, unreviewed CHO database (Uniprot, 34 962 entries,March 2018), and reviewed human database for HeLa samples (Uniprot, 26 339, March 2018).  Precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragmentation type, both HCD & EThcD; product ion mass tolerance for HCD, 20 ppm; product mass tolerance for EThcD, 20 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification; variable modifications: methionine oxidation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Byonic database of the 50 common biantennary N-glycans and 20 M6P-modified N-glycans.

### Publication Abstract
Mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) is a distinctive post-translational modification critical for trafficking of lysosomal acid hydrolases into the lysosome. Improper trafficking into the lysosome, and/or lack of certain hydrolases, results in a toxic accumulation of their substrates within the lysosomes. To gain insight into the enzymes destined to the lysosome these glycoproteins can be distinctively enriched and studied using their unique M6P tag. Here we demonstrate, by adapting a protocol optimized for the enrichment of phosphopeptides using Fe<sup>3+</sup>-IMAC chromatography, that proteome-wide M6P glycopeptides can be selectively enriched and subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry, taking advantage of exclusive phosphomannose oxonium fragment marker ions. As proof-of-concept of this protocol, applying it to HeLa cells, we identified hundreds of M6P-modified glycopeptides on 35 M6P-modified glycoproteins. We next targeted CHO cells, either wild-type or cells deficient in Acp2 and Acp5, which are acid phosphatases targeting M6P. In the KO CHO cells we observed a 20-fold increase of the abundance of the M6P-modification on endogenous CHO glycoproteins but also on the recombinantly over-expressed lysosomal human alpha-galactosidase. We conclude that our approach could thus be of general interest for characterization of M6P glycoproteomes as well as characterization of lysosomal enzymes used as treatment in enzyme replacement therapies targeting lysosomal storage diseases.

### Keywords
Hela, Imac, Glycopeptide, M6p, Cho

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
TOMISLAV CAVAL

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


