### Accession
PXD010767

### Title
Temporal Phosphoproteome Dynamics Reveals the Role of ATP Synthase Inhibitor Citreoviridin in Gefitinib-resistant Lung Cancer Cells

### Description
Non-small cell lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Gefitinib, epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is the first-line treatment of NSCLC, however, many patients eventually become resistant and experience progressive disease. Therefore, development of efficient therapeutic agents to overcome resistance is urgent. We previously found that citreoviridin, one of toxic mycotoxins derived from fungal species, can suppress lung cancer cell growth by inhibiting the activity of ectopic ATP synthase, but has limited effect on normal cells. Citreoviridin suppresses mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling by site-specific dephosphorylation of HSP90AB1 on Serine 255 in gefitinib non-resistant lung cancer CL1-0 cells and xenograft model. We are curious whether signaling pathways underlying citreoviridin-treated gefitinib-acquired resistant lung cancer cells are different. In this study, we showed that citreoviridin inhibited cell proliferation and anchorage-dependent growth of gefitinib-acquired resistance NCI-H1975 cells with EGFR T790M mutation. Furthermore, we explored the dynamic molecular response by temporal phosphoproteomic approach. We identified 1476 phosphopeptides corresponding to 738 phosphoproteins and quantified 1901 phosphorylation sites. There were 274 phosphosites corresponding to 174 phosphorylated proteins significantly differential expressed. Functional enrichment analysis demonstrated that citreoviridin treatment affected chromatin organization, cell cycle and apoptosis. Interestingly, we found that citreovirdin suppressed cell proliferation by site-specific phosphorylation of topoisomerase on serine 1106. Citreovirdin induced double strands breaks, and then leaded to DNA damage response. The DNA lesions triggered cells to cell cycle arrest at S phase for repairing or apoptosis for cell death. The results indicated that citreoviridin could potentially be a therapeutic agent against gefitinib-resistant NSCLC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Cells were washed three times with PBS and lysed in lysis buffer containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine (SLS, MP biomedicals) in 50 mM triethylammonium bcarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Bioshop) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Bionovas). Cells were homogenized by sonicator at 60% amplitude and 0.6 cycle duration for 2 min and then collected the supernatant after centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4℃. The concentration of supernatants containing protein extracts were measured by PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reduction, alkylation and digestion 500 μg proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, BioShop) at room temperature for 30 min. Reduced cysteines were alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Alkylated proteins were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w; WAKO) for 3 h followed by trypsin (1:100 w/w; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for overnight at 37℃. To remove detergent, the digested peptides were added the equal volume of ethyl acetate (J.T.-Baker) and then vortexed for 2 min followed by centrifuged at 15,700 g for 2 min to separate aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase with peptides was collected and subjected to desalting using SDB-XC Stage Tips (3M, Neuss, Germany)1 and eluted by 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dimethyl labeling of peptides The stable isotope dimethyl labeling was performed for subsequently quantification of protein expression. The digested peptides were dried via a centrifugal evaporator (SpeedVac) and resolved in 100 mM TEAB. Each control samples were labeled with 4% formaldehyde-H2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and eATPi-treated samples were labeled with 4% formaldehyde-D2 (Sigma-Aldrich), separetely. 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN, Sigma-Aldrich) were immediately added to each samples for catalysis of the reaction and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The reactions were inactivated using cold 1% (v/v) Ammonium hydroxide (WAKO) and the labeled peptides were acidified to pH < 3 by 10% (v/v) formic acid (WAKO). Finally, The H2-labeled control sample were combined with the D2-labeled treatment sample at 1:1 ratio. Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptides enrichment were carried out via hydroxyl acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) proticol2,4. The home-made lactic acid-modified titania MOC tips were prepared by packing 0.5 mg TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) into 10 µL C8 StageTips and then equilibrated with solution A〔0.1% TFA, 80% ACN, and 300 mg/mL lactic acid (WAKO)〕1. Each mixture sample containing formaldehyde-H2 and formaldehyde-D2 labeled peptides was mixed with an equal volume of solution A, loaded onto the lactic acid-modified titania MOC tips. After washing with solution A and with solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% ACN), the phosphopeptides were eluted in 0.5% and 5% (v/v) solutions of piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich), and acidified with 10% TFA. Phosphopeptides were desalted with SDB-XC StageTips and dried with a centrifugal evaporator (SpeedVac). Samples were reconstituted in 0.5% TFA and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (nanoLC)–MS/MS. For each time-point, three independent batches of biological samples were prepared. NanoLC–MS/MS analysis Phosphopeptides were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron) connected to a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters). Peptide mixures were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 µm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 µm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 µm BEH C18 column with mobile phases containing solution A (0.1% FA) and solution B (ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra with full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1500). The resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 106 ions. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000). For each biological experiment, technical duplication of nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 was used to perform raw LC-MS/MS spectral information for peak detection and quantitation5. Andromeda search engine against Swiss-PROT human database version canonical (Published, 2015) allowing 0 to 2 missed cleavage sites were carried out for peptide identification6. Search criteria used in this study were shown as follows: trypsin specificity; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications specifically for phosphopeptide search. By using a decoy database strategy, significance threshold for peptide identification was based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor intensities of already identified peptides were further searched and recalculated by using the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant. For multiple phosphopeptides, the localization probability of all putative phosphosites was determined by using the MaxQuant PTM score algorithm. For single peptide with multiple hits, all matched proteins were counted separately.

### Publication Abstract
The EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib is commonly used for lung cancer patients. However, some patients eventually become resistant to gefitinib and develop progressive disease. Here, we indicate that ecto-ATP synthase, which ectopically translocated from mitochondrial inner membrane to plasma membrane, is considered as a potential therapeutic target for drug-resistant cells. Quantitative multi-omics profiling reveals that ecto-ATP synthase inhibitor mediates CK2-dependent phosphorylation of DNA topoisomerase II&#x3b1; (topo II&#x3b1;) at serine 1106 and subsequently increases the expression of long noncoding RNA, GAS5. Additionally, we also determine that downstream of GAS5, p53 pathway, is activated by ecto-ATP synthase inhibitor for regulation of programed cell death. Interestingly, GAS5-proteins interactomic profiling elucidates that GAS5 associates with topo II&#x3b1; and subsequently enhancing the phosphorylation level of topo II&#x3b1;. Taken together, our findings suggest that ecto-ATP synthase blockade is an effective therapeutic strategy via regulation of CK2/phospho-topo II&#x3b1;/GAS5 network in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cells.

### Keywords
Ectopic atp synthase, Phosphoproteomics, Lung cancer, Gefitinib resistance

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Cheng-Wei Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University


