### Accession
PXD010342

### Title
Inhibition of histone methyltransferase EZH2 in Schistosoma mansoni by GSK343 decreases the expression of genes implicated in DNA replication and ncRNA metabolism

### Description
Schistosomiasis is a chronic and debilitating disease caused by a trematode of the genus Schistosoma. The current strategy for the control of the disease involves treatment with Praziquantel, the only available drug. The development of new drugs is therefore a top priority. Drugs that inhibit histone modifying enzymes have been used in cancer, altering gene expression, replication, repair and DNA recombination. Schistosoma parasites have some characteristics similar to malignant tumors, such as intense cell division and high levels of metabolic activity. Here we evaluate in Schistosoma mansoni the effect of GSK343, an inhibitor of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 that had been shown to arrest or reduce the growth of human cancer cells. We show that GSK343 causes damage to the parasite tegument and reduces egg laying in vitro, concomitant with a decrease in levels of H3K27me3, the histone mark put in place by EZH2. RNA-seq and proteomic analyses of treated parasites showed changes in the expression of hundreds of genes involved in important metabolic processes. In females, a marked decrease was observed in the expression of genes related to processes such as DNA replication and noncoding RNA metabolism. In conclusion, the histone methyltransferase EZH2 seems to be a promising novel drug target against schistosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion for mass spectrometry  Schistosome parasites were lysed in lysis buffer containing urea (8 M), Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail-Complete from Roche and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic). Extracted proteins were quantified using Micro BCA Protein Assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology), reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) for 30 min at room temperature and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Following incubation, the samples were diluted in 20 mM Ambic, pH 7.5, and digested with trypsin (Promega V5111) 1:50 (w/w) overnight at room temperature. Samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (1 % final concentration) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min to stop trypsin digestion. Supernatant was collected and dried prior to desalting. Three biological replicates for treated and untreated conditions were processed and analyzed.   Peptide desalting for mass spectrometry  Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted using homemade micro-columns comprised of a C18 plug taken from a C18 disk (Sigma-Aldrich) with the constricted end of a P200 tip inserted into the disk. The acidified samples were loaded onto the micro-column by applying a gentle air pressure with the syringe and washed three times with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 50 % acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0.1% TFA, followed by 70% ACN/ 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analyses  Peptide samples were dried in the Speed-Vac, resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and analyzed using an EASY-nLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 μm) column and separated in an organic solvent gradient from 100 % phase A (0.1 % FA) to 30 % phase B (0.1 % FA, 95 % ACN) during 80 min for a total gradient of 105 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisition. The full scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 10e6 ions and a maximum fill time of 500 ms. Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation. Ions selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) were dynamically excluded for a duration of 30 s. Each MS scan was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM followed by 20 MS/MS scans of the most intense ions. All raw data were accessed in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).   Protein database searches and analyses  Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 and the embedded database search engine Andromeda. The MS/MS spectra were searched against our custom reference S. mansoni Protein Database (available at http://verjolab.usp.br/public/schMan/schMan1/gsk343/), with the addition of common contaminants, with an MS accuracy of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da) was set as the fixed modification, and two missed cleavages for trypsin. Methionine oxidation (15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010 Da) were set as variable modifications. Proteins and peptides were accepted at FDR less than 1 %. All raw data have been submitted to the PRIDE archive.   Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using the MaxQuant software with the “match between runs” feature activated. Protein LFQ intensity of each of the three biological replicates of treated and untreated samples were used for further statistical analyses. Proteins with valid values in at least two replicates of each biological condition were kept in the analyses. Exclusive proteins were identified in at least two biological replicates of one condition and in none of the other. Significantly regulated proteins were determined using the Welch’s t-test using the Perseus v.1.5.1.6 software and a p <= 0.05 was used as significance threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schistosoma mansoni, Rna-seq, Proteomics, Gsk343, Ezh2

### Affiliations
Instituto de Química da Universidade de São Paulo Instituto Butantan
Instituto Butantan

### Submitter
David Pires

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Verjovski-Almeida
Instituto de Química da Universidade de São Paulo Instituto Butantan


