### Accession
PXD008092

### Title
Moving Forward Real-Time Proteomics Mass Spectrometry by Remote Infrared Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization

### Description
Novel development makes remote real-time analysis with possible translation to in-vivo a reality. Remote Infrared Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization (Remote IR MALDI) system with endogenous water as matrix becomes real and allows to envisage real-time proteomics to be performed in the in-vivo context. Remote IR MALDI is demonstrated to be used to analyze peptides and proteins. Very interestingly, the corresponding mass spectra show ESI like charge states distribution, opening many applications for structural elucidation to be performed in real-time by Top-Down analysis. The charge states show no dependence toward laser wavelength or length of the transfer tube allowing for remote analyses to be perform 5 m away from the mass spectrometry (MS) instrument without modification of spectra. This brings also interesting features to the understanding of IR MALDI ionization mechanism

### Sample Protocol
For most of the experiments, the two analytes (Angiotensin-I and bovine Ubiquitin) were first prepared at a concentration of 10-3M in H2O. This solution was further diluted in glycerol/H2O (1:1; v/v), pure H2O or TFA 0.2%aq in H2O o as to obtain a final concentration of analytes of 5.10-4 M. For each experiment, 2 µL of analyte 5.10¬4 M were deposited onto a glass slide just before the irradiation. For the protein standard mix, an equal volume of the solution was added to glycerol and 2 µL of the analyte in glycerol were deposited onto a glass slide. For each condition, the sample was spotted 3 folds to get triplicates. For sensitivity tests, stock solution was further diluted 10, 100 and 1000 folds to achieve the targeted concentration but sample deposition was kept similar.  For the pH experiments, H2O/Glycerol (1:1; v/v) solutions of adjusted pH=3, 5, 7, 9 were first prepared. The H2O/Glycerol (1:1; v/v) solution is at pH=5. Thus, for pH<5, pH was adjusted by adding the appropriated volume of HCl (1M) and for pH>5 by adding appropriated volume of NaOH (0,1M). Then, 20 µL of the analytes (Ubiquitin, Lysozyme, or Cytochrome C) suspended at 5.10-4 M in pure H2O were dried in a SpeedVac vacuum dessicator (ThermoScientific) and resuspended in 20µL of the pH adjusted H2O/Glycerol (1:1; v/v). Then 2 µL of the final solution were deposited onto a glass slide for SpiderMass analysis. For the in-situ protein analysis, 100µL of a protein mix containing Ubiquitin, Lysozyme, and Cytochrome C) suspended at 5.10-4 M each in pure H2O were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 100µL of a solution of IPA/Glycerol (1:1; v/v). 2,5 µL of this solution were deposited onto a raw piece of food grade beef liver tissue bought from a local store and analyzed by SpiderMass after the droplet was absorbed by the tissue. The basic design of the instrument setup is already described in a previous study. In these experiments, the prototype was equipped with a fibered tunable InfraRed Optical parametric oscillator (OPO) system between 2.8 µm to 3.1 µm (Radiant version 1.0.1, OPOTEK Inc., Carlsbad, USA) pumped by a 1.064 µm radiation delivered by a Q-switched 10 ns pulse width Nd:YAG laser (Quantel Laser, Les Ulis, France). A 1 meter length biocompatible laser fiber with 450 µm inner diameter (HP fiber, Infrared Fiber Systems, Silver Spring, USA) was connected to the exit of the OPO system and focused by a 20 mm focal length CaF2 lens attached at its end. A Tygon® ND 100-65 tubing (2.4 mm inner diameter, 4 mm inner diameter, Akron, USA) was used to aspirate the ablated material and was directly connected to the inlet of the mass spectrometer (Synapt G2s, Waters, Manchester) through a modified atmospheric pressure interface described elsewhere. Three sample spots were deposited onto a glass slide to obtain significant results. The spectra acquisition were performed in positive resolution mode with a scan time of 0.5 sec.  MS/MS spectra were recorded in real-time conditions for Angiotensin  I and Ubiquitin, and they were subjected to CID in the transfer cell with respectively 20 and 35 V. Fragments ions of [M+2H]2+ of Angiotensin-I was performed using GPMAW software v4.23 (General Protein/Mass Analysis for Windows). MS/MS spectrum of [M+8H]8+ of Ubiquitin was exported to mMass software v5.5 (16) for the labelling of fragment ions.

### Data Protocol
Each acquisition was performed in triplicates. The recorded MS spectra were processed using MassLynx V4.1 SCN833. Generation of averaged mass spectrum was performed based on the total ion chromatogram. Then, a charge state selection was realized on the averaged mass spectrum to get the extracted ion chromatogram according to the acquisition time.

### Publication Abstract
Here we describe a new instrument (SpiderMass) designed for in vivo and real-time analysis. In this instrument ion production is performed remotely from the MS instrument and the generated ions are transported in real-time to the MS analyzer. Ion production is promoted by Resonant Infrared Laser Ablation (RIR-LA) based on the highly effective excitation of O-H bonds in water molecules naturally present in most biological samples. The retrieved molecular patterns are specific to the cell phenotypes and benign versus cancer regions of patient biopsies can be easily differentiated. We also demonstrate by analysis of human skin that SpiderMass can be used under in vivo conditions with minimal damage and pain. Furthermore SpiderMass can also be used for real-time drug metabolism and pharmacokinetic (DMPK) analysis or food safety topics. SpiderMass is thus the first MS based system designed for in vivo real-time analysis under minimally invasive conditions.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry • real-time analysis • remote ir maldi• proteins • charge state distribution

### Affiliations
University of Lille
University of Lille, INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM), F-59000 Lille, France.

### Submitter
Fournier Isabelle

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
University of Lille, INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM), F-59000 Lille, France.


