### Accession
PXD019159

### Title
Protein composition of the subretinal fluid suggest selective diffusion of vitreous proteins in retinal detachment

### Description
Purpose: To study the proteome of the subretinal fluid (SRF) from rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) in search for novel markers for improved diagnosis and prognosis of RRD. Methods: Human undiluted SRF obtained during vitrectomy for primary RRD using a 41G needle (n = 24) was analyzed and compared to vitreous humor from 2-days post-mortem eyes (n = 20). Sample preparation underwent nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Label-free quantification (LFQ) using MaxQuant was used to determine differential expressed proteins between SRF and vitreous humor. The intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used to rank proteins according to their molar fractions within groups. Identification of proteins beyond the quantitative level was performed using the Mascot search engine. Results: The protein concentration of the control vitreous humor was lower and more consistent (1.2 ± 0.4 mg) than that of the SRF (17.9 ± 22 mg). The iBAQ analysis showed high resemblance between SRF and vitreous humor, except for crystallins solely identified in vitreous humor. The LFQ analysis found 37 protein misregulations between SRF and vitreous humor of which the blood coagulation pathway was found to be enriched using the PANTHER Classification System. Combined, the iBAQ, LFQ and Mascot analysis found an overlap only in chitinase-3-like protein 1 and galectin-3-binding protein unique to the SRF. Conclusions: The proteome of the SRF was highly represented by proteins involved in proteolysis. Such proteins can possibly serve as targets in modulating the effects of SRF in RD.

### Sample Protocol
Human SRF and human vitreous samples were processed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP). Protein concentrations were determined using the A280 option of the NanoDrop 2000c system (Thermo Scientific) and the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For each FASP digest, 20 µg of each sample was applied to a 10 kMw cut-off filter (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g at 22°C until almost dry. The concentrated sample was resuspended in 200 µL 6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 min. The concentrated sample was reduced by adding 20 µL 500 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 to the filter, incubated for 5 min and spun another 14,000 x g for 30 min. Thiol-groups were alkylated by adding 20 µL 500 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, vortexed and incubated for 5 min in the dark at 22°C. Excess iodoacetamide was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g, followed by a washing step consisting of 200 µL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 before centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 30 min. Lastly, washed and concentrated sample was added 100 µL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 containing 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Sigma), vortexed and placed at 37°C for 16 hours. The following day, the filtrate was collected in a new tube and acidified by adding 10 µL 5% formic acid. Samples were desalted using homemade RP micro columns plugged with Octadecyl C18 Solid Phase Extraction disks (Empore, 3M) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analyses: MaxQuant iBAQ and LFQ quantification MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.5.0) was used to generate mascot generic files, and the Andromeda algorithm interrogated the SwissProt human database (2019_4; 20,422 sequences) using the following parameters: carbamidomethyl and N-terminal acetylation as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and proline as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme allowing two missed cleavage. The false discovery rate of peptides and proteins was set to 1%, and the mass tolerances of first and main precursor searches were set at 0.07 and 0.006 Da. The peptide mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The MaxQuant software was used to calculate the label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities for each protein based on a minimum of two peptides, including both unique and razor peptides. Match between runs was allowed among each group. LFQ and iBAQ intensities were processed and statistically compared using the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0). Values that were based on reverse sequence and only identified by site were removed. Only proteins quantified in a minimum of 75% of the replicates were included in the further comparison between groups. The molar percentage was calculated by dividing the iBAQ intensity of one protein by the total iBAQ intensity of the given sample. The proteins were ranked based on their average molar percentage in each group. For statistical analysis, the LFQ intensity values were logarithmized (Log2) and subjected to a student’s T-Test, followed by multiple hypothesis correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg method and an FDR of 0.01. Protein regulation with an adjusted p-value (q-value) below 0.01 was regarded as regulated between groups. The SRF groups was further divided into three sub-groups consisting of (1) 1-7 days post-RD, (2) 8-30 days post-RD and, (3) 30 < days post-RD. The SRF sub-groups were compared with each other and to the vitreous humor group, using same statistics as above, however  relying on proteins to be quantified in a minimum of five samples within each group.  Mascot analysis: The total protein identification in each group was obtained using the Mascot search engine v.2.5.1 interrogating the SwissProt human database (2019_7; 20,432 sequences). Precursor and production tolerance were set to 15 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and proline as a variable modification. Search results was adjusted to a 1% FDR at the protein level and imported to MS Data Mine v.1.312 for comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eye, Retinal detachment, Vitreous humor, Subretinal fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


