### Accession
PXD003859

### Title
buffalo sperm proteome LC-MS/MS

### Description
Male factors account for approximately 40% of all infertility. Conventional semen analysis focus on seminal physicochemical property and spermatozoa morphology. They yield no information concerning the functional competence of the spermatozoa(Petrunkina et al., 2007). Owning to the essential role of proteins in the reproductive process, comprehensive and systematic identification of proteome is critical to gain new insights into spermatogenesis and infertility. Recent advances in mass spectrometry have allowed the identification of hundreds to thousands of protein in spermatozoa(Oliva et al., 2008; Amaral et al., 2014; Codina et al., 2015). In major domestic mammalian species, global spermatozoa proteomic profiles have been described in rodents(Baker et al., 2008a; Baker et al., 2008b) and bovine(Peddinti et al., 2008). Meanwhile, lacking of new protein synthesis in spermatozoa supports the current view that the regulation of sperm maturation is controlled by exogenous proteins(O'Rand et al., 2011) (e.g., during epididymal transit). Among the seminal plasma proteins, The human seminal plasma has been comprehensively described (Pilch and Mann, 2006; Batruch et al., 2011; Milardi et al., 2012; Milardi et al., 2013; Sharma et al., 2013). In domestic animal species, some studies performing a systematic analysis on using high throughput proteomics have been performed(Kelly et al., 2006; Moura et al., 2007; Souza et al., 2012; Druart et al., 2013; Soleilhavoup et al., 2014). Buffalos (Bubalus bubalis) are adapted to hot–humid tropical climatic conditions, but have low reproductive efficiency. The low sperm motility maybe contributed to protein components variation of spermatozoa and seminal plasma. The composition of buffalo spermatozoa and buffalo seminal plasma (BSP) remains unknown. Proteomic study would be beneficial to the elucidation of the roles of sperm and BSP proteins in regulation of maturation, motility and fertilization. As such, the aim of the current study was to extensively characterize the differentially expressed protein of buffalo spermatozoa and seminal plasma using a comparative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Buffalo semen was acquired from Work Station of Livestock & Poultry Breed Improvement. The breeding buffalo having normal fertility acceptable for breeding purposes. Semen was centrifuged at 3000 g for 15 min to separate the sperm cells and buffalo seminal plasma (BSP). the supernatants of semen were transferred to a new tube and were precipitated by adding six volumes of ice-cold acetone. After centrifuged at 8000 g for 30 min, the protein precipitates were dissolved in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 50 mM dithiothreitol, DTT and phosphatase inhibitor, pH 8.0).     The spermatozoa were washed twice by PBS and allowed for a two-step protein extraction approach. the spermatozoa were dissolved in lysis buffer for 2 h at 4 °C. the cell debris were resuspended in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and phosphatase inhibitor, pH 7.4). The supernatants of two step were mixed. The protein concentration was determined by 2D Quant kits (GE Healthcare, CT, USA) and protein samples were tryptic digested by a Filter-Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol described by previously study (Wisniewski et al., 2009).The peptides of spermatozoa and BSP were dissolved in buffer A (2% ACN in water, pH 10.0). Then they were prefractionated by high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (hp-RPLC) using a XBridge C18 column (4.6(inner diameter)  250 mm(length), particle size: 5 m, 130 Å; Waters, Milford, MA) on a Waters e2695 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Waters Co., Ltd., Milford, MA, USA). Eight fractionations were collected with a 60 min gradient of 0–5% buffer B (98% ACN, pH 10.0) for 5 min, 5–35% buffer B for 45 min, and 35–50% buffer B for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. The 60 fractionations were dried in a speed-Vac and pooled into eight aliquots. The fractionations were desalted using ZipTips C18 Tips (Millipore, Cat. No. ZTC18S960) and re-dissolved in solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, FA) for LC–MS/MS analysis.The fractionated peptides were used for LC–MS/MS analysis on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) with an Acclaim PepMap nano trap C18 column (100 m inner diameter, i.d.  2 cm, 5 m, 100 Å) and an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (75 m i.d.  15 cm, 3 m, 100 Å, both from Dionex, Idstein, Germany) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of solvent B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA); 5–35% solvent B for 45 min, 35–100% solvent B for 10 min, 100% solvent B for 5 min, total run time 60 min. All eight peptide samples were acquired using an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Survey scans in the range 150–1800 m/z were acquired with a MS resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 400) in the Orbitrap analyzer and followed by 10 intensive precursor MS/MS scans by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 35% at 30,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for the maximum list size of 500 for duration time of 30 s with two exclusion counts. Siloxane ions were used for internal calibration (m/z, 445.1200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the Sequest algorithm was used for the identification of proteins. The raw data were processed and searched against the bovine Uniprot protein database (24,213 sequences, released in Dec. 2013. http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/9913). The number of allowed trypsin missed cleavages was set to 2, while oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were selected. Peptide tolerance was set to 20ppm with fragment ion set to 0.8 Da.  Parameters were specified as follows: fixed modification = Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification = Oxidation (M) and TMT-6plex (Y); one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed; mass tolerance of precursor ions was 20 ppm and that of fragment ions was ± 0.8 Da. Only peptides that were filtered with a confidence level of 95% were accepted. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using peptide validator-based on decoy database searching.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive identification of the proteins of spermatozoa and seminal plasma enables the full characterization of sperm biology and is essential to understand how seminal plasma influences sperm fertility. In this study, proteomics of buffalo spermatozoa and seminal plasma were analyzed using a bottom-up approach. A total of 2147 and 864 proteins were identified from mature spermatozoa and seminal plasma, respectively. Of these, 371 proteins-42.9% in the seminal plasma set-were common to both spermatozoa and seminal plasma. ODF2, AKAP4, and TUBB were the most highly abundant proteins of spermatozoa whereas the three most highly abundant proteins in seminal plasma were ALB, CLU, and AZGP1. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that most sperm proteins were involved in transport, phosphorylation and macromolecule localization. More seminal plasma proteins were related to proteolysis, response to stimulus and homeostatic process. Pathways associated with energy metabolism, protein processing and RNA transport were significantly enriched in spermatozoa. In buffalo seminal plasma, three distinguishing GO pathways-proteasome activity, lysosomal activity, complement and coagulation cascades-were found to play important roles in sperm protection. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis indicated that 531 and 620 proteins participated in buffalo sperm and seminal plasma PPI networks, respectively. Sub-network mining elaborated detailed biological events. This study is the first to provide an in-depth proteomic analysis of buffalo spermatozoa and seminal plasma. The results extend our understanding of male buffalo reproduction and provide clues for determining the relationships between sperm biology and seminal plasma.

### Keywords
Buffalo; sperm; proteome; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Guangxi university, state key lab for subtropical Agro-bioresource conservation and utilization, SKLCUSA
state key lab for convservation and utilization of subtropical agro-bioresource, buffalo reproduction research team.

### Submitter
qiang Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Qiang Fu
state key lab for convservation and utilization of subtropical agro-bioresource, buffalo reproduction research team.


