### Accession
PXD019067

### Title
Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of medulloblastoma

### Description
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 8.5 to detected phosphorylation peptides of mouse cerebellum progenitor.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were resuspended with 30 μL solvent A respectively (A: 0.1% formic acid in water), separated by nano-LC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiments were performed on a Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion ™ Lumos ™ Tribrid ™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source. 10 μL peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm), with a flow of 10 μL/min for 3 min and subsequently separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15 cm) with a linear gradient, from 4% B (B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN) to 39% B in 260 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 250 nL/min. The electrospray voltage of 2 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The mass spectrometer was run under data dependent acquisition mode, and automatically switched under MS and MS/MS mode. The parameters was setting as: (1) MS: scan range (m/z)=350 – 1500; resolution=120,000; AGC target=4e5; maximum injection time=50 ms; include charge states=2-7; dynamic exclusion=17 s; (2) HCD-MS/MS: resolution=60,000; isolation window=1.6; AGC target=5e4; maximum injection time=118 ms; collision energy=30.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the UniProt-mouse database (ver.201711, 52191 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme Trypsin. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), and Phosphorylation (STY) were specified as variable modifications. Peptides were filter by 1% FDR and 1 unique. Differentially expressed peptides were filtered if they contain phosphorylation PTMs with AScore≥20 and with fold change over 2.

### Publication Abstract
MYC-driven medulloblastomas are highly aggressive childhood brain tumors, however, the molecular and genetic events triggering MYC amplification and malignant transformation remain elusive. Here we report that mutations in CTDNEP1, a CTD nuclear-envelope-phosphatase, are the most significantly enriched recurrent alterations in MYC-driven medulloblastomas, and define high-risk subsets with poorer prognosis. Ctdnep1 ablation promotes the transformation of murine cerebellar progenitors into Myc-amplified medulloblastomas, resembling their human counterparts. CTDNEP1 deficiency stabilizes and activates MYC activity by elevating MYC serine-62 phosphorylation, and triggers chromosomal instability to induce p53 loss and Myc amplifications. Further, phosphoproteomics reveals that CTDNEP1 post-translationally modulates the activities of key regulators for chromosome segregation and mitotic checkpoint regulators including topoisomerase TOP2A and checkpoint kinase CHEK1. Co-targeting MYC and CHEK1 activities synergistically inhibits CTDNEP1-deficient MYC-amplified tumor growth and prolongs animal survival. Together, our studies demonstrate that CTDNEP1 is a tumor suppressor in highly aggressive MYC-driven medulloblastomas by controlling MYC activity and mitotic fidelity, pointing to a CTDNEP1-dependent targetable therapeutic vulnerability.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Phosphorylation, Neuron progenitor

### Affiliations
1.	Brain Tumor Center, Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
Brain Tumor Center, Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA

### Submitter
Zaili Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Q. Richard Lu
Brain Tumor Center, Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA


