### Accession
PXD040803

### Title
Interaction and global proteomics reveal the role of the pluripotency factor L1TD1 in embryonal tumor cell proliferation and mobility

### Description
Pluripotency factors are known to be abnormally expressed cancer cells, which often correlate with poor prognosis. The molecular mechanisms by which pluripotency factors contribute to tumor aggressiveness are yet to be elucidated. The pluripotency marker L1TD1 interacts with other pluripotency factors and is a marker for human embryonic stem cells. In cancer, L1TD1 expression has been detected in solid tumors, including Embryonal tumors of the Central Nervous System. Previously, we reported that, in medulloblastoma, L1TD1 expression correlates with metastasis and shorter overall patient survival. Here, we use Affinity purification-mass spectrometry and global proteomics to map the L1TD1 protein interaction network and assess proteins regulated by L1TD1 expression, respectively. Interactome and global proteome analysis led to the enrichment of overlapping Biological Processes attributed to L1TD1 including Cell proliferation, Cell death and cell migration. We also used L1TD1 overexpressing tumor cell populations for in vitro validation of the omic data. L1TD1 overexpressing cells presented higher cell mobility, enhanced filopodial formation and distinct cell morphology. These cells were overall more proliferative and resistant to cisplatin treatment in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lines Daoy-MED, USP13-MED and USP7-ATRT were cultured in DMEM Low Glucose (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco) and 1X Antimycotic-Antibiotic (Gibco). The cell line HEK-293T was cultured using DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS. In this study we used the expression vector PS17001 (Origene) and cloned the human L1TD1 gene CDS to obtain C-terminus GFP-tagged recombinant L1TD1 protein. The cloned vector and the empty vector were used for the production of lentiviral particles alongside the packaging plasmids pMd2g and PsPAX2. The plasmids were transfected into HEK-293T cells using the transfection reagent Lipofectamine3000 (Thermo scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions for Lentiviral Production. The lentiviral supernatant of the transfected HEK-293T cells was collected 48 hours after transfection, filtered and used to transduce the cell lines Daoy-MED, USP13-MED and USP7-ATRT with the addition of polybrene for a final concentration of 8ug/mL in complete cell media. The co-immunoprecipitation assays were performed using GFP-Trap agarose Beads (Chromotek) for the immunoprecipitation of GFP-tagged L1TD1 recombinant protein and GFP by itself on Control cell lines. Adherent cells were washed 3X with ice-cold PBS, and harvested with a Cell lifter (Corning) in 3mL´s of PBS. Harvested cells were centrifuged at 300g x 5 minutes at 4 degrees celsius and lysed in GFP-Trap Mammalian cell lysis buffer. Pre-washed GFP-Trap beads were incubated with cell lysates for 60 minutes at 4 degrees celsius in a rotation mixer. After protein binding incubation the beads were washed using a washing column from Chromotek, following manufacturer instructions. Unbound and wash flow-through solutions were stored for later check-up. Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the beads using an Acetic acid solution. Each was then lyophilised, resuspended in a 6M Urea solution, reduced with DTT (37 degrees celsius for 30 minutes) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (room temperature for 30 minutes). Samples subject to tryptic digestion and resulting peptide were cleaned up using Oasis HLB plates. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and applied to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into .mgf via msconvert. These mgf files were then analysed via MASCOT MS/MS Ions search tool againist the SwissProt reviewed sequences (20394 sequences; March 2021- proteome ID- UP000005640) downloaded from Uniprot. Used variable modifications: acetylation (lysine, N-termini) and Methonine oxidation. Allowed for 1 missed cleavage from the Trypsin enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Interactome, Neurone, Pluripotent, Proteome, Neuroblastoma, L1td1, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
University of Southampton

### Submitter
Brandon Coke

### Lab Head
Professor Rob Ewing
University of Southampton


