### Accession
PXD008084

### Title
TAF8 MUTATION CAUSES INTELLECUAL DISABILITY, TFIID DISASSEMBLY WITH NO EFFECT ON RNA POLYMERASE II TRANSCRIPTION

### Description
The human general transcription factor TFIID is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In eukaryotic cells, TFIID nucleates RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex formation on gene promoters and thus, is crucial for Pol II transcription. Germline knock out of several mouse TFIID subunits (Tbp, Taf7, Taf8, and Taf10) results in lethality at embryonic day 4.0, demonstrating the fundamental role of holo-TFIID in transcription. We identified a child harboring a splice-site mutation in TAF8, who has intellectual disability, poor growth, progressive spasticity and microcephaly. The c.781-G>A TAF8 mutation in this patient resulted in a frame shift, which affected the final 50 carboxy terminal amino acids of TAF8. We found that the mutant TAF8 protein is unstable and the patient c.781-G>A TAF8 primary fibroblasts did not form canonical TFIID complexes. Astonishingly however, genome-wide RNA pol II occupancy and pre-mRNA transcription on the tested genes was unaffected in the patient’s primary fibroblasts. This study indicates that perturbed TFIID function is less deleterious for transcription in human cells than originally anticipated.

### Sample Protocol
Protein WCE isolation Pelleted cells were resuspended in 1x volume of buffer containing 400mM KCl, 20mM TrisCl pH7.5, 2mM DTT, 20% glycerol and 1x complete protease inhibitors. The cells were frozen and thawed in liquid N2 four times before being centrifuged at 13K RPM for 10 min to pellet debris and isolate WCE supernatant.   TFIID co-immunoprecipitation Confluent plates of Taf8 mutant and control fibroblasts harvested and lysed in WCE buffer (described above), and 3mg of whole cell extract from each genotype was used for each co-immunoprecipitation. Protein G or A magnetic Dynabeads (Invitrogen 10002D or 10004D) were incubated with 6ul of anti-TAF10 antibody (IH8) or anti-GST antibody (15TF21D10) for 2 hours, then unbound antibody was removed with 2 washes in IP100 buffer (25mM TrisCl pH 7.5, 5mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 100mM KCl, 2mM DTT and 1x complete protease inhibitors). Fibroblast WCE was made up to 600ul in IP100 buffer, pre-cleared then added to Dynabeads coupled to antibody, and incubated overnight at 4oC with gentle agitation. The following day the magnetic beads were isolated with a magnetic rack, the unbound material was collected, and the beads were subjected to two rounds of washing for 10 minutes each with IP500 buffer (25mM TrisCl pH 7.5, 5mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 500mM KCl, 2mM DTT and 1x complete protease inhibitors), followed by IP100 buffer. For the anti-TAF10 co-IP, proteins bound to the beads were eluted by adding 60ul of 2mg/ml competing TAF10 peptide for 4 hours, then again for 2 hours.   Mass spectrometry  IP-ed proteins were also subjected to LC/MS-MS analysis on the ObiTrap ELITE as described in (Fournier et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Human Swissprot database (Release 2013_04, 20225 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 7 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a 5 % FDR (false discovery rate) and rank 1. Proteins were identified with 1 peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The human general transcription factor TFIID is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In eukaryotic cells, TFIID is thought to nucleate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex formation on all protein coding gene promoters and thus, be crucial for Pol II transcription. In a child with intellectual disability, mild microcephaly, corpus callosum agenesis and poor growth, we identified a homozygous splice-site mutation in TAF8 (NM_138572.2: c.781-1G&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;A). Our data indicate that the patient's mutation generates a frame shift and an unstable TAF8 mutant protein with an unrelated C-terminus. The mutant TAF8 protein could not be detected in extracts from the patient's fibroblasts, indicating a loss of TAF8 function and that the mutation is most likely causative. Moreover, our immunoprecipitation and proteomic analyses show that in patient cells only partial TAF complexes exist and that the formation of the canonical TFIID is impaired. In contrast, loss of TAF8 in mouse embryonic stem cells and blastocysts leads to cell death and to a global decrease in Pol II transcription. Astonishingly however, in human TAF8 patient cells, we could not detect any cellular phenotype, significant changes in genome-wide Pol II occupancy and pre-mRNA transcription. Thus, the disorganization of the essential holo-TFIID complex did not affect global Pol II transcription in the patient's fibroblasts. Our observations further suggest that partial TAF complexes, and/or an altered TFIID containing a mutated TAF8, could support human development and thus, the absence of holo-TFIID is less deleterious for transcription than originally predicted.

### Keywords
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip), Intellectual disability, Rna polymerase ii (pol ii), Patient, Splice site mutation, Tbp-associated factor (taf), Tata binding protein (tbp), Tfiid, Frame shift

### Affiliations
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire IGBMC, Illkirch, France  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, France  Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France
IGBMC

### Submitter
Farrah El-Saafin

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Tora
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire IGBMC, Illkirch, France  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch, France  Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France


