### Accession
PXD008792

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis in microdissected renal vessels of hypertensive and normotensive rats

### Description
Systemic hypertension has a profound impact on the renal vascular physiology. In order to elucidate the biological pathways and macromolecules deregulated by hypertension renal vessels were obtained by Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM) from Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats (SHR) and age-matched controls (20 weeks). Proteomic analysis was performed aiming to detect early molecular alterations associated with hypertension at the renal vessels before the onset of vascular damage.  Proteomic analysis identified 688 proteins, of which 58 were differentially expressed (15 up-regulated and 43 down-regulated in SHR). Many of these proteins are involved in vascular tone regulation by modulating the activity of endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase (eNOS) (e.g. Xaa-Pro aminopeptidase 1 (XPP1), N(G) N(G)-dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 (DDAH1), Dehydropteridine reductase (DHPR)) or in blood pressure control by regulating the renin-angiotensin system (e.g. Glutamyl aminopeptidase/Aminopeptidase A (AMPE), Aminopeptidase N (AMPN)). Moreover, pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the eNOS activation pathway is deregulated only in SHR. Our study demonstrates that hypertension causes early proteomic changes in the renal vessels of SHR. These changes are relevant to vascular tone regulation and consequently may be involved in the development of vascular damage and hypertensive nephrosclerosis. Therefore, the identified proteins could be considered as therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Laser Capture Microdissection Laser Capture Microdissection was performed using a PALM MicroBeam Laser System (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Germany). The laser capture system is equipped with an UV-A laser and a computer. Frozen unfixed renal tissue samples from 20 weeks of age SHR and WKY rats (N=4 for each group) were cut into 14 μm cryosections, mounted on glass slides coated with a biochemically inert membrane (PALM Membrane slides NF 1.0 PEN, Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Germany) and lightly stained with Gill’s hematoxylin according to standard procedures. Renal vessels and a limited number of glomeruli which exhibited prominent afferent and efferent arterioles were outlined with the drawing tool on the computer view of the field. The laser cut the selected area of renal parenchyma, following the drawn outline, and blew the microdissected sections off the slide by a higher energy laser pulse, to be captured onto 500-μl AdhesiveCap Touch opaque tube (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Germany) placed over the sample area. Approximately 10,000,000 – 14,000,000 μm2 of microdissected segments were collected from each sample.   GeLC-MS analysis  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography coupled with tandem Mass Spectrometry): Microdissected segments of renal parenchyma were homogenized and proteins were extracted in sample buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiurea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTE). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. Equal amounts of protein from each sample (6 μg) were analyzed by SDS PAGE and the resulting single bands were stained with Coomassie Colloidal Blue. Bands were excised from the gels and cut in small pieces (1-2 mm). Gel pieces were destained in 40% Acetonitrile, 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced in 10 mM DTE, 100 mM NH4HCO3, and alkylated in 50 mM IAA, 100 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were dried and trypsinized overnight with 60 ng trypsin in 10 mM NH4HCO3. Peptide extraction was performed with two washes of the trypsinized gel pieces with 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by two washes with 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. Extracted peptides were dried and kept at -80oC.  LC-MS/MS: Dried peptides were solubilized in 100 μl ultrapure water and separated on a nano HPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLS system (Dionex™, Camberly, UK). 5μl of each sample were loaded on a Dionex 0.1×20 mm, 5 μm C18 nanotrap column at a flow rate of 5 μl/min in 98% mobile phase A (0,1% formic acid) and 2% mobile phase B (100% acetonitrile, 0,1% formic acid). At a next step the sample was injected into an Acclaim PepMap C18 nanocolumn 75 μm×50 cm (Dionex™, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), at a flow rate of 0,3 μl/min. The samples were eluted with a gradient of solvent B starting at 1%B for 5 min, rising to 5% B at 10 min, 25%B at 180 min and 65%B at 240 min. The eluted peptides were ionized using a Proxeon nanospray ESI source, operating in positive ion mode, and injected into an Orbitrap Elite FTMS (ThermoFinnigan, Bremen, Germany). The mass-spectrometer was operated in MS/MS mode scanning from 380 to 2000 amu. The resolution of ions in MS1 was 60,000 and 7,500 for HCD MS2. The top 20 multiply-charged ions were selected from each scan for MS/MS analysis using HCD at 35% collision energy. Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software package (ThermoScientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK), using the SEQUEST search engine and the Uniprot human reviewed database. The search was performed using carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications. Two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. SEQUEST results were filtered for false-positive identifications.

### Data Protocol
Quantification and statistical analysis:  Reliable protein identifications which were present in at least 3 of the available 4 samples were retained for quantification analysis performed at the peptide level. The intensity for each protein in each sample was normalized in ppm (quotient of intensity for the particular protein to the sum of all intensities of all proteins of the specific sample multiplied with 106). The average normalized intensity for each protein was then determined for all the samples of the two groups (SHR and WKY).  As differentially expressed proteins selected for further analysis, were considered those with a fold change of > 1.5 (up-regulated in SHR compared to WKY) or < 0.66 (down-regulated in SHR compared to WKY), and a p-value of <0.05 (Mann Whitney).   Bioinformatics analysis In order to unveil the pathways that may be associated with the identified proteins in both SHR and WKY animals, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis was performed using Cytoscape software(8) with the ClueGO plugin (9) using Rattus Norvegicus as organism. P-value (corrected with Bonferroni) < 0.05 was set as the threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Essential hypertension, Endothelial dysfunction, Laser capture microdissection, Spontaneously hypertensive rats, Vascular proteomics

### Affiliations
Biotechnology Department, Proteomics Laboratory, BRFAA, Athens, Greece
BRFAA

### Submitter
Jerome Zoidakis

### Lab Head
Dr Jerome Zoidakis
Biotechnology Department, Proteomics Laboratory, BRFAA, Athens, Greece


