### Accession
PXD023081

### Title
The Pharmacological Effect and Mechanism of Lanthanum Hydroxide on Vascular Calcification Caused by Chronic Renal Failure Hyperphosphatemia

### Description
Objective: To investigate the treatment and mechanism of lanthanum hydroxide on hyperphosphate-induced vascular calcification in chronic renal failure.  Methods: Develop a rat model of CKD hyperphosphatemia. Rats were randomly allocated to the model, lanthanum hydroxide, lanthanum carbonate, Calcium carbonate groups. Determination of serum biochemical indicators and the determination of pathological analysis of kidney tissue, Von Kossa staining and CT scan on the aortic vessels. The proteomic analysis of aortic tissue in Vivo. A calcified VSMCs model was established. The calcium content and ALP activity were measured. RT-PCR measures the mRNA expression level of SM22α, Runx2, BMP-2 and TRAF6. Western Blot measures the protein expression level of SM22α, Runx2, BMP-2, TRAF6 and NF-κB. Results: Through the detection of serum biochemical indicators and pathological analysis of kidney tissue, it can be summaryed that lanthanum hydroxide has the effect of delaying the progression of renal failure and protecting renal function. We found that the administration of lanthanum hydroxide delayed the development of vascular calcification induced by hyperphosphatemia in CKD. It can be concluded that lanthanum hydroxide may affect vascular calcification through the NF-κB pathway. , To deal with Lanthanum chloride (LaCl3) inhibited phosphate induced calcification, osteo-/chondrogenic transdifferentiation, and NF-κB signaling in cultured VSMCs. Lanthanum hydroxide significantly reduces the expression of Runx2, BMP-2, TRAF6 and NF-κB.  Conclusion: Lanthanum hydroxide has a protective effect on the kidneys, and can delay the development of vascular calcification by reducing serum phosphorus concentration.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was ground into powder with liquid nitrogen and transferred to a 5 ml centrifuge tube. After that, four times the volume of  lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor mixture) was added, and the ice was treated with high intensity ultrasound processor (scientz) for three times.The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit. Take an equal amount of each sample protein for enzymatic hydrolysis, add an appropriate amount of standard protein, and adjust the volume to the same with the lysis buffer. Add 1 volume of pre-cooled acetone, vortex to mix, then add 4 volumes of pre-cooled acetone, and precipitate at -20°C for 2 h. Centrifuge at 4500 g for 5 min, discard the supernatant, and wash the precipitate twice with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the pellet, add TEAB at a final concentration of 200 mM, ultrasonically disperse the pellet, add trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m m-1), and hydrolyze overnight. Add dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM, and reduce at 56°C for 30 min. Then add iodoacetamide (IAA) to make the final concentration 11 mM, and incubate for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit.  The peptides were fractionated by high pH RP-HPLC with thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μ m particle size, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length). After dissolving in the mobile phase A of liquid chromatography, use the EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid system for separation. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid gradient setting: 0-38 min, 8% - 23% B; 38-52 min, 23% - 35% B; 52-56 min, 35% - 80% B; 56-60 min, 80% B; the flow rate was maintained at 600.00 nL / min. The peptides were separated by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) and implanted into NSI ion source for ionization, and then analyzed by QE + 1 mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chronic renal failure, Lanthanum hydroxide, Hyperphosphatemia, Vascular calcification, Mechanism, Pharmacological effect

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, Inner Mongolia Medical University
13142400107

### Submitter
Zhao Lulu

### Lab Head
Dr Gang Li
School of Pharmacy, Inner Mongolia Medical University


