### Accession
PXD021580

### Title
Mass Spectrometry of NOT gene-related purifications

### Description
Mass Spectrometry of NOT gene-related purifications, including NOT5 Tap Tag in WT and not4 deletion, the Ribosome Nascent Chain Complex,  and aggregates in NOT5 Delta,

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated by a single affinity purification step as described (33) with some modifications. Briefly, 3 liters of yeast cells expressing TAP-tagged proteins were grown at 30°C in YPD to an OD600 of 2.0. The washed pellet was resuspended with SAGA lysis buffer (40mM HEPES-KOH PH 8.0, 350 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) and flash frozen with liquid nitrogen as drops. Cell drops were broken with a MM 400 CyroMill (Retsch) at 30 pulses/min for 2 min. The generated cell powder was dissolved in SAGA lysis buffer supplemented with 0.5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and 2 mg/ml protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and spun at 6000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were cleared by centrifugation in a Beckman Ti60 rotor (40 000 rpm, 30 min, 4°C). 400mg of total lysate was incubated with IgG sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Proteins were bound by rotating at 4°C for 2 h and subsequently washed with 10 ml SAGA lysis buffer and 10 ml Tobacco Etch Virus protease (TEV) buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT). TEV protease (100 U) cleavage was performed in 1 ml of TEV buffer at 30°C for 1h.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos or Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a NanoAcquity system (Waters). Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 μm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a commercial 0.075 x 150 mm Nikkyo (Nikkyo Technology) analytical nanocolumn (C18, 5 μm, 100 Å). The analytical separation was run for 35 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: Initial at 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B in 14 min, and then to 20 % A and 80 % B in 5 min. After 1 min at this condition, buffer composition was changed to 95 % A and 5 % B in 2 min, and equilibrate for 13 min . Flow rate was of 220 nL/min. For MS survey scans, the orbitrap (OT) resolution was set to 60000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. For protein identification, up to 5 precursor ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ. The ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 m/z). The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID.  Protein identification Peaklists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched simultaneously against Saccharomyces Cerevisiae (UniProtKB, release 2011-09, 7776 entries using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.0). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. oxidation of methionine was specified as variable modifications. The Mascot searches were validated using Scaffold (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we show that Not4 and Not5 from the Ccr4-Not complex modulate translation elongation dynamics and change ribosome A-site dwelling occupancy in a codon-dependent fashion. These codon-specific changes in not5&#x394; cells are very robust and independent of codon position within the mRNA, the overall mRNA codon composition, or changes of mRNA expression levels. They inversely correlate with codon-specific changes in cells depleted for eIF5A and positively correlate with those in cells depleted for ribosome-recycling factor Rli1. Not5 resides in punctate loci, co-purifies with ribosomes and Rli1, but not with eIF5A, and limits mRNA solubility. Overexpression of wild-type or non-complementing Rli1 and loss of Rps7A ubiquitination enable Not4 E3 ligase-dependent translation of polyarginine stretches. We propose that Not4 and Not5 modulate translation elongation dynamics to produce a soluble proteome by Rps7A ubiquitination, dynamic condensates that limit mRNA solubility and exclude eIF5A, and a moonlighting function of Rli1.

### Keywords
Ribosome-nascent chain complex, Aggregates, Not4, Not genes, Rnc, Not5, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centre Médical Universitaire, University of Geneva
UNIGE

### Submitter
George Allen

### Lab Head
Dr Martine Collart
Centre Médical Universitaire, University of Geneva


