### Accession
PXD006660

### Title
Capturing protein communities by structural proteomics in a thermophilic eukaryote

### Description
The arrangement of proteins into complexes is a key organizational principle for many cellular functions. Although the topology of many complexes has been systematically analyzed in isolation, their molecular sociology in situ remains elusive. Here, we show that crude cellular extracts of a eukaryotic thermophile, Chaetomium thermophilum, retain basic principles of cellular organization. Using a structural proteomics approach, we simultaneously characterized the abundance, interactions and structure of a third of the C. thermophilum proteome within these extracts. We identified 27 distinct protein communities that include 108 interconnected complexes, which dynamically associate with each other and functionally benefit from being in close proximity in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Protein co-elution analysis: For protein co-elution analysis, 100 μl of concentrated lysate (approximately 30 mg/ml) was separated by a Biosep SEC-S4000 (7.8 x 600) size exclusion column on an EttanLC (HPLC) system running at 0.25 ml/min in 100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 95 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2. 250 μl fractions were collected.  Proteins in each fraction were denatured in 4 M urea buffer containing 0.2% (w/v) Rapigest® detergent. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was performed prior to protein digestion by adding 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min followed by 15 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were digested first using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) at 37°C for 4 h and second with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 12 hours after diluting the urea concentration to 1.5 M. Acidified samples (10% trifluoroacetic acid, vol/vol) were desalted using Macro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. 30 fractions from the first biological replicate were pooled and dimethyl labeled (heavy) to generate a spike-in standard. These were added to all fractions dimethyl labeled (light) in a 1:1 ratio of peptide abundance.  For protein co-elution, size exclusion chromatography fractions were analyzed in biological triplicates. Peptides mixtures were separated with a BEH300 C18 (75 μm x 250 mm, 1.7 μm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters) using a stepwise 75 min gradient from 3% to 85% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The connected LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Scientific) that was operated in data-dependent mode performing one survey MS1 scan followed by up to 20 (TOP20) collision-induced dissociation (CID)-based fragmentation MS/MS scans of the highest abundant ions available. Only charge states >1 were allowed for fragmentation. Important MS settings were: m/z range: 375-1600; resolution: 30,000 FWHM; AGC: 106; maximum ion time: 500 ms. Important MS2 settings were: minimum signal threshold: 150; dynamic exclusion time: 30 s; isolation width: 2 Da; normalized collision energy: 40; activation Q: 0.25; AGC: 30,000; maximum ion time: 50 ms  For cross-linking of C. thermophilum protein complexes, consecutive fractions were pooled into three-fraction pools. For the xQuest pipeline, native protein complexes in fraction pools were cross-linked using 0.5 mM isotope-labeled disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS, Creative Molecules) at 35°C, 600 rpm, for 30 min. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 35°C, 600 rpm, for 10 min. An additional cross-linking experiment was performed using a preperative SEC column for the xQuest pipeline: 2 ml of an approximately 12.5 mg/ml solution was injected onto a HiPrep 26/60 Sephacryl S-400 HR column at 0.2 ml/min and 300 μl fractions were collected. Consecutive fractions were pooled into seven-fraction pools and cross-linked using DSS. These were individually concentrated to 100 μl in order to achieve a concentration of approx. 0.5-1 mg/ml. Cross-linked protein complexes were denatured by addition of 4 M Urea/0.1% 0.2% (w/v) Rapigest® and subjected to carbamidomethylation and digestion as described above.  Cross-linked peptides derived from each fraction pool were enriched using peptide gel filtration. In brief, samples were reconstituted (30% (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on an Äktamicro LC system (GE) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. Fractions eluting between 0.9 and 1.4 ml based on the 215 nm UV absorbance profile were collected (3-4 fractions total for each of the original fraction pools) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Fractions were reconstituted in 20-40 μl buffer containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis Fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected online to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 mm x 250 mm, 1.7 mm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters) using a stepwise 60 and 120 min gradient between 3% and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed using a TOP-20 strategy where survey-MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap (R = 30,000) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 40, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. In order to focus the acquisition on larger cross-linked peptides, charge states 1, 2 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ± 15 ppm. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Protein co-elution analysis:  MS raw data for each fraction were searched against the Chaetomium thermophilum protein database including common protein contaminants using the MaxQuant search engine (version1.305) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Important search parameters were: missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications, oxidation (M), N- acetylation (protein N-terminus); multiplicity, 2, allowing for light and heavy dimethyl labeling; static, carbamidomethylation (C); matching between runs, yes. Proteins and peptides were filtered for 1% FDR using target-decoy-based reverse database search. Further filters applied were: protein score, equal or higher than 60; PEP, <0.05; number of unique peptide counts, equal or higher than 2. Major protein ID was used for identified protein groups. Label-free quantitation of protein intensities was deemed more efficient than labeled spike-in standard quantitation. Thus, protein intensities for the biological triplicates (dimethyl light channel) were exported as iBAQ scores as determined by the MaxQuant software.  Cross-linking analysis:  To assign the fragment ion spectra, raw files were converted to centroid mzXML using the Mass Matrix file converter tool and then searched using xQuest against a fasta database containing the sequences of the proteins identified in the fractions. Posterior probabilities were calculated using xProphet and benchmarked on structural models.

### Publication Abstract
The arrangement of proteins into complexes is a key organizational principle for many cellular functions. Although the topology of many complexes has been systematically analyzed in isolation, their molecular sociology <i>in&#xa0;situ</i> remains elusive. Here, we show that crude cellular extracts of a eukaryotic thermophile, <i>Chaetomium thermophilum</i>, retain basic principles of cellular organization. Using a structural proteomics approach, we simultaneously characterized the abundance, interactions, and structure of a third of the <i>C.&#xa0;thermophilum</i> proteome within these extracts. We identified 27 distinct protein communities that include 108 interconnected complexes, which dynamically associate with each other and functionally benefit from being in close proximity in the cell. Furthermore, we investigated the structure of fatty acid synthase within these extracts by cryoEM and this revealed multiple, flexible states of the enzyme in adaptation to its association with other complexes, thus exemplifying the need for <i>in&#xa0;situ</i> studies. As the components of the captured protein communities are known-at both the protein and complex levels-this study constitutes another step forward toward a molecular understanding of subcellular organization.

### Keywords
Xl-ms, Chaetomium thermophilum, Protein communities

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany


