### Accession
PXD011616

### Title
Proteomics and direct Protein-SIF of the bacterial ectosymbionts of the ciliate Kentrophoros sp. H

### Description
Kentrophoros ciliates are found worldwide in coastal marine sediment, and have an obligate symbiosis with sulfur-oxidizing Gammaproteobacteria called Candidatus Kentron. The genomes of different Kentron species suggest that they are chemolithoheterotrophs, producing new biomass from organic carbon substrates. We investigated the metaproteome of Kentrophoros sp. H and its symbiont (from two sites in the Mediterranean), to verify that hypothesized pathways of carbon and energy metabolism are indeed expressed, and to estimate the stable isotope fractionation in biomass, which can be a signature of the carbon sources used by the organism.

### Sample Protocol
All samples except H-pool-8 were collected on 2014-06-03 from sediment adjacent to seagrass meadows at Sant’ Andrea, Isola d’Elba, Italy, where sediment was retrieved by SCUBA divers, and sorted by decantation in the laboratory. Sample H-pool-8 was collected on 2018-07 from coastal sediment at Pampelonne Beach, Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur, France, which was sorted on site by decantation. Ciliates were individually picked out and fixed in RNAlater, and subsequently stored at 4 °C. One individual Kentrophoros sp. specimen and nine pooled samples of four or five individuals each were used to prepare tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol of Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6:359-362) with minor modifications (Hamann et al. 2016, Nature 534(7606):254). Samples were lysed in 30 µl of SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) by heating to 95 °C for 10 minutes. To avoid sample losses we did not clear the lysate by centrifugation after lysis. Instead, we loaded the whole lysate on to the 10 kDa filter units used for the FASP procedure. The QubitTM Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Life Technologies) was used to determine peptide concentrations, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide concentrations were below the detection limit in all samples. All samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as described in Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 1558), with the modification that a 75 cm analytical column was used. Briefly, an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to load peptides with loading solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Since, peptide concentrations were very low, complete peptide samples (80 µl) were loaded onto the pre-column. Peptides were eluted from the pre-column onto a 75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 60° C. Separation of peptides on the analytical column was achieved at a flow rate of 225 nl min 1 using a 460 min gradient going from 98 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) to 31 % buffer B (0.08 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) in 363 min, then to 50 % B in 70 min, to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 26 min 99 % B. Eluting peptides were analyzed in a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Carryover was reduced by running two wash runs (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile) between samples. Data acquisition in the Q Exactive Plus was done as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microbiol. 2:16195).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification A database containing protein sequences predicted from the Ca. Kentron genomes described in the manuscript corresponding to this project and predicted protein sequences from a preliminary host transcriptome was used for protein identification. The Ca. Kentron sp. H genome sequences are available from the  European Nucleotide Archive under study accession PRJEB25374. The same genomes are also available on the JGI IMG/ER platform (https://img.jgi.doe.gov/) under accessions: 2609459750, 2615840503, 2615840504. The Ca. Kentron protein sequences were clustered at 98% identity with CD-HIT, and only the representative sequences were used for the database. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), which contains sequences of common lab contaminants, was appended to the database. The final database contained 5,715 protein sequences. For protein identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against this database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microbiol. 2:16195). Two samples, H-pool-6 and H-pool-7 did not yield enough peptide hits for a reliable direct protein-SIF quantification, and were excluded from further analysis. Direct Protein-SIF Stable carbon isotope fingerprints (SIFs = δ13C values) for Ca. Kentron symbiosis were determined using the proteomic data as described by Kleiner et al. (2018, PNAS 115 (24), E5576-E5584). Briefly, human hair with a known δ13C value was used as reference material to correct for instrument fractionation. A tryptic digest of the reference material was prepared as described above and analyzed with the same 1D-LC-MS/MS method as the samples. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) files generated by Proteome Discoverer were exported in tab-delimited text format. The 1D-LC-MS/MS raw files were converted to mzML format using the MSConvertGUI available in the ProteoWizard tool suite (Chambers et al. 2012, Nat. Biotech. 30:918-920). Only the MS1 spectra were retained in the mzML files and the spectra were converted to centroided data by vendor algorithm peak picking. The PSM and mzML files were used as input for the Calis-p software (https://sourceforge.net/projects/calis-p/) to extract peptide isotope distributions and to compute the direct Protein-SIF δ13C value for Ca. Kentron and the human hair reference material. The direct Protein-SIF δ13C values were corrected for instrument fragmentation by applying the offset determined by comparing the direct Protein-SIF δ13C value of the reference material with its known δ13C value.

### Publication Abstract
Since the discovery of symbioses between sulfur-oxidizing (thiotrophic) bacteria and invertebrates at hydrothermal vents over 40&#x2009;years ago, it has been assumed that autotrophic fixation of CO<sub>2</sub> by the symbionts drives these nutritional associations. In this study, we investigated "<i>Candidatus</i> Kentron," the clade of symbionts hosted by <i>Kentrophoros</i>, a diverse genus of ciliates which are found in marine coastal sediments around the world. Despite being the main food source for their hosts, Kentron bacteria lack the key canonical genes for any of the known pathways for autotrophic carbon fixation and have a carbon stable isotope fingerprint that is unlike other thiotrophic symbionts from similar habitats. Our genomic and transcriptomic analyses instead found metabolic features consistent with growth on organic carbon, especially organic and amino acids, for which they have abundant uptake transporters. All known thiotrophic symbionts have converged on using reduced sulfur to gain energy lithotrophically, but they are diverse in their carbon sources. Some clades are obligate autotrophs, while many are mixotrophs that can supplement autotrophic carbon fixation with heterotrophic capabilities similar to those in Kentron. Here we show that Kentron bacteria are the only thiotrophic symbionts that appear to be entirely heterotrophic, unlike all other thiotrophic symbionts studied to date, which possess either the Calvin-Benson-Bassham or the reverse tricarboxylic acid cycle for autotrophy.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Many animals and protists depend on symbiotic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria as their main food source. These bacteria use energy from oxidizing inorganic sulfur compounds to make biomass autotrophically from CO<sub>2</sub>, serving as primary producers for their hosts. Here we describe a clade of nonautotrophic sulfur-oxidizing symbionts, "<i>Candidatus</i> Kentron," associated with marine ciliates. They lack genes for known autotrophic pathways and have a carbon stable isotope fingerprint heavier than other symbionts from similar habitats. Instead, they have the potential to oxidize sulfur to fuel the uptake of organic compounds for heterotrophic growth, a metabolic mode called chemolithoheterotrophy that is not found in other symbioses. Although several symbionts have heterotrophic features to supplement primary production, in Kentron they appear to supplant it entirely.

### Keywords
Candidatus kentron, Kentrophoros, Protein-sif, Metaproteomics, Pampelonne beach, Ciliophora, Thiotrophic symbiosis, Metaproteome, Isola d' elba, Protist, 1d-lc, Mediterranean, Gammaproteobacteria, Ciliate

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Brandon K. B. Seah
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology


