### Accession
PXD034902

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Dscc1 knockout mouse cells

### Description
In this project we aimed to explore the effect of Dscc1 gene loss on the proteome. Embyros from wildtype and aged matched Dssc1 null embryos were profiled.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were lysed in RIPA buffer plus HaltTM protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (final concentration 2x, ThermoFisher Scientific) with probe sonication and heating.  Sample was then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15min to remove the pellet.  Protein concentration were measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo). 100 µg of proteins per sample was taken. Proteins were reduced by TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma), alkylated by iodoacetamide (Sigma), and then purified by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation. Purified proteins were digested in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) by trypsin (ThermoFisher) at 1:25 (by weight) at 37C for 18 hours. 40 µg (for human iPS) or 50 µg (for mouse embryo head) peptides were labelled by 0.4 mg TMT10plex according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Samples were mixed, dried in SpeedVac, and then were fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) – 35% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 30 min / total cycle 60min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min.  Fractions were collected ay every 30 sec and then concatenated to 12 fractions and dried in SpeedVac.  The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA)/H2O and analysed on the Orbitraip Fusion hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (both from Thermo Fisher). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 nano trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µ) then peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm) over a linear gradient of 4 – 33.6% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 180 min / cycle time at 210 min at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) with the Top Speed 3s cycle time.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan range was from m/z 380 to 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC set at 400,000 and maximum injection time at 50 msec.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 6) above the intensity threshold at 5000 were fragmented by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) in ion trap at 35% collision energy (CE), with AGC at 10,000 and maximum injection time at 50 msec, and isolation width at 0.7 Da in quadrupole.  The top 10 MS2 fragment ions were isolated by synchronous precursor selection (SPS) method with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and further fragmented by higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) at 60% CE and detected in the Orbitrap in a scan range 110-400 m/z to get the report ions’ intensities at a better accuracy. The resolution was set at 60,000, and the AGC at 60,000 with maximum injection time at 105 msec.  The dynamic exclusion was set 60 sec with ± 7 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against fasta files of reviewed Uniprot homo Sapien entries (December 2021) or Mus musculus entries (April 2020) and an in-house contaminate database. Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 30 ppm for Precursor, and 0.6 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), and Oxidation (M), static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 100%.  Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification, and the SPS mass matches threshold was set at 50%.  Report ions intensities were normalized by total peptide amount, and then scaled on all average to correct the variation by for different protein loading in each channel.  The statistical analysis was performed in Perseus software (v 1.6.2.3) (https://maxquant.net/perseus/).  For human iPS samples, one sample T-test was performed, and filtered for Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.05.  Entries with q-value less than 0.05 and log2 ratio less than -0.5 or bigger than 0.5 were marked as Significant change.  For mouse embryo head samples, two sample Student’s T-test was performed and filtered by p-value at 0.05.  Proteins with both -log p-value bigger than 1 (or 1.3) and log2 ratio change less than -0.5 or bigger than 0.5 were marked as Significant change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Dscc1, Knock out, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Insitute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Insitute of Cancer Research


