### Accession
PXD007793

### Title
The autophagy receptor p62/SQSTM1 mediates anti-inflammatory actions of the selective glucocorticoid receptor modulator CpdA in macrophages

### Description
Glucocorticoids are widely used to treat inflammatory disorders. Prolonged use results in side effects including osteoporosis, diabetes and obesity. The selective glucocorticoid receptor (GR) modulator Compound A (CpdA) exhibits an inflammation-suppressive effect, largely in absence of detrimental side effects. To understand the mechanistic differences between the classic glucocorticoid dexamethasone (DEX) and CpdA, we looked for proteins oppositely regulated using an unbiased proteomics approach. We found that the autophagy receptor p62 but not GR mediates the anti-inflammatory action of CpdA in macrophages. CpdA drives the upregulation of p62 by recruiting the NRF2 transcription factor to its promoter. Contrarily, the classic GR ligand dexamethasone recruits GR to p62 and other NRF2 controlled gene promoters, resulting in gene downregulation. Both DEX and CpdA are able to induce autophagy, albeit in a cell-type and time-dependent manner. Suppression of LPS-induced IL-6 and MCP1 genes in bone marrow-derived macrophages by CpdA is hampered upon p62 silencing, confirming that p62 is essential for the anti-inflammatory capacity of CpdA. Together, these results demonstrate how off-target mechanisms of selective GR ligands may establish a more efficient anti-inflammatory therapy

### Sample Protocol
Protocol samples processing: A549 cells were cultivated in DMEM without arginine and lysine (Gibco, 04195-922M) supplemented with 10% dialysed FCS (Gibco, 10270106), 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution (Gibco, 15140-122) and with either “heavy” (H) [13C6]lysine and [13C6]arginine (Silantes, 211204102, 201204102) or “light” (L) [12C6]lysine and [12C6]arginine. To achieve a complete incorporation of the labelled amino acids, cells were maintained in culture for 6 days. After treatments with DEX+TNF and CpdA+TNF, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (0.8% CHAPS, 50 mM sodium phospate buffer pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl supplemented with a Complete protease inhibitor cocktail) and the proteins were digested with trypsin (Pomega, V5111). The peptide mixtures were pre-fractionated by RP-HPLC into 20 different fractions. The obtained fractions were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, being a tandem configurated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm internal diameter (I.D.) x 20 mm length, 5 µm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 m I.D. x 150 mm length, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 50% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 98/2, v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a wash reaching 99% solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. In the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The ten most intense ions were then isolated in the linear ion trap with a target value of 5E4, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s and fragmented in the HCD cell.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed on the raw data with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. The generated spectra were searched against the sequences of the human proteins stored in the UniProt database (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,172 human protein sequences). Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5) on the protein groups file from MaxQuant. After removal of reverse database hits, protein groups only identified by site and contaminant protein group identifications, the distributions were each centralized around their median and the sample ratios from 3 biological replicates were grouped. Proteins with less than two valid replicate values were removed and a one sample t-test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucocorticoids, P62/sqstm1, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation, Cpda, Autophagy receptors, Nrf2-signaling, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Karolien De Bosscher - Staff Scientist VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology Albert Baertsoenkaai 3 - 9000 Gent - Belgium
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr Debosscher Karolien
Prof. Dr. Karolien De Bosscher - Staff Scientist VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology Albert Baertsoenkaai 3 - 9000 Gent - Belgium


