### Accession
PXD025652

### Title
Evaluation of fully functionalized diazirine tags for chemical proteomic applications

### Description
The use of photo-affinity labeling (PAL) reagents for the mapping of noncovalent small molecule-protein interactions has become widespread. Recently, several ‘fully-functionalized’ (FF) chemical tags have been developed wherein a photoactivatable capture group, an enrichment handle, and a functional group for synthetic conjugation to a molecule of interest are integrated into a single modular tag. Diazirine-based FF tags in particular are increasingly employed in chemical proteomic investigations, however, despite routine usage, their relative utility has not been established. Here, we systematically evaluate several diazirine-containing FF tags, including a terminal diazirine analog developed herein, for chemical proteomic investigations. Specifically, we compared the general reactivity of five diazirine tags and assessed their impact on the profiles of various small molecules, including fragments and known inhibitors revealing that such tags can have profound effects on the proteomic profiles of chemical probes. Our findings should be informative for chemical probe design, PAL-reagent development, and chemical proteomic investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µL DPBS and sonicated (15 ms on, 40 ms off, 15% amplitude, 1 s total on x 3). Protein concentrations were normalized (2 mg/mL in 500 µL with cold DPBS) as previously described. To each sample was added solutions of tris((1-benzyl-4-triazolyl)methyl)amine (30 μL, 1.7 mM in DMSO/t-BuOH 1:4 v/v), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (10 µL, 50 mM), biotin-PEG3-azide (5 µL, 100 µM), and CuSO4 (10 µL, 50 mM) and shaken at room temperature for 1 h. After reaction, 2.5 mL of cold 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3 solution and 1 mL cold DPBS 4 °C was added, the samples were vortexed then were centrifuged (4,700 x g, 10 min, 4 °C), forming a disc. The supernatant was removed, and the samples were washed three times with 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3, resuspended by sonication and centrifuged as previously described. Pellets were resuspended in freshly prepared urea solution (500 µL DPBS, 6 M) and a solution of SDS (10 µL of 10 % w/v), followed by freshly prepared 1:1 solution (50 µL) TCEP (200 mM in DPBS) and K2CO3 (600 mM in DPBS) and incubated (30 min, 37 °C) while shaking. After reaction, a solution of freshly prepared iodoacetamide (70 µL, 400 mM in DPBS) was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature while protected from light. A solution of SDS (130 µL, 10 % in DPBS w/v) was added, then diluted with DPBS (5.5 mL). A streptavidin-agarose slurry (100 µL, 50 %, Pierce) was added to each tube and rotated for 1.5 h at RT. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (750 x g, 2 min, 4 °C), washed (1 x 5 mL 0.2% w/v SDS in DPBS, 1 x 5 mL DPBS, 1 x 5 mL 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 in Milliq water) and transferred to 1.5 mL LoBind microcentrifuge tubes with TEAB (1 mL, 100 mM) and pelleted by centrifugation (750 x g, 2 min, 4 °C). The supernatant was aspirated, and sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (200 µL, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 100 µM CaCl2) was added to the beads and incubated at 37 °C for 14 h with shaking. The digest was separated by centrifugation (750 x g, 5 min, 4 °C) and placed in new LoBind centrifuge tubes. The beads were washed with TEAB (100 µL, 100 mM pH 8.5 in Milliq water), and the washing was separated and combined with the supernatant (300 µL total peptide mix per sample). MS-grade acetonitrile (120 µL) was added to each and samples were labeled with respective TMT 10 plex isotope (8 µL, 20 µg/ µL) for 1 h with occasional vortexing at RT. To quench, hydroxylamine (6 µL, 5% v/v) was added to each sample, vortexed, and incubated for 15 min at RT. Formic acid (4 µL) was added to each tube to acidify and the samples were dried under vacuum centrifugation. The samples were combined by redissolving the contents of one tube in a solution of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 200 µL, 0.1% in water) and transferred into each sample until all samples were redissolved. The step-wise process was repeated with a second volume of TFA solution (100 µL in water) for a final volume of 300 µL. The samples were fractionated using a fractionation kit (Pierce high pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific 84868) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide fractions were eluted from the spin column with consecutive solutions of 0.1% triethylamine combined with MeCN (5-95% MeCN). The fractions were combined pairwise (fraction 1 and fraction 7, fraction 2 and fraction 8, etc.), dried via vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80 °C until ready for mass spectrometer injection. TMT labeled samples were redissolved in MS buffer A (20 µL, 0.1% formic acid in water). 3 µL of each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 µm x 2 mm) and eluted on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 15 cm) using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was prepared as described above and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in MeCN) were used in a 220 min gradient (flow rate 0.3 mL min, 35 °C) of 2 % buffer B for 10 min, followed by an incremental increase to 30 % buffer B over 192 min, 60 % buffer B for 5 min, 60-95 % buffer B for 1 min, hold at 95 % buffer B for 5 min, followed by descent to  2% buffer B for 1 min followed by re-equilibration at 2 % for 6 min. The elutions were analyzed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with a cycle time of 3 s and nano-LC electrospray ionization source applied voltage of 2.0 kV. MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1x106 ions, maximum injection time of 50 ms (dynamic exclusion enabled, repeat count 1, duration 20 s). The scan range was specified from 375 to 1,500 m/z. Peptide fragmentation MS2 spectra was recorded via collision-induced diffusion (CID) and quadrupole ion trap analysis (AGC 1.8x104, 30 % collision energy, maximum inject time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6). MS3 spectra was generated by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with collision energy of 65 %. Precursor selection included up to 10 MS2 ions for the MS3 spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed with the processing software Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide sequences were identified by matching proteome databases with experimental fragmentation patterns via the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Fragment tolerances were set to 0.6 Da, and precursor mass tolerances set to 10 ppm with one missed cleavage site allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C, +57.02146) and TMT-tag (K and N-terminal, +229.1629) were specified in the modifications selection as static while oxidation (M, +15.994915) was defined as variable. For peptide localization experiments, the following dynamic modifications were included: for LD-F 545.3240 or 551.3378); for Ar-F 663.2907 or 669.3045; for BD-F 545.3240 or 551.3378; for DF-F 569.2688 or 575.2826; for Tm-F 517.2927 or 523.3065. Spectra were searched against the Homo Sapiens proteome database (42,358 sequences) using a false discovery rate of 1 % (Percolator). MS3 peptide quantitation was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Abundances in each channel were normalized to the naturally biotinylated protein ACACA. Identified proteins were required to have at least two unique peptides. TMT ratios obtained by Proteome Discoverer were transformed with log2(x), and p-values were calculated via Student’s two-tailed t-tests with two biological replicates. Quantitative data are listed in the supplementary proteomics data spreadsheet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diazirine, Fully-functionlalized, Photoaffinity

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute Jupiter FL, USA
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Louis Conway

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher G Parker
Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute Jupiter FL, USA


