### Accession
PXD017913

### Title
Integrin adhesion complexes formed on different basement membrane ligands

### Description
Adhesion complexes isolated from cells in culture. Podocytes were attached to different extracellular matrix ligands and adhesion complex isolated.

### Sample Protocol
IAC isolation IACs were isolated using a similar approach to the ligand affinity purification method described previously(Jones et al., 2015). For isolation of IACs from podocytes or ARPE19 cells, cells were treated in the same manner as for the attachment assay described above. Cells were spread on tissue culture dishes coated with ECM ligand (2.5-10 μg/ml) or apotransferrin (10 μg/ml) for 180 minutes following attachment assay described above. Thereafter, cells were incubated with the membrane-permeable crosslinker dimethyl-3, 3′-dithiobispropionimidate (DTBP; Sigma-Aldrich; 6 mM) diluted in Advanced Dulbecco's Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM5) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 minutes and quenched with Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, after which cells were washed twice with PBS. Cell bodies were removed by a 1-minute incubation with extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 25 mM EDTA, 25 μg/ml leupeptin, 25 μg/ml aprotinin and 0.5 mM AEBSF). Denuded cells were subjected to 30 seconds high- pressure water wash to removed nuclei. Protein complexes left bound to the substrate were collected in reducing sample buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v) sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), 0.004% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 8% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) and incubated at 70 °C for 10 min. Adhesion complex samples were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and used either for western blotting or visualizsed with InstantBlue to be used for in-gel proteolytic digestion. MS data acquisition Following SDS–PAGE, gel lanes were sliced and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin(Shevchenko, Wilm, Vorm, & Mann, 1996) with modifications(Humphries et al., 2009b). Peptide samples were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) coupled online to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a Symmetry C18 preparative column (20 mm × 180 μm, 5-μm particle size; Waters) and separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, 1.7-μm particle size; Waters) using a 45-min linear gradient from 1% to 25% or 8% to 33% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Vizcaino et al., 2016) partner repository with the dataset identifier PDXxxxxxx (pending publication)

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.4; Matrix Science). Peak list files were searched against a modified version of the Uniprot mouse database (version 3.70; release date, 3 May 2011), containing ten additional contaminant and reagent sequences of non-mouse origin, using Mascot (version 2.2.06; Matrix Science) (Perkins et al, 1999). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and hydroxylation of proline and lysine were allowed as variable modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 0.4 Da and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS datasets were validated using rigorous statistical algorithms at both the peptide and protein level(Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003),(Keller, Nesvizhskii, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2002) implemented in Scaffold (version 3.6.5; Proteome Software). Protein identifications were accepted upon assignment of at least two unique validated peptides with ≥90% probability, resulting in ≥99% probability at the protein level. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of 0.1% for all datasets. MS data quantification Relative protein abundance was calculated using peptide intensity. Orbitrap MS data were entered into Progenesis LC-MS (Non Linear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) and automatically aligned. Spectra were extracted using extract_msn executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.4; Matrix Science) and imported back into Progenesis LC-MS to acquire intensity data. Alignment of chromatograms was carried out using the automatic alignment algorithm, followed by manual validation and adjustment of the aligned chromatograms. All features were used for peptide identifications. Progenesis LC-MS created the peak list file that was exported and searched in Mascot. Results were loaded in Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc, version 3.6.5) and peptide and protein identification thresholds were set to 95% and 99% confidence, respectively. Data were exported from Scaffold as a spectrum report, and imported into Progenesis LC-MS to assign peptide identifications to features. Peptide and protein data were then exported from Progenesis LC-MS as .csv files to be analysed in Excel (Microsoft).

### Publication Abstract
Cells have evolved mechanisms to sense the composition of their adhesive microenvironment. Although much is known about general mechanisms employed by adhesion receptors to relay signals between the extracellular environment and the cytoskeleton, the nuances of ligand-specific signalling remain undefined. Here, we investigated how glomerular podocytes, and four other basement membrane-associated cell types, respond morphologically to different basement membrane ligands. We defined the composition of the respective adhesion complexes using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. On type IV collagen, all epithelial cell types adopted a round morphology, with a single lamellipodium and large adhesion complexes rich in actin-binding proteins. On laminin (511 or 521), all cell types attached to a similar degree but were polygonal in shape with small adhesion complexes enriched in endocytic and microtubule-binding proteins. Consistent with their distinctive morphologies, cells on type IV collagen exhibited high Rac1 activity, while those on laminin had elevated PKC&#x3b1;. Perturbation of PKC&#x3b1; was able to interchange morphology consistent with a key role for this pathway in matrix ligand-specific signalling. Therefore, this study defines the switchable basement membrane adhesome and highlights two key signalling pathways within the systems that determine distinct cell morphologies. Proteomic data are availableviaProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017913.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Ab, Adhesions, Extracellular matrix ligand., Rpe19, Integrins

### Affiliations
University of Chester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell-Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK

### Submitter
UoC Randles

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell-Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK


