### Accession
PXD011341

### Title
Analysis of plasmid induce proteome changes in UPAB1 under different conditions

### Description
LFQ analysis of Whole cell lysates and secreted preparation of acinetobacter baumannii UPAB1 with and without pAB5 and under different conditions

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilised secreted samples or whole cell lysates were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Samples were diluted with 100mM TEAB and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Multidrug resistant (MDR) Acinetobacter baumannii poses a growing threat to global health. Research on Acinetobacter pathogenesis has primarily focused on pneumonia and bloodstream infections, even though one in five A. baumannii strains are isolated from urinary sites. In this study, we highlight the role of A. baumannii as a uropathogen. We develop the first A. baumannii catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI) murine model using UPAB1, a recent MDR urinary isolate. UPAB1 carries the plasmid pAB5, a member of the family of large conjugative plasmids that represses the type VI secretion system (T6SS) in multiple Acinetobacter strains. pAB5 confers niche specificity, as its carriage improves UPAB1 survival in a CAUTI model and decreases virulence in a pneumonia model. Comparative proteomic and transcriptomic analyses show that pAB5 regulates the expression of multiple chromosomally-encoded virulence factors besides T6SS. Our results demonstrate that plasmids can impact bacterial infections by controlling the expression of chromosomal genes.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 4940 Parkview Place, Campus Box 8230, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 4940 Parkview Place, Campus Box 8230, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA


