### Accession
PXD044625

### Title
Chemoproteomic capture of RNA binding activity in living cells

### Description
Proteomic methods for RNA interactome capture (RIC) rely principally on crosslinking native or labeled cellular RNA to enrich and investigate RNA-binding protein (RBP) composition and function in cells. The ability to measure RBP activity at individual binding sites by RIC, however, has been more challenging due to the heterogenous nature of peptide adducts derived from the RNA-protein crosslinked site. Here, we present an orthogonal strategy that utilizes clickable electrophilic purines to directly quantify protein-RNA interactions on proteins through photoaffinity competition with 4-thiouridine (4SU)-labeled RNA in cells. Our photo-activatable-competition and chemoproteomic enrichment (PACCE) method facilitated detection of >5,500 cysteine sites across ~3,000 proteins displaying RNA-sensitive alterations in probe binding. Importantly, PACCE enabled functional profiling of canonical RNA-binding domains as well as discovery of moonlighting RNA binding activity in the human proteome. Collectively, we present a chemoproteomic platform for global quantification of protein-RNA binding activity in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
Traditional Chemoproteomics Studies: Cells were treated with CEP probe and washed in cold PBS before spinning down. Cells were washed before flash freezing. Lysates were fractionated using ultracentrifugation. Cells were lysed in PBS + protease inhibitor using a probe-tip sonicatator. Lysates were then centrifuged. Membrane fractions were reconstituted in RIPA buffer. CEP-labeled samples were conjugated by copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition to desthiobiotin-azide. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 hr at room temperature. After incubation, excess reagents were removed using chloroform/methanol extractions. Proteins were reduced, cooled and alkylated. Excess reagents were removed using chloroform/methanol extractions. Pellets were resuspended and proteolytically digested (trypsin). Samples were enriched using avidin beads and washed with PBS. Bound peptides were eluted. Eluates were combined and centrifuged using mini Bio-Spin chromatography columns. Peptides were dried and reconstituted. Nucleophilic Amino Acid Studies: DM93 SILAC cells were prepped as described. Nitrogenous Base Competition Studies: Soluble fractions from HEK293T cells were prepared using centrifugation in PBS + protease inhibitor. Protein concentrations were normalized to 2.3 mg/mL in 432 µL of PBS supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets. Light SILAC cells were treated with AHL-Pu-1; heavy cells were co-treated with AHL-Pu-1 and nitrogenous bases. CEP-labeled samples were prepared as described. In Situ PACCE: SILAC HEK293T cells were plated and grown for 40 hrs. Cell media was replaced with 4SU-supplemented complete SILAC DMEM. Cells were washed with PBS and crosslinked. Serum-free DMEM containing CEP (AHL-Pu-1) was added. RNase-free PBS was added and cells were harvested. PBS washed cells were then washed and frozen. Cells were lysed in PBS containing cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets (EDTA-free) by sonication. Recombinant RNasin was added. Cell lysates were subjected to ultracentrifugation. The membrane pellet was resuspended in a modified RIPA buffer with sonication. Soluble fractions were normalized to 2.3 mg/mL prior to chloroform/methanol extraction, while membrane samples were normalized to 3.3 mg/mL. Proteomes were prepared using chloroform/methanol extractions. Unenriched Proteomics: Cells were grown, treated, lysed and resuspended as described. Soluble and membrane concentrations were then normalized to 2mg/mL and subjected to a filter aided sample preparation. Samples were washed with PBS. Protein was reduced with DTT. The mixture was mixed with 200 µL urea/ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged. An additional 200 µL was added and centrifuged again. An iodoacetamide solution (UA) was added and incubated, then centrifuged. The samples were washed with UA and centrifuged. The filter was washed with ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and centrifuged. The protein was digested with trypsin on the membrane in ABC. Once digested, an additional 40 µL of ABC was added and centrifuged into a new tube. An additional 50 µL of 0.5M NaCl was added to the top of the filter unit and centrifuged. The final peptide solution was acidified with acetic acid. C18- Stage tips were conditioned.  Loaded samples were washed with 20 µL of buffer A three times and eluted with 20 µL of buffer B three times. In Vitro PACCE: SILAC HEK293T cells were treated with 4SU, crosslinked, flash frozen and stored at -80 °C. Cells were reconstituted in PBS + protease inhibitor. The cells were lysed by passage through a 26G needle. Recombinant RNasin was added, and the lysate centrifuged. Soluble and membrane were separated. The membrane samples were reconstituted in PBS + protease inhibitor using sequential passage through various needle sizes. Concentrations were normalized to 2.3 mg/mL (soluble) or 3.3 mg/mL (membrane). Lysates were treated with either iodoacetamide-alkyne or AHL-Pu-1 for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Samples were modified and processed using click chemistry and chloroform/methanol extractions as described. In Vitro RNase: Heavy cells were treated with 100 µM 4SU.. Cells were then washed with RNase free PBS, centrifuging several times. Cells were flash frozen in liquid N2. Cells were lysed using a probe-tip sonicator in 40mM Tris-HCl with EDTA-free protease inhibitor. After sonication, 60 µL of 10x assay buffer. Cell lysates were combined, and an aliquot of each was taken to analyze concentrations. Aliquots were split into each respective condition. RNase was added. All samples without RNase were treated with recombinant RNasin. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 hr. When complete, concentrations were normalized to 2.3 mg/mL at 500 µL and transferred to a 12-well plate. Samples were crosslinked. After, 432 µL were removed and treated with AHL-Pu-1. Probe was functionalized via click chemistry. Samples were processed using chloroform/methanol extractions as described.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol: PACCE and Enriched Proteomics Peptide identification from LC-MS/MS was accomplished using Byonic™ (Protein Metrics Inc.). Data were searched against the human protein database (UniProt, download date: 02/18/2016) with the following parameters: ≤ 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, too high (narrow) “precursor isotope off by x”, precursor and charge assignment computed from MS1, maximum of 1 precursor per MS2, 1% protein false discovery rate. Three variable (common) modifications were included: methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da), and CEP-modified Cys (+604.2631). CEP probe modifications on amino acids of interest were included as a variable modification of 604.2631. Search results were filtered in R on a per site basis. The median SR for all cleavage patterns (i.e. ratios are calculated on a modified site basis, combining fully tryptic, half-tryptic and missed cleavages) was reported. Peptides highlighted in the main text and figures were manually validated.  Peptides with a SR>2 in PACCE conditions (4SU-RNA and 4SU- and native-RNA) were analyzed with a Mann-Whitney U test for significance compared to the SILAC mixing control (light and heavy proteomes added in a 1:1 ratio). For nucleophilic amino acid studies, searches were used variable CEP probe modification (+604.2631) on the following nucleophilic amino acids: cysteine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, methionine, asparagine, glutamine, arginine, serine, threonine, tryptophan, and tyrosine. A stricter Byonic™ score cutoff (≥600) was applied to minimize false positive identifications. For in situ and in vitro PACCE experiments, custom peaks for the identification of desthiobiotin fragments were added to the CEP modification in the Byonic™ search to account for probe fragments: +197.129, +240.1712, +425.2638, +453.2825. For in vitro PACCE studies, Iodoacetamide-alkyne probe modifications on Cys residues were included as a variable modification of 509.2962. Data processing protocol: Unenriched Proteomics Mass spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5) and searched using Byonic (v. 4.1.10) with a human protein database (UniProt 02/18/2016, 20,199 entries). The following search parameters were used: precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances ≤ 10 ppm and ≤ 50 ppm, respectively, signal to noise threshold ≥ 5, retention time shift ≤5 min, minimum peptide sequences per protein ≥ 1, peptide length ≥ 4, and a Byonic score threshold = 300. The protein false discovery rate was 0.01. One static modification was included: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da). Several dynamic modifications (3 total) were included, including: methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da, common 1), heavy lysine (+8.0142 Da, common 2), and heavy arginine (+10.0083 Da, common 2).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic methods for RNA interactome capture (RIC) rely principally on crosslinking native or labeled cellular RNA to enrich and investigate RNA-binding protein (RBP) composition and function in cells. The ability to measure RBP activity at individual binding sites by RIC, however, has been more challenging due to the heterogenous nature of peptide adducts derived from the RNA-protein crosslinked site. Here, we present an orthogonal strategy that utilizes clickable electrophilic purines to directly quantify protein-RNA interactions on proteins through photoaffinity competition with 4-thiouridine (4SU)-labeled RNA in cells. Our photo-activatable-competition and chemoproteomic enrichment (PACCE) method facilitated detection of &gt;5500 cysteine sites across ~3000 proteins displaying RNA-sensitive alterations in probe binding. Importantly, PACCE enabled functional profiling of canonical RNA-binding domains as well as discovery of moonlighting RNA binding activity in the human proteome. Collectively, we present a chemoproteomic platform for global quantification of protein-RNA binding activity in living cells.

### Keywords
Human, Chemical biology, Chemoproteomics, Lc-msms, Rna-binding protein, Rna interactome

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Department of Chemistry University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Dina Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Ku-Lung Hsu
Department of Chemistry University of Texas at Austin


