### Accession
PXD001410

### Title
A Themis:SHP complex promotes T cell survival

### Description
THEMIS is critical for conventional T cell development but its precise molecular function remains elusive. Here we show that THEMIS constitutively associates with the phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2. This complex requires the adapter GRB2, which bridges SHP to Themis in a Tyr-phosphorylation-independent fashion. Rather, SHP1 and THEMIS engage with the N-SH3 and C-SH3 domains of GRB2, respectively, a configuration that allows GRB2-SH2 to recruit the complex onto LAT. Coherent with THEMIS-mediated recruitment of SHP to the TCR signalosome, THEMIS knockdown increased TCR-induced TCR- phosphorylation, Erk activation and CD69 expression, however not Lck phosphorylation. This generalized TCR signalling increase led to augmented apoptosis, a phenotype mirrored by SHP-1 knockdown. Remarkably, a KI mutation of Lck Ser59, previously suggested to be key in ERK-mediated resistance towards SHP-1 negative feedback, did not affect TCR signalling nor ligand discrimination in vivo. Thus, THEMIS:SHP complex dampens early TCR signalling by a previously unknown molecular mechanism that favors T cell survival. We discuss possible implications of this mechanism in modulating TCR output signals towards conventional T cell development and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, resting or anti-CD3-activated Jurkat cells (10e8) expressing THEMIS-Strep were lysed and pulled down as described (Paster et al, 2013). Biotin-blocked Streptactin-Sepharose beads were used to assess background. Biotin-eluted proteins were boiled in reducing SDS NuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen), followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoactamide (Sigma). In-gel digest and MS data acquisition were performed as described (Brockmeyer et al, 2011).

### Data Protocol
Data were converted to .mzXML format using MSconvert (Proteowizard) and uploaded into the Central Proteomics Facility Pipeline (CPFP) (Trudgian et al, 2010) for analysis. Enzyme was set to trypsin allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and Oxidation (methionine), deamidation (NQ), acetylation (Protein‐N) and phosphotyrosine as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS peak identifications were 20 ppm and 0.1Da respectively. InterProphet probability (IP Prob) is derived by the combination of results from multiple search engines within CPFP and improves coverage and confidence over use of a single search engine. Label‐free quantitation was performed using the SINQ (Spectral index quantitation) tool within CPFP(Trudgian et al, 2011). Only proteins which were >20‐fold abundant over the biotin‐blocked control sample were considered for further analysis using the CRAPOME contaminant repository (Mellacheruvu et al, 2013). Finally, proteins found in less than 5% of all Streptag background pull‐down experiments listed within CRAPOME were considered as true interactors.

### Publication Abstract
THEMIS is critical for conventional T-cell development, but its precise molecular function remains elusive. Here, we show that THEMIS constitutively associates with the phosphatases SHP1 and SHP2. This complex requires the adapter GRB2, which bridges SHP to THEMIS in a Tyr-phosphorylation-independent fashion. Rather, SHP1 and THEMIS engage with the N-SH3 and C-SH3 domains of GRB2, respectively, a configuration that allows GRB2-SH2 to recruit the complex onto LAT. Consistent with THEMIS-mediated recruitment of SHP to the TCR signalosome, THEMIS knock-down increased TCR-induced CD3-&#x3b6; phosphorylation, Erk activation and CD69 expression, but not LCK phosphorylation. This generalized TCR signalling increase led to augmented apoptosis, a phenotype mirrored by SHP1 knock-down. Remarkably, a KI mutation of LCK Ser59, previously suggested to be key in ERK-mediated resistance towards SHP1 negative feedback, did not affect TCR signalling nor ligand discrimination in vivo. Thus, the THEMIS:SHP complex dampens early TCR signalling by a previously unknown molecular mechanism that favours T-cell survival. We discuss possible implications of this mechanism in modulating TCR output signals towards conventional T-cell development and differentiation.

### Keywords
Shp1, Tcr, Negative feedback, Themis, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Molecular Immunology Group, University of Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Kristin Katsch

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Oreste Acuto
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Molecular Immunology Group, University of Oxford, UK


