### Accession
PXD027969

### Title
Radiation tolerance mechanism of Deinococcus radiodurans using lable-free proteomics

### Description
Even though these results have shown several key proteins played an import role in radiation tolerance mechanism of DR, they were lack of the deep protein coverage, global protein analysis as well as the dynamic changes of DR, which limits further understanding of biological changes in response to ionizing radiation. To the best of our knowledge, the global and specific radiation tolerance mechanism of DR has not been elucidated yet. Therefore, a label-free quantitative proteomics was applied to conduct a systematic and comprehensive proteomic analysis on DR after 6 kGy γ-irradiation at different time point. Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) with a fold-change cutoff were reported. These proteins, providing a deep understanding of the molecular response to ionizing radiation.

### Sample Protocol
The collected bacteria were dissolved in the lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) and extracted by ultrasonication in ice bath (SONICS VCX800, power: 800 W, frequency: 20 kHz, treatment time 4 min, vibration 2 s, interval 2 s). Total protein supernatant was centrifuged at 15000 × g for 45 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was optimized using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) reagent (Pierce, MA, USA). For digestion, 50 ug protein of each sample was used. Protein was incubated at 56 ℃ for 30 min to be reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma). Final 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) was added for alkylation for 30 min. After diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to decrease urea concentration below 2 M, protein were firstly digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight with the mass ratio of 50:1(m/m, protein: trypsin), and subsequently at the ratio of 100:1 (m/m, protein: trypsin) at 37 °C for 4 h. Finally, digestion was ended by 1% formic acid (v/v). Peptides were desalted by Monospin C18 column (shimadzu, 5010-21700). The desalted eluates were dried, and pellets were stored at − 80 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against D. radiodurans database from UniProtKB (https://www.uniprot.org/, uniprot-proteome_UP000002524) with MaxQuant software (v 1.6.4.0). The search parameters were as follows: typsin KR_C was the specific enzyme is trypsin KR_C, which allows up to 4 missing cleavages; Carbamidomethyl[C] was set as the ﬁxed modiﬁcation; oxidation [M] and acetyl [ProteinN-term] were the variable modifications; the tolerance of the precursor and fragments were both set to 20 ppm. All protein identification was based on the criteria of false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. The option of match between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min. The other parameters in MaxQuant were set with default values. The built-in label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) in Maxquant was applied to quantification. And the missing values in proteomic datasets were imputated using NAguideR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deinococcus radiodurans; radiation; label-free quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Beijing Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Shuchen Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang yongqian
Beijing Institute of Technology


