### Accession
PXD023239

### Title
The proximal proteome of 17 SARS-CoV-2 proteins links to disrupted host antiviral signaling and translation

### Description
To study SARS-CoV-2 biology, we generated an atlas of 2422 human proteins vicinal to 17 SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins using proximity proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Perform BioID on 17 SARS-CoV-2 proteins to identify their binding proteins in the host proteome

### Data Protocol
Maxquant, Version 1.5.2.8, was used to analyze the LC-MS and MS/MS data for protein identification and quantification.(Cox and Mann, 2008) The database we used for search was human IPI database, version 3.68, which contained 87,061 protein entries. The maximum number of miss-cleavages for trypsin was two per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Viral proteins localize within subcellular compartments to subvert host machinery and promote pathogenesis. To study SARS-CoV-2 biology, we generated an atlas of 2422 human proteins vicinal to 17 SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins using proximity proteomics. This identified viral proteins at specific intracellular locations, such as association of accessary proteins with intracellular membranes, and projected SARS-CoV-2 impacts on innate immune signaling, ER-Golgi transport, and protein translation. It identified viral protein adjacency to specific host proteins whose regulatory variants are linked to COVID-19 severity, including the TRIM4 interferon signaling regulator which was found proximal to the SARS-CoV-2 M protein. Viral NSP1 protein adjacency to the EIF3 complex was associated with inhibited host protein translation whereas ORF6 localization with MAVS was associated with inhibited RIG-I 2CARD-mediated IFNB1 promoter activation. Quantitative proteomics identified candidate host targets for the NSP5 protease, with specific functional cleavage sequences in host proteins CWC22 and FANCD2. This data resource identifies host factors proximal to viral proteins in living human cells and nominates pathogenic mechanisms employed by SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Bioid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Yen-Yu Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside


