### Accession
PXD003616

### Title
Mouse_T1D_microbiota -  Clostridial Butyrate Biosynthesis Enzymes Are Significantly Depleted in the Gut Microbiota of Nonobese Diabetic Mice

### Description
A metaproteomic approach was exploited to investigate microbiota protein expression in feces from Eα16 and NOD mice at 10 weeks of age (n=6 vs 6 mice)

### Sample Protocol
Samples were resuspended by vortexing in SDS-based extraction buffer and then heated and subjected to a combination of bead-beating and freeze-boiling steps as detailed elsewhere (Tanca et al., 2014). Protein extracts were subjected to on-filter reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009), with slight modifications detailed elsewhere (Tanca et al., 2013). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific). The single-run 1D LC peptide separation was performed as previously described (Tanca et al., 2014), loading 4 μg of peptide mixture per each sample and applying a 485 min separation gradient. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode, with Higher Energy Collision Dissociation as the fragmentation method, as detailed elsewhere (Tanca et al., 2013).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 2.0; Thermo Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%). Search parameters were set as follows: precursor mass threshold 350-5000 Da; minimum peak count 6; signal-to-noise threshold 2; enzyme trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites 2; peptide length range 5-50 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da; dynamic modification methionine oxidation; static modification cysteine carbamidomethylation. A collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from mouse fecal samples and processed according to previous reports (Tanca et al., 2016) was merged with a previously published (Xiao et al., 2015) and publicly available (ftp://penguin.genomics.cn/pub/10.5524/100001_101000/100114/Genecatalog/184sample_2.6M.GeneSet.pep.gz) mouse metagenomic dataset, and employed as sequence database for identification of microbial peptides (9,825,357 sequences in total). The mass spectra were also searched against a second database containing the Mus musculus proteome from UniProtKB (release 2017_08) in order to identify host proteins. In this latter case, protein grouping according to the strict parsimony principle was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests that the intestinal microbiota is involved in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Here we sought to determine which gut microbial taxa and functions vary between nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice and genetically modified NOD mice protected from T1D (E&#x3b1;16/NOD) at 10&#x2009;weeks of age in the time window between insulitis development and T1D onset. The gut microbiota of NOD mice were investigated by analyzing stool samples with a metaproteogenomic approach, comprising both 16S rRNA gene sequencing and microbial proteome profiling through high-resolution mass spectrometry. A depletion of <i>Firmicutes</i> (particularly, several members of <i>Lachnospiraceae</i>) in the NOD gut microbiota was observed compared to the level in the E&#x3b1;16/NOD mice microbiota. Moreover, the analysis of proteins actively produced by the gut microbiota revealed different profiles between NOD and E&#x3b1;16/NOD mice, with the production of butyrate biosynthesis enzymes being significantly reduced in diabetic mice. Our results support a model for gut microbiota influence on T1D development involving bacterium-produced metabolites as butyrate.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Alterations of the gut microbiota early in age have been hypothesized to impact T1D autoimmune pathogenesis. In the NOD mouse model, protection from T1D has been found to operate via modulation of the composition of the intestinal microbiota during a critical early window of ontogeny, although little is known about microbiota functions related to T1D development. Here, we show which gut microbial functions are specifically associated with protection from T1D in the time window between insulitis development and T1D onset. In particular, we describe that production of butyrate biosynthesis enzymes is significantly reduced in NOD mice, supporting the hypothesis that modulating the gut microbiota butyrate production may influence T1D development.

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Mouse, Metaproteomics, Diabetes, Butyrate

### Affiliations
Proteomics Laboratory, Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Alghero, Italy

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Alghero, Italy


