### Accession
PXD021109

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomics Pinpoints Uncharted Gcn2-Mediated Modes of Translational Control

### Description
To identify new Gcn2 target proteins, we performed a set of Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC)-based quantitative phosphoproteomics experiments, in which we compared WT cells to gcn2∆ and sui2S52A cells (n=3), all treated, or not, with rapamycin, which has previously been shown to stimulate eIF2alpha phosphorylation by Gcn2.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains were grown in synthetic dextrose complete medium containing either non-labeled or labeled lysine and arginine variants. Cells were treated or not with 200 ng/mL rapamycin for 30 min and the dried TCA-treated cell pellets (100 mg) of each labeling were mixed and processed. Dried TCA-treated cell pellets (50 mg) of each labeling were mixed, proteins extracted and digested by Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, WAKO) for 4 h. The concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M before overnight trypsin digestion (Promega). The second day, peptides were purified by SPE using HR-X columns in combination with C18 cartridges (Macherey-Nagel), elutes were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized for overnight. The third day, peptides were fractionated by HpH reversed phase chromatography, fractions were acidified, frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized for overnight. The fourth day, the dry peptides were suspended in 200 µl 80% acetonitrile with 1% TFA for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 beads (GL Sciences). The tip flow-through was stored at −80°C for non-phosphopeptide analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) using a Uniprot full-length S. cerevisiae database (March, 2016) and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation, serine-, threonine- and tyrosine- phosphorylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved Gcn2 protein kinase mediates cellular adaptations to amino acid limitation through translational control of gene expression that is exclusively executed by phosphorylation of the &#x3b1;-subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2&#x3b1;). Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, however, we discovered that Gcn2 targets auxiliary effectors to modulate translation. Accordingly, Gcn2 also phosphorylates the &#x3b2;-subunit of the trimeric eIF2&#xa0;G protein complex to promote its association with eIF5, which prevents spontaneous nucleotide exchange on eIF2 and thereby restricts the recycling of the initiator methionyl-tRNA-bound eIF2-GDP ternary complex in amino-acid-starved cells. This mechanism contributes to the inhibition of translation initiation in parallel to the sequestration of the nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B by phosphorylated eIF2&#x3b1;. Gcn2 further phosphorylates Gcn20 to antagonize, in an inhibitory feedback loop, the formation of the Gcn2-stimulatory Gcn1-Gcn20 complex. Thus, Gcn2 plays a substantially more intricate role in controlling translation initiation than hitherto appreciated.

### Keywords
Translation, Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Rapamycin

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


