### Accession
PXD005005

### Title
Split-BioID - Split-BioID: a conditional proteomics approach for high resolution proteomics

### Description
Split-BioID: a conditional proteomics approach for high resolution proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on 4-20 % RunBlue SDS precast gels until they migrated 2-3 cm into the gel. The whole lane was sliced after staining with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250, excluding the streptavidin band. The samples were then processed to overnight (16 h) trypsin digestion (Modified Sequencing Grade, Roche). The peptides were extracted from the gel and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were then resuspended in 50 µl 1% formic acid, centrifuged and transferred to HPLC vials. The samples were loaded (15 µl injection volume) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, running dual column setup) coupled to a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were initially trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, 100 µM x 2 cm) trap column, and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µM x 50 cm) followed by a transfer line (20 µM x 50cm) attached to an Easy Spray emitter (7 µM ID) (Thermo Scientific) to the mass spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50˚C and a source voltage of 2.5 kV. Peptides were resolved in a gradient of acetonitrile (AcN) in 0.08% formic acid, increasing the percentage of AcN from 2% to 40% within 120 min, and to 98% within an addition 25 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a m/z 350–1800 range with a resolution of 60,000 and a target value of 106 ions. Peptide fragmentation was performed with the collision induced dissociation (CID) mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5000 ions. Ion selection threshold was set to 5000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot-human database (downloaded in March 2016) to which common contaminants and reverse sequences of all entries had been added. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and lysine biotinylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. For comparison between samples, we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. The “match between run” option was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela cells, Ltq orbitrap

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences

### Submitter
Julien Béthune

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Béthune
Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center


