### Accession
PXD030078

### Title
An integrative multi-omics approach to characterize prebiotic inulin effects on Faecalibacterium prausnitzii

### Description
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a major commensal bacterium in the human gut, is well known for its anti-inflammatory effects, which improve host intestinal health. Although several studies have reported that inulin, a well-known prebiotic, increases the abundance of F. prausnitzii in the intestine, the mechanism underlying this effect remains unclear. In this study, we applied liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based multi-omics approaches to identify biological and enzymatic mechanisms of F. prausnitzii involved in the selective digestion of inulin. An LC-MS/MS-based intracellular proteomic and metabolic profiling was performed to determine the quantitative changes in specific proteins and metabolites of F. prausnitzii when grown on inulin. Interestingly, proteomic analysis revealed that the putative proteins involved in inulin-type fructan utilization by F. prausnitzii, particularly b-fructosidase and amylosucrase were upregulated in the presence of inulin. To investigate the function of these proteins, we overexpressed bfrA and ams, genes encoding beta-fructosidase and amylosucrase, respectively, in Escherichia coli, and observed their ability to degrade fructan. In addition, the enzyme activity assay demonstrated that intracellular fructan hydrolases degrade the inulin-type fructans taken up by fructan ATP-binding cassette transporters. Furthermore, we showed that the fructose uptake activity of F. prausnitzii was enhanced by the fructose phosphotransferase system transporter when inulin was used as a carbon source.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols about sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for quantification of each protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Faecalibacterium prausnitzii</i>, a major commensal bacterium in the human gut, is well known for its anti-inflammatory effects, which improve host intestinal health. Although several studies have reported that inulin, a well-known prebiotic, increases the abundance of <i>F. prausnitzii</i> in the intestine, the mechanism underlying this effect remains unclear. In this study, we applied liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based multiomics approaches to identify biological and enzymatic mechanisms of <i>F. prausnitzii</i> involved in the selective digestion of inulin. First, to determine the preference for dietary carbohydrates, we compared the growth of <i>F. prausnitzii</i> in several carbon sources and observed selective growth in inulin. In addition, an LC-MS/MS-based intracellular proteomic and metabolic profiling was performed to determine the quantitative changes in specific proteins and metabolites of <i>F. prausnitzii</i> when grown on inulin. Interestingly, proteomic analysis revealed that the putative proteins involved in inulin-type fructan utilization by <i>F. prausnitzii</i>, particularly &#x3b2;-fructosidase and amylosucrase were upregulated in the presence of inulin. To investigate the function of these proteins, we overexpressed <i>bfrA</i> and <i>ams,</i> genes encoding &#x3b2;-fructosidase and amylosucrase, respectively, in <i>Escherichia coli,</i> and observed their ability to degrade fructan. In addition, the enzyme activity assay demonstrated that intracellular fructan hydrolases degrade the inulin-type fructans taken up by fructan ATP-binding cassette transporters. Furthermore, we showed that the fructose uptake activity of <i>F. prausnitzii</i> was enhanced by the fructose phosphotransferase system transporter when inulin was used as a carbon source. Intracellular metabolomic analysis indicated that <i>F. prausnitzii</i> could use fructose, the product of inulin-type fructan degradation, as an energy source for inulin utilization. Taken together, this study provided molecular insights regarding the metabolism of <i>F. prauznitzii</i> for inulin, which stimulates the growth and activity of the beneficial bacterium in the intestine.

### Keywords
Pts transporter, Abc transporter, Inulin, Lc-ms/ms, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Beta-fructosidase, Amylosucrase, Prebiotics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Engineering, Laboratory of Cellular and Biomolecular Engineering, Soongsil University, Republic of Korea
Soongsil university

### Submitter
Sung-Hyun Jo

### Lab Head
Dr Yon-Gon Kim
Department of Chemical Engineering, Laboratory of Cellular and Biomolecular Engineering, Soongsil University, Republic of Korea


