### Accession
PXD028066

### Title
Intestinal proteomic response to oral challenge of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli in weaned pigs

### Description
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is a major cause of diarrhoea in children in resource-limited countries and of travellers diarrhoea. The ileal proteomics change after ETEC challenge is less characterised. Here in this study changes of ileal proteins post ETEC challenge in weaned pigs are studied. In total, 5151 ileal proteins were successfully annotated and 9 proteins had significantly different abundance between the ETEC and CON pigs.

### Sample Protocol
The ileal samples were processed according to the enhanced ﬁlter-aided sample preparation (eFASP) protocol. Briefly, the samples were homogenized in lysis buffer and the supernatant containing 100 µg protein was transferred onto a centrifugal ﬁlter and washed twice by mixing with an exchange buﬀer. The protein was reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Vacuum-dried tryptic peptides were resuspended and applied onto a Dionex RSLC UPLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The ileal samples were processed according to the enhanced ﬁlter-aided sample preparation (eFASP) protocol. Briefly, the samples were homogenized in lysis buffer and the supernatant containing 100 µg protein was transferred onto a centrifugal ﬁlter and washed twice by mixing with an exchange buﬀer. The protein was reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Vacuum-dried tryptic peptides were resuspended and applied onto a Dionex RSLC UPLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
Enterotoxigenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (ETEC) is closely associated with diarrhoea in children in resource-limited countries. This study aims to investigate the change of the mucosal microbiome and protein expression in the ileum induced by <i>E. coli</i> K88 (ETEC) using pigs as a model. Seven weaned male pigs were orally given ETEC (1 &#xd7; 10<sup>9</sup> CFU, <i>n</i> = 7), and the other seven received saline (CON, <i>n</i> = 7). Ileal tissues were obtained 48 hours after the ETEC challenge for both proteomic and mucosal microbiome analyses. Nine proteins were found with altered abundance between the two groups, including a decrease in FABP1 and FABP6, involved in bile acid circulation. The TLR-9 mediated pathway was also affected showing increased transcription of genes SIGIRR and MyD88. Correlations between the ileal proteins and mucosal bacterial taxa found included a positive correlation between Lactobacilllus and PPP3CA (r = 0.9, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001) and a negative correlation between Prevotella with CTNND1 (r = -0.7, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). In conclusion, ETEC infection caused inflammation and impaired the circulation of bile acids and the mucosal microbiome may affect the expression of intestinal proteins. Further studies are needed to explain the exact roles of these affected processes in the pathogenesis of ETEC-triggered diarrhoea.

### Keywords
Infant diarrhea; enterotoxigenic escherichia coli; proteomics; ileum; sus scrofa

### Affiliations
School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
Sun-Yat-Sen University

### Submitter
Shanshan Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Ping-ping Jiang
School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China


