### Accession
PXD010375

### Title
Comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses reveal multiple differences associated with albino leaves in Ananas comosus var. Bracteatus

### Description
Ananas comosus var. bracteatus has high ornamental value and widespread application because of its chimeric leaves. However, little is known about the molecular mechanism regulating this characteristic. Here, comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the white parts (Whs) and green parts (Grs) of the chimeric leaves were performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). In total, 1,685 DEGs, including 712 up- and 973 down-regulated ones, and 5,428 DEPs, including 1,018 up- and 795 down-regulated ones, were identified between the Whs and Grs. Comparisons with the GO and KEGG annotations revealed that the DEGs were involved mostly in carbon fixation, porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. The DEPs were mainly involved in ribosomes, photosynthesis, photosynthesis antennas, and porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism. Combined analysis showed that nine proteins related to chlorophyll biosynthesis, photosynthetic pigments, and photosynthesis were unchanged at mRNA level but suppressed at protein level. These results indicated that the albino phenotype of the Whs was caused by the proteomic-level suppression of key enzymes involved in the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway and that translational and post-translational regulation may play important roles in both the biosynthesis of photosynthetic pigments and photosynthesis.  Biological signiﬁcance: Leaves of Ananas comosus var. bracteatus serve as the best materials for the study of albino mechanism. Because the chemic trait of A. comosus var. bracteatus is unstable and the molecular mechanism of the albino cells was poorly understood, we performed comparative analyses both at the transcriptome and proteome levels. This work revealed suppressed proteomic-level and translational and post-translational regulation contribute to the albino phenotype formation. Our results provide better information concerning the molecular mechanism within the chimeric leaves of A. comosus var. bracteatus.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Plant materials and sample preparation    A. comosus var. bracteatus chimeric plants (3 years old) were planted in the experimental field of Sichuan Agricultural University (Fig. 1). Taking the white strip and green strip of chimeric leaves (Whs/Grs) for transcriptome sequencing and quantitative analysis of proteins, each sample had three independent biological replicates and was taken from at least three different leaves. Samples were ﬂash-frozen with liquid nitrogen and then stored at −80 °C for RNA-seq and tandem mass tag (TMT) analyses. 2.2 RNA extraction and RNA-seq    Total RNA was extracted separately from white and green parts of chimeric leaves using an RNeasy plus Micro Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the recommendations of the manufacturer. RNA integrity was assessed using the RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit and the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). Each RNA sample was subjected to DNase digestion (Takara) to remove any remaining DNA. Enrichment of mRNA, fragment interruption, addition of adapters, size selection, PCR amplification and RNA-seq were performed using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencing platform, Beijing Biomarker Technologies, Beijing, China.  2.3. Protein extraction, digestion, and TMT labelling    The sample was transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4℃ for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 100% TCA for 2 h at 4℃. After centrifugation at 4℃ for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37℃ and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments.  After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  2.4. LC–MS/MS analysis     Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis was performed by PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific).   The gradient consisted of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 25% to 40% over 8 min, 40% to 80% over 3 min, and then holding at 80% for 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analysed by Q Exactive™ PLUS Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization source followed by MS/MS in Q Exactive™ PLUS (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using a normalized collision energy setting of 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
2.5. Database search    The resulting MS/MS data were processed using a Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database obtained from the client (27024 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. For protein quantification, TMT-6plex was selected in Maxquant. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to <1%, and the peptide ion score was set as ≥20. 2.6. Functional annotation of differentially expressed genes and proteins    The differentially expressed genes were compared against the NCBI and Swiss-Prot databases. Functional annotation of differentially regulated transcripts and proteins was conducted using GO annotation [14]. The differentially accumulated transcripts and proteins were annotated according to the KEGG database [15]. For quantitative analysis, quantitative ratios for fold-change cut-off were set at above 1.3 and below 0.77 to determine up-accumulated or down-accumulated proteins with a p-value of less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chimeric leaves, Molecular mechanism, Transcriptome, Proteome, Ananas comosus var. bracteatus

### Affiliations
PTM
aCollege of Landscape Architecture of Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, PR China

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Ma
aCollege of Landscape Architecture of Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, PR China


