### Accession
PXD015969

### Title
Perilous Sites: High basic Fibroblast Growth Factor level supplement Parkinson’s disease pathology and its Spread

### Description
Lewy body (LB) pathology and loss of dopaminergic neurons are imprints of Parkinson’s disease (PD). LBs are mainly comprised of alpha-Synuclein (Dijkstra et al., 2014). Strolling detection of LBs in brain regions contribute to progressive construct of PD pathology to which molecular mechanisms are not clear (H. Braak & Del Tredici, 2017). Two key facets of LB formation are protein aggregation via misfolding and transmission of misfoldled proteins to various brain regions, eventually causing neuronal death (Goedert, Spillantini, Del Tredici, & Braak, 2013; Pacelli et al., 2015). Misfolding requires alterations in intracellular physiology (Carbone, Costa, Provensi, Mannaioni, & Masi, 2017; Funes et al., 2014; Guzman et al., 2018; Pacelli et al., 2015) and detection of misfolded proteins in exosomes confirms exosomatic transmission (Ngolab et al., 2017). High levels of neurotropic-factors (Brockmann et al., 2017) and changes in bioenergetics are found in PD patients, these can bring physiological alterations (Smith et al., 2018). En masse, these evidences and  hipocampal association with synucleopathies (Flores-Cuadrado, Ubeda-Bañon, Saiz-Sanchez, de la Rosa-Prieto, & Martinez-Marcos, 2016) allowed us to probe other volunerable PD proteins in cell-lysate and exosomal proteomes of bFGF treated hippocampal neurons. Using WPCNA we developed co-expression modules and spotted many PD related proteins; which can act as precursors during  diseased or onset stage.

### Sample Protocol
The neurons were lysed direct on the plate in RIPA lysis buffer using a cell scraper. The lysate was transferred into a fresh Eppendorf tube and undissolved material was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 20,000 g and 4°C. A protein assay was performed and 15 µg of protein were subjected to proteolytic digestion with the SP3 protocol. Proteins were reduced by addition of 9 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (Biozol, Germany) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteine residues were alkylate by addition of 18 µL 400 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, US) and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Afterwards, the reaction was quenched by adding another 9 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol. Proteolytic digestion was performed using a modified protocol for single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) (Sielaff et al., 2017). Briefly, after binding of proteins to 40 µg of a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic magnetic Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, US) with a final concentration of 70% acetonitrile for 30 min at room temperature, beads were washed twice with 200 µL 70% ethanol and twice with 180 µL acetonitrile. For proteolytic digestion, 125 ng LysC and 125 ng trypsin (Pomega, Germany) were added in 20 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by an incubation for 16 h at room temperature. The supernatants were transferred to fresh 0.5 mL protein lobind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). For improved peptide recovery, 20 µL 0.1% formic acid were added to the magnetic beads followed by sonication for 30 s in a sonication bath (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH, Germany). The supernatants were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were redissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration was estimated using Nanodrop at 280 nm (Thermofisher, US). Peptides from neuronal lysate digestion were analysed on an Easy nLC 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific, US) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Germany) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). An amount of 1 µg of peptides per sample was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH,Germany) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid min (gradient: 0 min., 2.4% B; 2 min., 4.8% B; 92 min., 24% B; 112 min., 35.2% B; 121 min., 60% B). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000. The top 15 peptide ions were chosen for Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 26%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000. A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al., 2014). The MS data was searched against a canonical fasta database of Rattus norvegicus from UniProt (download: March 5th 2018, 29975 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. The protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a two-sided Student’s t-Test was applied to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. Additionally, a permutation based false discovery rate estimation was used (Tusher et al., 2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuron, Rat, Exosome, Bfgf

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


