### Accession
PXD031861

### Title
Trypanosoma evansi secretome carries potential biomarkers for surra diagnosis

### Description
Trypanosoma evansi is a parasite of African origin that has evolutionary proximity to Trypanosoma brucei. This parasite, which causes the surra, has the broadest range of hosts, including wild and domestic mammals, and its geographic distribution is the widest among all trypanosomes. This disease causes numerous economic losses in livestock in countries in the Americas, Africa, and Asia. This work aims to obtain in vitro secreted proteins from T. evansi and identify potential treatment and diagnostic biomarkers of surra. For this, in an experimental group, the parasite was purified in an ion-exchange column (DEAE-Cellulose) and maintained in a secretion medium. In a second group, there was no purification of the parasites. Also, each group was maintained at 37 ºC and 27 ºC.  Finally, we identified the proteins through mass spectrometry. We found a total of 246 proteins and noticed that the temperature appears to modulate protein secretion. We observed negligible differences in proteins from purified and non-purified sets. We observed that most secreted proteins are related to molecular function (F) of binding, catalytic activity, structural molecule activity, and biological process (P) of metabolic process, cellular process, localization, and biological regulation. We also verified that most secretome proteins have homologous proteins with trypanosomatids T. brucei, T. b. gambiense, T. vivax, and T. equiperdum. However, despite this, it was possible to identify the presence of exclusive T. evansi epitopes with potential biomarkers for differential surra diagnosis. We identified epitopes of proteins that are part of the glycolytic process of the parasite, which can be used in immunotherapy by the production of anti-proteins from the glycolytic process. Finally, this is the first work that provide a big picture of the T. evansi secretome and could be the starting point to elucidate biological issues related to surra.

### Sample Protocol
- SDS-PAGE A pool of technical triplicates from each sample was concentrated in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator plus® – Eppendorf) for 4 hours at 37 ºC; 40 µg were resolved for 1 hour in 4–12% NuPage gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 40 mA. The gels were stained with FastBlue (Scienco Biotech - Lages, Brazil). The samples used for mass spectrometry analysis were resolved for approximately 20 minutes, long enough for the proteins to come out of the concentration gel. Secretion medium (10µL) was used as a negative control. Each sample (in gel) were cutted in 2 samples (A and B). The files are organized in the follow rule: <Medium (Purified - P/Non Purified - NP)><Temperature><Biological sample, C for Control><Band (A or B)><Technical Duplicate in MS run>      - Tryptic digestions (in-gel) Fast Blue stained protein bands (1 cm × 1 cm) were excised from the gels and treated twice with 200 μL of destaining solution (5 mM ammonium carbonate (NH4HCO3) in 50% ACN) for 30 min at 37 °C with shaking, and the excess ACN was removed by drying in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, DE) for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60 °C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at room temperature. Gels were washed with 200 μL of destaining buffer for 15 min at 37 °C with shaking. Gel slices were incubated with 50 μL of 100% ACN for 15 min at room temperature and dried for 15 min. Proteins were digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1 μg) (Promega, Madison, WI) for 15 min at room temperature in digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3/1 mM CaCl2, pH 8.5) and then incubated for 16 h at 37 °C. The digestions were stopped by the addition of 175 mM HCl (pH 7.5). Peptides were recovered from the gel by adding 100 μl of 5 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% ACN and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The remaining tryptic peptide solution was transferred to a new tube, dried for 1 h at room temperature and reconstituted with 10 μL 0.1% formic acid, as described in Wagner et al. (2013).  - Mass spectrometry  Samples were submitted to mass spectrometry analysis in a liquid chromatography system (UHPLC; ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography - Nano Acquiring) coupled to a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA) as described before (Wagner et al., 2013). The peptide mixtures were separated into a reverse-phase column (75 an i.d., 15 cm long) with a flow of 500 nL/min. It was used as acetonitrile solvent with gradients of 5% - 10% in 5 minutes, 10% - 40% in 10 minutes, 40% - 95% in 10 seconds, remaining at 95% for 3 minutes, and ending with reconditioning of the column at 5% for 7 minutes.  The ions were acquired positively (ions 2+, 3+ and 4+) with a range of 400-1400m/z with a resolution of 30,000 m/z, and 11 scanning events were performed with the acquisition of 10 ms between each event. The 11 most intense precursor ions were submitted to the ICD collision chamber in an argon environment with 35V energy.

### Data Protocol
- Database search  The raw data from the mass spectrometry were processed by Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, UK) using a FASTA file containing sequences of the following proteins: T. evansi proteome (strain STIB805) obtained from TriTrypDB (version 39) (Aslett et al., 2009) and Rattus norvegicus proteome (proteome Id UP000002494, Brown Norway strain). In addition, porcine trypsin, Saccharomyces sp. alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and human keratin were added to the FASTA file as contaminants control. The search was performed in decoy mode was well. Mascot search parameters consisted of tryptic peptides with a missing cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, methionine oxidation as variable modifications and 0.5 Da for peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance. Mascot results were submitted to Scaffold Software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR), which also performed X! Tandem analysis (Bjornson et al., 2008). First, the biological triplicates of each group were combined via the "MudPIT" option, available in Scaffold to combine the search results into a single sample. Only those with at least two unique peptides assigned, a false positive rate (FDR) = 0%, and peptide and protein probabilities being between 95% and 99%, respectively, were considered valid protein identification (ProphetProphet algorithm).

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma evansi is a parasite that is phylogenetically close to Trypanosoma brucei and is the causative agent of a disease known as surra. Surra is responsible for a high mortality rate in livestock and large economic losses in the Americas, Africa, and Asia. This work aimed to analyze in vitro secreted proteins from T. evansi and identify potential treatment and diagnostic biomarkers for surra diagnosis. Two groups were used. In one group the parasites were purified using a DEAE-Cellulose column and maintained in a secretion medium while in the other group the parasites were not purified. Each group was further divided to be maintained at either 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C or 27&#xa0;&#xb0;C. We identified 246 proteins through mass spectrometry and found that the temperature appears to modulate protein secretion. We found minimal variations in the protein pools from pure and non-purified sets. We observed an emphasis on proteins associated to vesicles, glycolysis, and cellular homeostasis through the enrichment of GO. Also, we found that most secretome proteins share homologous proteins with T. b. brucei, T. b. gambiense, T. vivax, T. equiperdum, and T. b. rhodesiense secretome but unique T. evansi epitopes with potential biomarkers for surra diagnosis were detected. SIGNIFICANCE: Trypanosoma evansi is a parasite of African origin that is phylogenetically close to Trypanosoma brucei. As with other trypanosomatids and blood parasites, its infection causes non-pathognomonic symptoms, which makes its diagnosis difficult. One great problem is the fact that no diagnostic test differentiates between Trypanosoma equiperdum and T. evansi, which is a problem in South America and Asia, and Africa. Thus, it is urgent to study the biochemistry of the parasite to discover proteins that can be used for differential diagnosis or be possible therapeutic targets. In addition, the study of the secretome can point out proteins that are used by the parasite in its interactions with the host, helping to understand the progression of the disease.

### Keywords
Proteomic; bioinformatic; immunoinformatic; epitope;

### Affiliations
Federal Institute of Santa Catarina
Professor at Federal Institute of Santa Catarina

### Submitter
Renato Moreira

### Lab Head
Dr Renato Simões Moreira
Professor at Federal Institute of Santa Catarina


