### Accession
PXD012528

### Title
Targeted Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Clostridium perfringens Toxins

### Description
Clostridium perfringens is an anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium spread throughout the environment. This bacterium is a common agent in the gastrointestinal tracts of healthy human beings and other mammals. Simultaneously, this agent is one of the most significant producers of toxins among all known bacteria. This expressive toxicity is due to the bacterium’s ability collectively to produce different protein toxins and/or enzymes with diverse modes of action. The present study uses currently developed targeted proteomic methods for the simultaneous detection of selected C. perfringens protein toxins. The method was applied in different kinds of environmental matrices and was used to analyze toxins production in a set of collection strains.

### Sample Protocol
Set of 11 different C. perfringens strains were first used to characterize the spectrum of produced toxins. The strains were cultivated anaerobically in two different cultivation media (Schaedler anaerobe broth and BBL Fluid thioglycolate medium), culture filtrates were collected and bacteria were lysed in ultrasonic homogenizer. Samples (culture filtrates as well as the lysates from both media) were solubilized by 1M urea, reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, alkylated by iodoacetamide and digested by sequencing grade trypsin. The peptides were then desalted using phase extraction cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges, C18, Merck), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Due to the lack of commercially available protein toxin standards necessary for the targeted method development, recombinant toxins were prepared. The alpha, beta, beta2, epsilon, iota a, and iota b proteins of C. perfringens were expressed in E. coli and isolated through a polyhistidine tag in sufficient quantity and purity for MS analysis (digestion as above). Peptide mixtures were then analyzed by nano-LC coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed by Proteome Discoverer software v. 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot search algorithm. Data were searched against a database constructed by merging the sets of C. perfringens proteomes (C. perfringens strain 13; ATCC 13124; SM101; ATCC 3626; JGS1495; str. F4969; str. JGS1721; str. JGS1987; NCTC 8239; and WAL-14572). The merged database contained 32,700 sequences (downloaded on May 18th 2016). Search parameters were set as follows:  tryptic specificity with maximum of 2 missed cleavages, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification, mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 20 mmu for product ions. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (high confidence) and 0.05 (medium confidence). Peptides for targeted assays were selected using Skyline software v. 4.1 (downloaded from https://skyline.ms/project/home/begin.view). The spectral library was created from data-dependent acquisition MS analyses of the recombinant proteins. Skyline parameters for peptide settings were set as follows: trypsin with no missed cleavages; peptide length from 5 to 25 amino acids; methionine-containing peptides were excluded; Cys carbamidomethylation was allowed; isotope label type was set up as heavy (13C6 15N2 lysine and 13C6 15N4 arginine); transitions were set from 2+ and 3+ precursor ions. For each targeted peptide, the Skyline result was manually inspected. For each toxin, two or three unique peptides were selected. Peptides and their labeled forms were included in one common inclusion list.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomics recently proved to be a technique for the detection and absolute quantification of proteins not easily accessible to classical bottom-up approaches. Due to this, it has been considered as a high fidelity tool to detect potential warfare agents in wide spread kinds of biological and environmental matrices. <i>Clostridium perfringens</i> toxins are considered to be potential biological weapons, especially the epsilon toxin which belongs to a group of the most powerful bacterial toxins. Here, the development of a target mass spectrometry method for the detection of <i>C. perfringens</i> protein toxins (alpha, beta, beta2, epsilon, iota) is described. A high-resolution mass spectrometer with a quadrupole-Orbitrap system operating in target acquisition mode (parallel reaction monitoring) was utilized. Because of the lack of commercial protein toxin standards recombinant toxins were prepared within <i>Escherichia coli</i>. The analysis was performed using proteotypic peptides as the target compounds together with their isotopically labeled synthetic analogues as internal standards. Calibration curves were calculated for each peptide in concentrations ranging from 0.635 to 1101 fmol/&#x3bc;L. Limits of detection and quantification were determined for each peptide in blank matrices.

### Keywords
Prm; clostridium perfringens; protein toxin; epsilon toxin

### Affiliations
University of Defence
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Miloslava  Ďuráčová

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Krocova
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


