### Accession
PXD011215

### Title
Trichinella britovi: muscle larvae, adult worm - LC-MS/MS

### Description
Of the species of Trichinella spp. that may affect human health, Trichinella britovi is the second most common. As an early diagnosis of trichinellosis is crucial for effective treatment, it is important to identify sensitive, specific and common antigens of adult T. britovi worms and muscle larvae. The present study was undertaken to uncover the stage-specific and common proteins of T. britovi that hold promise for specific diagnostics. To that end, the somatic extracts obtained from two developmental stages, muscle larvae (ML) and adult worms (Ad), were separated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) coupled with immunoblot analysis. The positively-visualized protein spots specific for each stage were identified through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-LC/MS).   A total of 272 spots were detected in the proteome of T. britovi adult worms (Ad) and 261 in the muscle larvae (ML). The somatic extracts from Ad and ML were specifically recognized by pig T. britovi-infected swine sera at 10 days post infection (dpi) and 60 dpi, with a total of 70 prominent protein spots.  According to immunoblotting patterns and LC-MS/MS results, the immunogenic spots recognized by different pig T. britovi-infected sera were divided into three groups for the two developmental stages: adult stage-specific proteins, muscle larvae stage-specific proteins, and common proteins. Forty-five Ad proteins (29 Ad-specific and 16 common) and thirteen ML proteins (nine ML-specific and four common) cross-reacted with sera at 10 dpi. Many of the proteins identified in Ad (myosin-4, myosin light chain kinase, paramyosin, intermediate filament protein B, actin-depolymerizing factor 1, and calreticulin) are involved in structural and motor activity. Among the most abundant proteins identified in ML were 14-3-3 protein zeta, actin-5C, ATP synthase subunit d, deoxyribonuclease-2-alpha, poly-cysteine and histide-tailed protein, enolase, V-type proton ATPase catalytic and serine protease 30. Heat shock protein, intermediate filament protein ifa-1 and intermediate filament protein B were identified in both proteomes. The current study represents the first immunoproteomic identification of the antigenic proteins of adult worm and muscle larvae of T. britovi. These results provide a valuable basis for the development of diagnostic methods. The identification of common components among two developmental stages of T. britovi may be useful in the preparation of parasitic antigens in recombinant forms for diagnostic use.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: The same protein sample preparation procedure was used for both T. britovi stages. After thawing, the collected T. britovi ML and Ad were again extensively washed three times in PBS and then suspended in a lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM Trizma base), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Berlin, Germany). The protein extract was then homogenized in glass Potter-homogenizer and disintegrated by sonication three times for 10 s. The lysis extract was clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 x g at 4 0C for 15 minutes. The supernatant was collected, placed in new 1.5 mL tubes, and protein concentration was measured with the use of a NanoDrop-1000 Uv/Vis Spectrometer (NanoDrop Technologies,Wilmington, USA). The proteins were frozen at -70 0C for further analysis. Two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE): Three replicates of T. britovi protein samples were run in parallel on three immobilized pH-gradient IPG strips (RioRad, Hercules, USA). The 100 µg samples of previously prepared protein extracts from T. britovi Ad and ML were purified with the 2-D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. After the final centrifugation step, the protein pellets were rehydrated overnight in 250 µL of 2-D Starter Kit Rehydration/Sample Buffer (BioRad, Hercules, USA) and loaded onto a 7 cm pH 3-10 IPG strips (BioRad, Hercules, USA) for first dimension separation. The protein samples were separated in accordance with their pI values through isoelectric focusing (IEF) using a Protean IEF Cell (BioRad) device at 20 0C as follows: 1st step 15 minutes at 250V, 2nd step rapid ramping to 4000V for two hours, and 3rd step for 15,500 Vhrs (current limit of 50 µA/IPG strip). After focusing, the strips were submitted for two steps of equilibration, the first for 25 minutes in ReadyPrep 2-D starter Kit Equilibration Buffer I, containing DTT (BioRad, USA), and the second for 25 minutes in ReadyPrep 2-D Starter Kit Equilibration Buffer II containing iodoacetamide (BioRad, USA) instead of DTT. The two-dimensional SDS-PAGE was run using 12% acrylamide separating gels and 4% polyacrylamide stacking gels in a Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell electrophoresis chamber (BioRad, USA) at 200 V for approximately 50 minutes. The PageRuler Unstained Protein Ladder (ThermoFisher Scientific) was loaded onto each gel as a weight marker. All gels were separated in the same conditions. Silver staining and 2-DE immunoblotting: After 2-DE electrophoresis gels were silver-stained using PlusOne Silver Staining Kit (GE Healthcare) in accordance with manufacturer protocol or used without staining for 2-DE immunoblotting. The obtained gels were scanned with ChemiDoc MP system (BioRad, USA) and analyzed in Image Lab 5.2.1. software (BioRad, USA).  In addition, proteins from unstained gels were transferred onto Immuno-Blot polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (BioRad) by a wet transfer system (BioRad, USA) at 95 V for one hour in cool conditions. The PVDF membranes with the Ad and ML proteins were blocked in Pierce Protein-Free T20 (TBS) Blocking Buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) for one hour at room temperature. Following this, the PVDF membranes were incubated overnight at 4oC with T. britovi-infected pig sera (dose of 20,000 ML) diluted 1:100, at 10 dpi and 60 dpi. Adult worm proteins transferred onto the membrane were treated with antisera taken at 10 dpi while the ML proteins were treated with antisera from 10 dpi and 60 dpi. The secondary antibody HRP-conjugated goat anti-pig IgG were diluted 1:35 000 (Sigma-Aldrich, Louis, USA). The uninfected sera were used as parallel negative controls.  The negative control experiment used the same method as mentioned above. The immunoreactive proteins were visualized on a film using a Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (ThermoFisher Scientific, Walthman, USA) according to the provided instruction. Reproducibility of the immune recognition was verified by repeating the immunoblot at least three times.  LC-MS/MS: Spots of interest visible on the films were gently excised from compatible silver-stained gels and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to a mass spectrometer in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences (Warsaw, Poland). Samples were concentrated and desalted on a RP-C18 pre-column (Waters), and further peptide separation was achieved on a nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) RP-C18 column (Waters, BEH130 C18 column, 75 µm i.d., 250 mm long) in a nanoACQUITY UPLC system, using a 45 minute linear acetonitrile gradient. The column outlet was directly coupled to an Electrospray ionization (ESI) ion source of a  Orbitrap Velos type mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), operating in a regime of a data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch with HCD-type peptide fragmentation. An electrospray voltage of 1.5 kV was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.2.0, MatrixScience). The obtained peptide masses and fragmentation spectra were matched to the National Center Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant database (115488495 sequences/42334050411 residues), with a Nematoda filter (748652 sequences) using the Mascot search engine (Mascot Daemon v. 2.4.0, Mascot Server v. 2.4.1, MatrixScience). The following search parameters were applied: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, peptide mass tolerance to ± 30 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.1 Da. The protein mass was left as unrestricted, and mass values as monoisotopic, with one missed cleavage being allowed. Alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation as fixed, oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (MatrixScience), with a probability-based algorithm. The expected value threshold of 0.05 was used for the analysis, which means that all peptide identifications had less than a one-in-20 chance of being a random match.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adult worm, Lc-ms/ms, Immunoblotting, 2-de, Muscle larvae, Trichinella britovi

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Polish Academy of Sciences 
Institute of Parasitology, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Sylwia Grzelak

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Grzelak
Institute of Parasitology, Polish Academy of Sciences


