### Accession
PXD014398

### Title
Proteome of cork producing cells: comparison of stoppable vs non-stoppable quality cork

### Description
Cork quality is a technological trait of large interest for the Mediterranean cork industry. Our manuscript analyses the proteins and phenolics of cork producing cells in order to collect data about the molecular/biochemical pathways determining cork quality. To the best of our knowledge, this information is sparse in the research and technological community but it would be a valuable tool for breeding. We show that cells leading to the production stoppable (highly valued) and non-stoppable cork have contrasting profiles regarding soluble and cell-wall bound phenolics. The difference was also observed when considering the protein profiles but the discrimination between cork quality groups is not as remarkable as when considering phenolics. In any case, the mitochondrial metabolism points out for higher energy demand in non-stoppable cork producing cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken from five trees producing cork of stoppable quality (SQC) and from five trees producing non-stoppable quality cork (N-SQC). Samples were obtained by scratching the inner side of freshly removed planks and comprise recently formed phellem with suberized (cork) and unsuberized cells (phelloid) and phellogen cells (meristem). Immediately after debarking, the samples were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. At the laboratory, samples were lyophilized, grinded using a ball mill and PTFE shaking flasks and stored at -80Â°. One gram of sample (dry weight) was used for protein extraction, following (Isaacson et al., 2006). The upper phases were combined and precipitated overnight at -20ÂºC with 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. After centrifugation the pellet washed twice with 2 volumes of methanol and four times with 2 volumes of acetone. The resulting pellet was dried under vacuum (1-2 hours) and resuspended in 8M urea and 4% CHAPS (w/v), gently agitated for two hours. After centrifugation, the supernatant was desalted (PD miniTrap G25). Protein was quantified with Bradford (Ramagli, 1999). One-hundred micrograms of protein were used for two-dimensional electrophoresis. Briefly, isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out with pH 3âˆ’10 immobilized strips (13cm) and run to a cumulative 32120 Vh (Pinheiro et al., 2013) in the presence of 0.12 % DeStreak Reagent (GE Healthcare). The second dimension SDS-PAGE was performed at 20 ÂºC with 12% resolving gels using the Hoefer SE 600 apparatus (GE Healthcare) at 10 mA per gel, for the first 15 min, and 20 mA per gel for the next 4 h, or until the bromophenol blue dye front had run off the gel. Precision Plus Protein All Blue Standards (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) were used for molecular mass determinations. Gels were subsequently stained in Colloidal Coomassie Blue (Neuhoff, Stamm and Eibl, 1985) and images acquired with ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare). Image gel analysis was performed with Progenesis SameSpots 2D software v.4.5 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd). The automatic analysis assigned 394 polypeptide spots, 355 spots being detected in at least four replicates of each cork quality group (n-1). These spots were submitted to MALDI-TOF/TOF for protein identification. A Freedom EVO II workstation (Tecan) was used for the digestion. Briefly, gel plugs were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution in 50 % v/v MeOH/MilliQ Water (Millipore) for 20 min and dehydrated twice for 20 min in 75 % ACN. Proteins were digested with 8 ÂµL of a solution containing 5 ng/ÂµL trypsin (trypsin Gold, Promega) in 20mM ammonium bicarbonate (overnight, 37Â°C). Digested peptides were extracted from the gel plugs with 50 % v/v ACN containing 0.1 % v/v TFA, dried and resolubilized in 0.7 ÂµL of 50 % v/v ACN/ containing 0.1 % v/v TFA. Peptides were spotted on a MALDI-TOF target and 0.7 ÂµL of 7 mg/mL Î±-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 50 % v/v ACN containing 0.1 % v/v TFA was added. MALDI mass spectra were acquired using the Sciex 5800 TOF/TOF (Sciex). The 10 most abundant peaks, excluding known contaminants, were automatically selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Using ProteinPilot (version 4.0.8085; AB Sciex), MS and MS/MS spectra were submitted to an in-house MASCOT server (version 2.3.1; Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com) for searching against the NCBInr database limited to the taxonomy Quercus (taxID3511; from 01 Feb 2019; 178,293 sequences). A second search was performed using the EST oak sequences from NCBI (taxID3511; from 01 Feb 2019; 870,474 sequences). Parameters were: peptide mass tolerance 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, double oxidation of tryptophan, tryptophan to kynurenine and ethylation of glutamic acid as variable modifications. Up to two miscleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Cork is a renewable, non-wood high valued forest product, with relevant ecological and economic impact in the Mediterranean-type ecosystems. Currently, cork is ranked according to its commercial quality. The most valuable planks are chosen for cork stoppers production. Cork planks with adequate thickness and porosity are classified as stoppable quality cork (SQC). The chemical composition of cork is known, but the regulation of metabolic pathways responsible of cork production and composition, hence of cork quality, is largely unknown. Here, we tested the hypothesis that post-genomic events may be responsible for the development of SQC and N-SQC (non-stoppable quality cork). Here, we show that combined proteomics and targeted metabolomics (namely soluble and cell wall bound phenolics) analyzed on recently formed phellem allows discriminate cork planks of different quality. Phellem cells of SQC and N-SQC displayed different reducing capacity, with consequential impact on both enzymatic pathways (e.g., glycolysis) and other cellular functions, including cell wall assembly and suberization. Glycolysis and respiration related proteins were abundant in both cork quality groups, whereas the level of several proteins associated to mitochondrial metabolism was higher in N-SQC. The soluble and cell wall-bound phenolics in recently formed phellem clearly discriminated SQC from N-SCQ. In our study, SQC was characterized by a high incorporation of aromatic components of the phenylpropanoid pathway in the cell wall, together with a lower content of hydrolysable tannins. Here, we propose that the level of hydrolysable tannins may represent a valuable diagnostic tool for screening recently formed phellem, and used as a proxy for the quality grade of cork plank produced by each tree.

### Keywords
Cork producing cells, Maldi tof/tof, Quercus suber, Gel based proteomics

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology
Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Portugal

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Pinheiro
Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Portugal


