### Accession
PXD021929

### Title
Fungus-host protein-protein interactions between Drechmeria coniospora and Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Label-free quantitative affinity purification experiments were performed to identify the host protein binders of D. coniospora fungal virulence factors in C. elegans.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification experiments were performed in five different transgenic worm strains, each of which expressed a fungal virulence factor tagged with both FLAG and mKate2 fluorescent protein. For each strain, three biological replicates were used in pull-downs with Chromotek RFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads and the corresponding binding control beads. Samples were in-gel digested and measured by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0). MS/MS mass spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of WormPep release WS275 (28,466 entries), UniProt E. coli K-12 proteome release 2020_01 (4,403 entries), the corresponding transgenic fusion protein and a list of 246 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm. A separate search was performed to identify mono-ADP-ribosylation (MAR) sites in strain pZX26.

### Publication Abstract
Animals and plants need to defend themselves from pathogen attack. Their defences drive innovation in virulence mechanisms, leading to never-ending cycles of co-evolution in both hosts and pathogens. A full understanding of host immunity therefore requires examination of pathogen virulence strategies. Here, we take advantage of the well-studied innate immune system of Caenorhabditis elegans to dissect the action of two virulence factors from its natural fungal pathogen Drechmeria coniospora. We show that these two enterotoxins have strikingly different effects when expressed individually in the nematode epidermis. One is able to interfere with diverse aspects of host cell biology, altering vesicle trafficking and preventing the key STAT-like transcription factor STA-2 from activating defensive antimicrobial peptide gene expression. The second increases STA-2 levels in the nucleus, modifies the nucleolus, and, potentially as a consequence of a host surveillance mechanism, causes increased defence gene expression. Our results highlight the remarkably complex and potentially antagonistic mechanisms that come into play in the interaction between co-evolved hosts and pathogens.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Drechmeria coniospora, Ap-ms, Ppi, Innate immunity, Fungus-host interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Turing Centre for Living Systems, Marseille, France

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan J. Ewbank
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Turing Centre for Living Systems, Marseille, France


