### Accession
PXD000005

### Title
Proteomic screen reveals Fbw7 as a modulator of the NF-kB pathway

### Description
Proteomics on HCT116 cells. 3 samples wild-type, 3 samples Fbw7 KO. Subcellular fractionation to cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. Proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin, and labelled with TMT6-plex:  126,127,128 - wildtype; 129,130,131 - Fbw7 KO. Sample separation by high resolution isoelectric focusing at peptide level, whereafter 72 fractions were loaded onto reversed phase LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Fbw7 is a ubiquitin-ligase that targets several oncoproteins for proteolysis, but the full range of Fbw7 substrates is not known. Here we show that by performing quantitative proteomics combined with degron motif searches, we effectively screened for a more complete set of Fbw7 targets. We identify 89 putative Fbw7 substrates, including several disease-associated proteins. The transcription factor NF-&#x3ba;B2 (p100/p52) is one of the candidate Fbw7 substrates. We show that Fbw7 interacts with p100 via a conserved degron and that it promotes degradation of p100 in a GSK3&#x3b2; phosphorylation-dependent manner. Fbw7 inactivation increases p100 levels, which in the presence of NF-&#x3ba;B pathway stimuli, leads to increased p52 levels and activity. Accordingly, the apoptotic threshold can be increased by loss of Fbw7 in a p100-dependent manner. In conclusion, Fbw7-mediated destruction of p100 is a regulatory component restricting the response to NF-&#x3ba;B2 pathway stimulation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms orbitrap human colon epithelium fbw7 hirief

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Rui
 Branca
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology


