### Accession
PXD034888

### Title
DAXX adds a de novo H3.3K9me3 deposition pathway to the histone chaperone network (part 1)

### Description
A multitude of histone chaperones are required to support histones from their biosynthesis until DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of histone co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways remains enigmatic. Using exploratory interactomics, we define the interplay between histone H3–H4 chaperones in the histone chaperone network. We identify several novel histone dependent complexes and predict the structure of the ASF1 and SPT2 co-chaperone complex, expanding the role of ASF1 in histone dynamics. We show that DAXX provides a unique functionality to the histone chaperone network, recruiting histone methyltransferases to promote H3K9me3 catalysis on new histone H3.3–H4 prior to deposition onto DNA. Hereby, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo H3K9me3 deposition and heterochromatin assembly. Collectively, our findings provide a framework for understanding how cells orchestrate histone supply and employ targeted deposition of modified histones to underpin specialized chromatin states.

### Sample Protocol
H3.1 (HeLa S3 pLVX-TetOne-puro H3.1-FlagHA), H3.3 (HeLa S3 pLVX-TetOne-puro H3.3-FlagHA) and control (HeLa S3 pLVX-TetOne-puro-TwinStrep-HA) cell lines were described previously (Hammond et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2022). Cell lines expressing ASF1a, ASF1b, sNASP, HJURP and DAXX (WT and mutants) from pLVX-TetOne-puro constructs were created by lentiviral transductions of HeLa S3 suspension cells. Cells were grown in DMEM medium, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin, and grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Expression of the chaperones (ASF1a, ASF1b, sNASP, HJURP or DAXX) and histones (H3.1, H3.3) was induced by treatment with 2 µg/ml Doxycycline for 24-36 hours. For SILAC experiments cells were grown in RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC supplemented with dialyzed FBS, MEM non-essential amino acid mix, GlutaMAX, and isotopically labeled arginine (316 μM) and lysine (547 μM). Triple SILAC experimental conditions employed heavy labeling (Lys8 + Arg10), medium labeling (Lys4 + Arg6), and light labeling (Lys0 + Arg0), see also experimental design.  Soluble extracts were prepared by washing the cells twice with ice-cold PBS, and resuspending the pellet in ice-cold NP40-NaCl buffer (300 mM NaCl, 0.05 % NP40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) with freshly added inhibitors (5 mM NaF and 10 mM β-Glycerolphosphate, 0.1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 10 µg/ml Leupeptin, 10 µg/ml Pepstatin A, 100 ng/ml Trichostatin A , 0.2 mM Na3VO4), and left for 15 minutes at 4 °C.  Lysates were cleared, transferred to a new tube, centrifuged again, and 0.45 μm filtered. Protein concentrations were equalized. Immunoprecipitation of Strep-HA-chaperone and histone-Flag-HA was performed using MagStrep "type3" XT or anti-HA, respectively, for 3 hours at 4 °C. Strep-HA-chaperone beads were washed 2x using ice-cold wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.02% NP40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol), and 4x using ice-cold wash buffer without glycerol and NP-40, after which they were eluted with Strep-Tactin®XT elution buffer and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. Histone-Flag-HA samples were washed exclusively in NP40-NaCl buffer and then additionally washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to on-bead tryptic digestion. Reduction and alkylation of samples, preparation of StageTips, and high-pH cleanup of samples on StageTip, was performed essentially as described previously (Hammond et al., 2021).  The vast majority of MS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to either a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo) or an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo), respectively referred to as “HF-X” and “Exploris” hereafter. The exact hardware used for each MS raw data file is defined in the experimental design template. For each run, 5 μL of sample was injected. Separation of peptides was performed using 20-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nl/min. For HF-X runs, the gradient length was 100 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 75 min ranging from 7 %B to 38 %B. For Exploris runs, the gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 57 min ranging from 7 %B to 30-36 %B depending on sample type (see experimental design template). Analytical columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) on the HF-X or a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source on the Exploris. Spray voltage set to 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Full scan range was set to 300-1,500 m/z (HF-X) or 300-1,300 m/z (Exploris), MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to 3,000,000 charges (HF-X) or 2,000,000 charges (Exploris), and MS1 maximum injection time to 120 ms (HF-X) or “Auto” (Exploris). Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 100 s (HF-X) or 80 s (Exploris). MS2 resolution was set to 45,000, MS2 AGC target to 200,000 charges, minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000 (HF-X) or intensity threshold to 230,000 charges per second (Exploris), MS2 maximum injection time to 90 ms (HF-X) or “Auto” (Exploris), and TopN to 9. Exceptions to MS2-specific parameters are listed in the experimental design template.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). Distinct experiments were analyzed in separate computational runs, as defined in the experimental design template. The human FASTA database used in this study was downloaded from Uniprot on the 13th of May, 2019. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. Label-free quantification was enabled for all samples. Matching between runs and second peptide search were enabled. For triple SILAC samples, the re-quantify option was activated and multiplicity was set to 3, with SILAC labels set to Arg0;Lys0 (light) and Arg6;Lys4 (medium) and Arg10;Lys8 (heavy), respectively. All data was filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at both the peptide-spectrum match and the protein assignment levels.

### Publication Abstract
A multitude of histone chaperones are required to support histones from their biosynthesis until DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of histone co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways remains enigmatic. Using exploratory interactomics, we define the interplay between human histone H3-H4 chaperones in the histone chaperone network. We identify previously uncharacterized histone-dependent complexes and predict the structure of the ASF1 and SPT2 co-chaperone complex, expanding the role of ASF1 in histone dynamics. We show that DAXX provides a unique functionality to the histone chaperone network, recruiting histone methyltransferases to promote H3K9me3 catalysis on new histone H3.3-H4 prior to deposition onto DNA. Hereby, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo H3K9me3 deposition and heterochromatin assembly. Collectively, our findings provide a framework for understanding how cells orchestrate histone supply and employ targeted deposition of modified histones to underpin specialized chromatin states.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Gene silencing, Asf1, Heterochromatin, Nasp, Epigenetics, Hjurp, Nucleosome assembly, Daxx

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


