### Accession
PXD047166

### Title
Signal Regulatory Protein Beta 2 is a novel positive regulator of innate anticancer immunity, GFP-IP/MS of SIRP-B2 on THP-1

### Description
In recent years, the therapeutic (re)activation of innate anticancer immunity has gained prominence, with therapeutic blocking of the interaction of Signal Regulatory Protein (SIRP)-α with its ligand CD47 yielding complete responses in refractory and relapsed B cell lymphoma patients. SIRP-α has as crucial inhibitory role on phagocytes, with e.g., its aberrant activation enabling the escape of cancer cells from immune surveillance. SIRP-α belongs to a family of paired receptors comprised of not only immune-inhibitory, but also putative immune-stimulatory receptors. Here, we report that an as yet uninvestigated SIRP family member, SIRP-beta 2 (SIRP-ß2), is strongly expressed under normal physiological conditions in macrophages and granulocytes at protein level. Endogenous expression of SIRP-ß2 on granulocytes correlated with trogocytosis of cancer cells. Further, ectopic expression of SIRP-ß2 stimulated macrophage adhesion, differentiation and cancer cell phagocytosis as well as potentiated macrophage-mediated activation of T cell Receptor-specific T cell activation. SIRP-ß2 recruited the immune activating adaptor protein DAP12 to positively regulate innate immunity, with the charged lysine 202 of SIRP-ß2 being responsible for interaction with DAP12. Mutation of lysine 202 to leucine lead to a complete loss of the increased adhesion and phagocytosis. In conclusion, SIRP-ß2 is a novel positive regulator of innate anticancer immunity and a potential costimulatory target for innate immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
2.5x10^3 µg total protein was lysed in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.2, 20 nM EDTA, 20 nM EGTA, 1% NP-40 (12879500, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 0.1% SDS (L6026, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA); containing Na3CO4 (450243, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigmafast; S8820, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay (Pierce™ Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, #23200, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pre-clearance beads (25 μL per sample, Chromotek bmab-20) were washed thrice with ice cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA), and subsequently added to the lysate (2,5 x103 μg total protein in 400 μL lysis buffer). After 1 h incubation at 4 °C (on end-over-end tumbler), the lysate was harvested in a Eppendorf tube and added to pre-washed GFP-beads (25 μL per sample, Chromotek gtma-20). After 1 h incubation at 4 °C (end-over-end tumbler), the supernatant was removed and beads were washed thrice with ice cold wash buffer. Subsequently, beads were resuspended in 100 μL SDS-sample buffer (Laemmli buffer) and boiled for 10 minutes. The supernatant was harvested using a magnetic field and 40 μL was used for analysis with mass spectrometry (Orbitrap-LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
Search Engine Name: PEAKS   Parent Mass Error Tolerance: 20.0 ppm   Fragment Mass Error Tolerance: 0.04 Da   Precursor Mass Search Type: monoisotopic   Enzyme: Trypsin   Max Missed Cleavages: 2   Digest Mode: Semispecific   Fixed Modifications:    Carbamidomethylation: 57.02   Variable Modifications:     Oxidation (M): 15.99   Max Variable PTM Per Peptide: 5   Database: 20190402_HUMAN_REV_20404ent   Taxon: All   Contaminant Database: Contaminants   Searched Entry: 20649   FDR Estimation: Enabled   Merge Options: no merge   Precursor Options: corrected   Charge Options: no correction   Filter Options: no filter   Process: true   Associate chimera: no   Fractions: 19mdv070-VRW001.raw   Ion Source: ESI(nano-spray)   Fragmentation Mode: high energy CID (y and b ions)   MS Scan Mode: FT-ICR/Orbitrap   MS/MS Scan Mode: FT-ICR/Orbitrap      Accession numbers and -10logP values were used for further data processing. First, the acquired accession numbers of THP-1.EV and THP-1.SIRP-ß2 mass spectrometry were compared and only unique SIRP-ß2 accession numbers were kept. Next, all unique hits with an occurrence of 20% or more in the CRAPome database [41] were filtered out. CRAPome is a large publicly available database of standardized negative controls, obtained from various leading lab specializing in affinity purification mass spectrometry. The cellular location of the remaining proteins was determined, using the accession numbers and the UniProt database. Lastly, only the membrane-bound proteins were selected and ranked based on -10logP values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thp-1, Lc-msms, Gfp-ip, Sirpb2

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG)
Department of hematology, UMCG

### Submitter
Nienke Visser

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Bremer
Department of hematology, UMCG


