### Accession
PXD001319

### Title
cys TMTRAQ_an integrative method for unbiased thiol-based redox proteomics

### Description
quantification of protein redox regulation. we combine cysteine reaction tandem mass tag(cysTMT) and isobaric tag for relative abd absolute quantification( ITRAQ) in one one experiment. we developed a double labeling strategy using iTRAQ and cysTMT in one experiment for simultaneous determination of quantifiable cysteine redox changes and protein level changes.

### Sample Protocol
sample was labeled with itraq tags and cysTMT tags. the method not only enable simultaneous analysis of cysteine redox changes and total protein level changes,but also allows determination of bona fide redox modified cysteines in protein though correction of protein turnover. cysTMT tags (m/z 126,127,128,129,130,131 for six samples)were used to lable protein thiol responsive to treatment, and itrage tags (m/z 114,115,116,117,119and 121 for six samples) were used to label the N-termini of peptides for analysis of protein level changes.

### Data Protocol
ms date file(.raw file) were searched by protein discoverer 1.4 with SEQUEST algorithm. simultaneous analyze cysteine redox changes and total protein level changes.protein discoverer nodes for spectrum grouper and spectrum slector were set to default with the spectrum properties filter set to a minimum and maxmum mass of 300Da and 5Kda respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cys tmtraq, Itraq, Cystmt

### Affiliations
UF
university of florida

### Submitter
Ning Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
university of florida


