### Accession
PXD009780

### Title
Autocrine Motility Factor Modulates Proliferation Signaling Mediated By GPER

### Description
Traditional surgery plus radiotherapy or chemotherapy, existing targeted therapies failed to significantly improve the survival rate of recurrent endometrial cancer, so suggesting that mechanism  of recurrence and progression that modulates in endometrial cancer is clinically important. Here, we show that GPER(G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1) was binded to AMF, and the complex were translocation form plasma to cytoplasmic. Mechanistic investigations elucidated that interaction of AMF with GPER triggers phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling activating and accelerating the ability of endometrial cancer cells growth. Furthermore, we found that AMF may contribute to GPER-mediated endometrial cancer progression using animal experiments and human histological experiments which be consistent with the above conclusions. On the basis of these evidences including invivo and invitro, our findings suggest that AMF–GPER interaction might be novel key molecular targets for therapeutic management of patients with endometrial cancer, whose disease were progression and recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
Ishikawa and SPEC-2 cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) and maintained according to the provider’s instruction in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 10% FBS . All cells were grown until confluent and were incubated in serum-free medium for 24 h before treated

### Data Protocol
Total protein was quantified by BAC and protein profiles were detected according sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis, then protein was digested with trypsin. For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was added to the respective peptide mixture. And the iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by Agilent 1100 HPLC Chromatographic instrument. The fractions were finally collected into 10 pools for analysis by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS, Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific). Proteome DiscovererTM 2.2 was used for peptide and protein identification through Uniprot. Differentially expressed proteins were then identified through fold change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endometrial cancer

### Affiliations
yiran_eric@126.com
No.2699, Gaoke West Road, Pudong New Area, Shanghai

### Submitter
Yiran Li

### Lab Head
Dr xiaoping wan
No.2699, Gaoke West Road, Pudong New Area, Shanghai


