### Accession
PXD022165

### Title
Proteomic insights into senescence of testicular peritubular cells from a nonhuman primate model

### Description
Age-related changes of the human testis may include morphological alterations, disturbed steroidogenesis and impaired spermatogenesis. However, the specific impact of cell age remains poorly understood and difficult to assess. Testicular peritubular cells fulfill essential functions, including sperm transport, contributions to the spermatogonial stem cell niche and paracrine interactions within the testis. To study their role in age-associated decline of testicular functions, we performed comprehensive proteome and secretome analyses of repeatedly passaged peritubular cells from Callithrix jacchus. This nonhuman primate model better reflects the human testicular biology than rodents and further gives access to young donors unavailable from humans. Among 5095 identified proteins, 583 were differentially abundant between samples with low and high passage numbers. The alterations indicate a reduced ability of senescent peritubular cells to contract and secrete proteins, as well as disturbances in NF-κB signaling and a reduced capacity to handle reactive oxygen species. Since this in vitro model may not exactly mirror all molecular aspects of in vivo aging, we investigated the proteomes and secretomes of testicular peritubular cells from young and old donors. Even though the age-related alterations at the protein level were less pronounced, we found evidence for impaired protein secretion, altered NF-κB signaling and reduced contractility of these in vivo aged peritubular cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated with a cup resonator (Bandelin). Samples were homogenized with centrifugation devices (Qiashredder, Qiagen (2500 g, 2 min)). Protein content was measured with a Pierce 660 nm assay (Thermo). Proteins were reduced in 4 mM dithiothreitol/ 2mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated in 8 mM iodoacetamide. Digestion was performed with Lys-C (1/100, enzyme/protein, Wako) for 4 h followed by trypsin (1/50 enzyme/protein, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. For the secretome analysis cell supernatants were concentrated using 3K Amicon centrifugal filters (Merck). Samples were brought to concentration of 1 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Afterwards samples were treated in the same way as the cell lysates apart from the digestion which was done in a single step using a Lys-C/Trypsin Mix (1/25 enzyme/protein, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC connected to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. From cell lysates and secretomes, 2 µg and 1 µg total protein were injected, respectively. Samples were first loaded onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 5 µl/min (mobile phase: 0.1 % formic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water). Liquid chromatography was performed with an EASY-Spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Cell lysate samples were separated with a two-step gradient from 3 % B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25 % B in 160 min followed by a ramp to 40 % for 10 min (A: 0.1 % formic acid in water). Using the same eluents, the gradient for secretome samples started from 3% to 25% B in 30 min, followed by ramping to 40 % B in 5 min. The mass spectrometer was run in the data dependent acquisition mode with a maximum of 15 MS/MS spectra per survey scan.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.5.0) was used to process LC-MS/MS data. Callithrix jacchus protein sequences were retrieved from UniProt (retrieval date: 02/2020) and complemented by the built-in contaminant database. A label free quantification approach was chosen and the “match between runs” feature was turned on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Cellular model, Senescence, Ageing, Non-human primate, Proteome, Marmoset monkey, Secretome

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany
Genzentrum der LMU München

### Submitter
Jan Bernd Stöckl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany


