### Accession
PXD023849

### Title
Proteomic and functional analysis identifies proteins related to embryonic development in decidua of patients with early recurrent miscarriage

### Description
Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is the occurrence of repeated pregnancies that end in miscarriage of the fetus before 20 weeks of gestation. Recurrent miscarriages affect about 1-2% of couples trying to conceive; however, mechanisms leading to this complication are largely unknown. Our previous studies using comparative proteomics identified 314 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in placental villous. In this study, we identified 5479 proteins from a total of 34157 peptides in decidua of patients with early recurrent miscarriage. Further analysis identified 311 DEPs in the decidua tissue; 159 proteins showed the increased expression while 152 proteins showed decreased expression. These 311 proteins were further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The results suggested that 50 DEPs could play important roles in the embryonic development. Furthermore, network analysis of the placental villous and decidua embryonic development DEPs was performed in STRING database to find the core gene. This study identifies several proteins that are specifically associated with embryonic development in decidua of patients with early recurrent miscarriage, these results provide new insights into potential biological mechanisms and may ultimately inform recurrent miscarriage.

### Sample Protocol
For this study, a total number of eight placental decidua samples, four from ERM patients and four from elective abortions, were collected from Shaoxing women and children hospital in Zhejiang, China. Placental decidua tissues were taken through the cervix during dilatation and aspiration according to strict clinical procedures. Informed consents were provided by all participants. This study was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee of the Shaoxing women and children hospital in Zhejiang, China. The inclusion criteria used for ERM patients were as follows: gestation age were between 6 and 10 weeks, two or more recurrent pregnancy losses. The control group was no obstetric complications or history of miscarriages and have at least one child. All the samples were stored at -80℃ until used

### Data Protocol
The resulting LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) for data interpretation and protein identification against the database Uniprot_Hordeum-vulgare_201747-20180125 (downloaded on 25/01/2018, and including 201747 protein sequences), which is sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=Hordeum-vulgare&sort=score. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. The modification set was as following: fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT10plex(K), TMT10plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). The minimum 6 amino acids for peptide, ≥1 unique peptides were required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. TMT reporter ion intensity were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is defined as the loss of two or more consecutive pregnancies before the 20&#xa0;weeks of gestation. RPL affects about 1-2% of couples trying to conceive; however, the mechanisms leading to this complication are largely unknown. Our previous studies using comparative proteomics identified 314 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the placental villous. In this study, we identified 5479 proteins from a total of 34&#x2009;157 peptides in decidua of patients with early RPL (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023849). Further analysis identified 311 DEPs in the decidua tissue; and 159 proteins were highly expressed, whereas 152 proteins were lowly expressed. These 311 proteins were further analyzed by using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. The results suggested that 50 DEPs played important roles in the embryonic development. Upstream analysis of these DEPs revealed that angiotensinogen was the most important upstream regulator. Furthermore, protein-protein interaction analysis of the embryonic development DEPs from the placental villous and decidua was performed in the STRING database. This study identified several proteins specifically associated with embryonic development in decidua of patients with early RPL. Therefore, these results provide new insights into potential biological mechanisms, which may ultimately inform RPL.

### Keywords
Recurrent miscarriage; tmt; decidua; ipa; embryonic development

### Affiliations

Shaoxing Women and Children's Hospital, Shaoxing, China.
Shaoxing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Shaoxing 312000, China.

### Submitter
Hai-Tao Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-Tao Pan
Shaoxing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Shaoxing 312000, China.


