### Accession
PXD023867

### Title
Serine-threonine kinase TAO3 mediated trafficking of endosomes containing the invadopodia scaffold TKS5-alpha promotes cancer invasion and tumor growth

### Description
Invadopodia are actin-based proteolytic membrane protrusions required for invasive behavior and tumor growth. In this study, we used our high-content screening assay to identify kinases whose activity impacts invadopodia formation. Among the top hits selected for further analysis was TAO3, a STE20-like kinase of the GCK subfamily, for further analysis. TAO3 was overexpressed in many human cancers, and regulated invadopodia formation in melanoma, breast and bladder cancers. Furthermore, TAO3 catalytic activity facilitated melanoma growth in 3-dimensional matrices and in vivo. A novel, potent catalytic inhibitor of TAO3 was developed that inhibited invadopodia formation and function, and tumor cell extravasation, and growth. Treatment with these inhibitors demonstrated that TAO3 activity is required for endosomal trafficking of TKS5-alpha, an obligate invadopodia scaffold protein. A phosphoproteomics screen for TAO3 substrates revealed the dynein subunit protein LIC2 as a relevant substrate. Knockdown of LIC2 or expression of a phosphomimetic form promoted invadopodia formation. Thus, TAO3 is a new therapeutic target with a distinct mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
C8161.9 cells with endogenous TAO3 replacement by shRNA-TAO3 and wild-type TAO3 (shRNA-resistant, SR) or kinase-dead TAO3 (shRNA-resistant, KR) on five 150 mm culture dishes grown to between 70-80% confluence. Cells were washed with 1X cold-PBS before lysis to remove any media containing protein contaminants. Lyse the cells by 10 ml of Urea Lysis Buffer (at room temperature, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium Beta-pyrophosphate, 1 mM Beta-glycerophosphate buffer) and disrupted by sonication on ice. The cell lysates were stored at -80C prior to digestion and enrichment. Protein concentrations were then determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Approximately 12 mg of protein from each lysate was used. Protein was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, urea diluted to 2 M, then trypsin (TPCK treated, Worthington) was added at a 25:1 protein:trypsin ratio. The samples were incubated overnight at 37C before being quenched with TFA at a final concentration of 1%. The peptides were then solid phase extracted using Waters Sep tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation). Peptide concentrations were then determined using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) and dried by vacuum concentration. The phosphopeptides were enriched using previously published methods using Titanosphere TiO2 5 um particles (GL Biosciences) (Anal Chem, 2011. 83(20): p. 7635-44; Proteomics, 2015. 15(2-3): p. 462-73). The enriched phosphopeptides were purified by solid phase extraction using UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group, Inc.) and dried down in preparation for TMT labeling. The enriched phosphopeptides from the SR and KR cells were then labeled with TMT reagents as recommended by the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific), mixed, and analyzed by two-dimensional liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (J Proteomics, 2019. 206: p. 103423).

### Data Protocol
The binary instrument files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) to extract fragment ion spectra, precursor information (m/z values and peptide charge state), and TMT reporter ion peak intensities. The fragment ion spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded November 2018 from https://www.uniprot.org) with 179 common contaminant entries appended. The SEQUEST search engine was used with a parent ion mass tolerance of 1.25 Da and fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005 Da. Trypsin cleavage with up to two missed cleavages was specified. Static modifications of Carbamidomethyl on Cysteine residues, and TMT6plex on Lysine and N-terminal peptide resides, along with variable modifications of Oxidation on Methionine and Phosphorylation on Tyrosine, Serine, and Threonine were specified. Confident peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were obtained using the percolator node, and only peptides with q values<0.05 were accepted. The phosphorylation site localization node phosphoRS was configured after the search node in Proteome Discoverer to reconcile modification sites. Parsimonious protein inference was used in Proteome Discoverer to produce final protein lists, and the results were exported to tab-delimited files for post processing using in-house Python scripts (https://www.github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git).  For the expression analysis the reporter ion intensities from all PSMs matching to an amino acid sequence containing a phosphopeptide were summed. Any phosphopeptides matching to contaminant entries in the database were excluded from further analysis. Reporter ion data from PSMs where the trimmed average reporter ion intensity that did not exceed 500 were excluded. Any final peptide reporter ion sums of zero were replaced with a value of 150 (the smallest non-zero reporter ion intensities observed were approximately 350) to avoid mathematical errors during visualizations and statistical testing. Significant differences were tested using a sliding window Z-score method described in more detail at https://github.com/pwilmart/Z-score_GUI, and a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple-testing correction was done to limit the candidate false-discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Invadopodia are actin-based proteolytic membrane protrusions required for invasive behavior and tumor growth. In this study, we used our high-content screening assay to identify kinases whose activity affects invadopodia formation. Among the top hits selected for further analysis was TAO3, an STE20-like kinase of the GCK subfamily. TAO3 was overexpressed in many human cancers and regulated invadopodia formation in melanoma, breast, and bladder cancers. Furthermore, TAO3 catalytic activity facilitated melanoma growth in three-dimensional matrices and <i>in vivo</i>. A novel, potent catalytic inhibitor of TAO3 was developed that inhibited invadopodia formation and function as well as tumor cell extravasation and growth. Treatment with this inhibitor demonstrated that TAO3 activity is required for endosomal trafficking of TKS5&#x3b1;, an obligate invadopodia scaffold protein. A phosphoproteomics screen for TAO3 substrates revealed the dynein subunit protein LIC2 as a relevant substrate. Knockdown of LIC2 or expression of a phosphomimetic form promoted invadopodia formation. Thus, TAO3 is a new therapeutic target with a distinct mechanism of action. SIGNIFICANCE: An unbiased screening approach identifies TAO3 as a regulator of invadopodia formation and function, supporting clinical development of this class of target.

### Keywords
Tks5-alpha, Tmt data, Phosphoproteomics, Tao3, Taok3, Invadopodia, Ptm quantitation, Endosomes, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Oregon Health & Science University Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology 2720 S. Moody Avenue Portland, OR 97201 USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sara A. Courtneidge
Oregon Health & Science University Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology 2720 S. Moody Avenue Portland, OR 97201 USA


