### Accession
PXD016680

### Title
An interaction network of RNA-binding proteins involved in Drosophila oogenesis

### Description
During Drosophila oogenesis, the localization and translational regulation of maternal transcripts relies on RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Many of these RBPs localize several mRNAs and may have additional direct interaction partners to regulate their functions. Using immunoprecipitation from whole Drosophila ovaries coupled to mass spectrometry, we examined protein-protein associations of 6 GFP-tagged RBPs expressed at physiological levels. Analysis of the interaction network and further validation in human cells allowed us to identify 26 previously unknown associations, besides recovering several well characterized interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Whole ovaries form transgenic flies were dissected and lysed in buffer with mild salt and detergent. Cleared lysates were treated with RNases and immunoprecipitations were performed using GFP-TRAP beads from Chromotek. Proteins were eluted in sample buffer by boiling at 95C and separated on NuPAGE  Bis-Tris precast 4-12% gradient gels. Proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were desalted and purified on C18 StageTips.  LC-MS analysis were performed on a nanoLC (Easy-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described previously (Semanjski et al., 2018). In brief, peptides were eluted using a segmented gradient of 10%–50% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min over 46 min. MS data acquisition was conducted in the positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant peaks selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z (mass/charge ratio).  Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z at a target value of 3 × 106 charges with the maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 (defined at m/z 200). The higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS spectra were recorded with the maximum injection time of 45 ms at a target value of 1 × 105 and a resolution of 30,000 (defined at m/z 200). The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, and the intensity threshold was kept at 1 × 105. The masses of sequenced precursor ions were dynamically excluded from MS/MS fragmentation for 30 s. Ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection. For dimethylation labeling the peptides derived from tryptic in-gel digestion were loaded on C18 StageTips and labeled as described in Boersema et al. (2009). Measurements were done the same way as for the unlabeled.

### Data Protocol
For label-free MS, raw data files (3 replicates per sample) were processed using MaxQuant software suite v.1.6.0.1. Using Andromeda search engine, the spectra were searched against UniProt D. melanogaster (taxonomy ID 7227) complete proteome database (11/07/2017; 23300 protein entries); a database comprising a sequence of the tag alone and a file containing 245 common contaminants. Default settings were used. Additionally, MaxLFQ algorithm was activated and the minimum number of peptide ratio count was set to 1. Matching between runs option was selected, with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Matching was performed only between replicates by controlling the fraction numbers. All peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 at peptide and protein level. The same parameters were used to process the raw data from the experiments applying dimethyl labeling, except for the following: MaxQuant software suite v. 1.5.2.8 was used; MS spectra were searched against a reference D. melanogaster proteome obtained from Uniprot  (16/10/2015; 23334 protein entries); dimethylation on peptide N-termini and lysine residues was defined as light (+28.03 Da), intermediate (+32.06 Da), and heavy (+36.08 Da); re-quantification was enabled; no matching between runs was applied; quantitation of labeled peptides required at least two ratio counts.

### Publication Abstract
During <i>Drosophila</i> oogenesis, the localization and translational regulation of maternal transcripts relies on RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Many of these RBPs localize several mRNAs and may have additional direct interaction partners to regulate their functions. Using immunoprecipitation from whole <i>Drosophila</i> ovaries coupled to mass spectrometry, we examined protein-protein associations of 6 GFP-tagged RBPs expressed at physiological levels. Analysis of the interaction network and further validation in human cells allowed us to identify 26 previously unknown associations, besides recovering several well characterized interactions. We identified interactions between RBPs and several splicing factors, providing links between nuclear and cytoplasmic events of mRNA regulation. Additionally, components of the translational and RNA decay machineries were selectively co-purified with some baits, suggesting a mechanism for how RBPs may regulate maternal transcripts. Given the evolutionary conservation of the studied RBPs, the interaction network presented here provides the foundation for future functional and structural studies of mRNA localization across metazoans.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Oogenesis, Lc/ms, Immunoprecipitation, Transgenic fly lines, Drosophila melanogaster, In vitro validation

### Affiliations
Living Systems Institute University of Exeter Exeter UK
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Fulvia Bono
Living Systems Institute University of Exeter Exeter UK


