### Accession
PXD026299

### Title
Proteogenomic Analysis Reveals Proteins Involved in the First Step of Adipogenesis in Human Adipose-derived Stem Cells

### Description
Background: Obesity is characterized as a disease that directly affects the whole-body metabolism and is associated with excess fat mass and several related comorbidities. Dynamics of the adipocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia play an important role in health and disease, especially in obesity. Human adipose-derived stem cells (hASC) represent an important source for understanding the entire adipogenic differentiation process. However, little is known about the triggering step of adipogenesis in hASC. Here, we performed a proteogenomic approach for understanding the protein abundance alterations expression changes during the initiation of the adipogenic differentiation process. Methods: hASC were isolated from adipose tissue from three donors, characterized and expanded. Cells were cultured for 24 hours in adipogenic differentiation medium followed to protein extraction. We used shotgun proteomics to compare the proteomic profile of 24h-adipogenic differentiated and undifferentiated hASC. Besides, we used our previously next-generation sequencing data (RNA-seq) from the total and polysomal mRNA fractions of hASC to study post-transcriptional regulation during the initial steps of adipogenesis. Results: We identified  a total of 3,.420 proteins out of and 48,.336 peptides, being 92 exclusively identified  proteins in the undifferentiated hASC and 53 exclusive proteins in 24h-differentiated cells. Using a stringent criterion, we identified 33 differentially abundant proteins when compare 24h-differentiated versus undifferentiated hASC (14 upregulated and 19 downregulated, respectively). Among the upregulated proteins, we shortlist identified several adipogenic-related proteins. Combined analysis of the proteome and the transcriptome allowed the identification of positive correlation coefficients between proteins and mRNAs.  Conclusions: These results demonstrate a specific proteome profile related to adipogenesis at the very beginning (24h) of the differentiation process in hASC, which represents an important piece for a better understanding of human adipogenesis and obesity. In addition, the adipogenic differentiation is fine-tuning regulated at transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational levels.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted with RapiGestTM detergent at a concentration of 0.1%. Protein concentrations were quantified using the fluorimetric assay for Qubit platform (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer's instructions. One hundred micrograms of proteins from each one sample were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration of 10 mM) for 30 minutes, at 60 °C. After incubation at room temperature, the samples were alkylated with iodocetamide (final concentration of 30 mM) for 25 minutes at room temperature, at dark, and lastly digested with trypsin in the proportion of 1/50 (E/S) for 20 hours. The enzymatic reaction was interrupted by adding trifluoroacetic (0.4% v/v final). Successively, the peptides were quantified using the fluorometric test - Qubit 2.0 ® (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Each sample was desalted and concentrated using Stage-Tips (STop and Go-Extraction TIPs) according to Rappsillber and collaborator [27].

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the PatternLab for proteomics 54 software which is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org and data analysis was performed according to its protocol [28]. Briefly, Tthe sequences from Homo sapiens were downloaded on December 17th, 2020 from the Swiss-Prot database and then a target-decoy database was generated to include a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 104 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet 2019.01 rev. 5 search engine was used for identifying the mass spectra [29]. Search parameters considered were: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5500 Da, up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass and bins of 0.02 m/z for MS/MS. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mrna., Proteogenomics, Hasc, Differentiation, Protein, Adipogenic

### Affiliations
Computational Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Group - Fiocruz
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz-PR, Brazil

### Submitter
Marlon D M Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz-PR, Brazil


