### Accession
PXD011328

### Title
Histone H3 Serine-57 phosphorylation by CHK1 promotes responses to DNA replication stress

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTM) of chromatin control the genomic environment for transcription, DNA replication and repair in response to cell stimuli1–3. Replication stress in budding and fission yeasts leads to abundant acetylation of histone H3 on lysine-56 (H3K56ac)4–6, but only trace levels of H3K56ac are detected in human cells7,8, implying that other histone modifications promote a repair-permissive environment. In budding yeast, genetic interactions between histone H3 lysine-56 and serine-57 substitutions suggest a possible role for serine-57 (H3S57) in responses to replication poisons9. In this study, we identify a phosphorylated form of H3S57 (H3S57ph) using phosphoproteomics in replicating Xenopus egg extracts, and show that it is a highly conserved histone modification which promotes responses to DNA replication stress in human cells. A kinome screen and functional experiments identified Checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) as the H3S57ph kinase; CHK1 inhibition eliminates H3S57ph and arrests cells in S-phase. Induction of replication stress increases H3S57ph, while disrupting H3S57ph reduces stalling of replication forks upon replication stress, inducing DNA damage. We identified two distinct mechanisms of action. First, H3S57ph interacts with specific DNA repair proteins, notably Rad50. Second, atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of the nucleosome core particle and in vitro assays indicate that H3S57ph interacts with the unacetylated side-chain of K56, thus loosening DNA-histone contacts. Our results suggest that H3S57ph is an effector of CHK1 that assists in processing stalled replication forks by increasing nucleosome mobility and promoting interactions with repair machinery, thereby limiting DNA damage upon replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
The protein digests were analysed using a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Maxis Impact; Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany), with a nano-ESI ion source interfaced with a nano-HPLC U3000 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Samples were concentrated with a pre-column (Thermo Scientific, C18 PepMap100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 A) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min using 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile. After pre-concentration, peptides were separated with a reversed-phase capillary column (Thermo Scientific, C18 PepMap100, 75 μm × 250 mm, 3 μm, 100 A) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using a two steps gradient (1 % to 9 % acetonitrile in 5 min then 9 % to 31% in 24 min) for Xenopus chromatin or a three steps gradient  (2 % to 22 % acetonitrile in 22 min then 22 % to 36% in 14 min and finally 36 % to 81 % acetonitrile in 50 min) for pulled-down assay, and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. Proteins were identified by MS/MS by information-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple charged peptides. Up to five data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data were analysed using Data Analysis software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) to generate the peak lists. The SwisssProt non-redundant database (Uniprot-Swissprot, release 2017-07) was queried locally using the Mascot search engine v.2.4.1 (Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com) and with the following parameters : Xenopus laevis for Xenopus chromatin or Homo sapiens for pulled-down assay for the taxonomy, trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of Cystein as fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm on full scans and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Proteins were validated once they contained at least one peptide with a pvalue<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Chromatin, H3s57ph, Dna replication stress, Checkpoint kinase 1 (chk1)

### Affiliations
INRA
IGMM, CNRS, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer team

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Fisher
IGMM, CNRS, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer team


