### Accession
PXD036297

### Title
Generation and Characterization of a Conditional Ku70 Knockout Cell Line

### Description
In this study we characterize and investigate the effect of the loss of Ku70 protein in a conditional Ku70 knockout TREx-293 cell system. Loss of Ku70 protein levels was directly correlated with a loss of cell viability, supporting the observation that Ku performs an essential role in human cells. Interestingly, critical loss of average telomere length was not observed in Ku70 knockouts generated. Global quantitative proteomic analysis of whole cell extracts from Ku70 knockouts following depletion of Ku70 may indicate that Ku’s essential role in humans is not at telomeres, but a non-canonical role which is not yet fully understood.

### Sample Protocol
SB Ku70 knockout cells were plated on 6-well plates (300,000 per well) according to depletion curve protocols described above. SB cells were plated in duplicate, with one plate containing +Dox media, and the other -Dox media undergoing Ku70-HA depletion (N=3) Another two plates were also seeded per replicate for western blots. Samples were trypsinized, spun down (8,000 rpm for 3 minutes, washed with PBS, and spun down again) and collected from Day 1 Dox to Day 8 No Dox (or Day 8 Dox for control group). Samples for mass spectrometry analysis for global proteomics were prepared exactly as described previously (Maitland et al, 2021, FASEB J) but following the digestion and acidification, peptides were desalted using Pierce™ C18 Spin Tips (Cat# 84850). Samples were then dried in a Speed vacuum, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and quantified by BCA assay.  Approximately 500 ng of peptide sample was injected onto a Waters M‐Class nanoAcquity UHPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an ESI Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive plus, ThermoFisher Scientific) operated as described in Maitland et al, 2021.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 using the Human Uniprot database (reviewed only; updated July 2020). Missed cleavages were set to 3, cysteine carbamidomethylation (CAM) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), N‐terminal acetylation (protein) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications (max. number of modifications per peptide = 5), and peptide length ≥6. Protein and peptide FDR was left to 0.01 (1%) and decoy database was set to revert. Match between runs was enabled and all other parameters left at default.

### Publication Abstract
The Ku70/80 heterodimer is a key player in non-homologous end-joining DNA repair but is involved in other cellular functions like telomere regulation and maintenance, in which Ku's role is not fully characterized. It was previously reported that knockout of Ku80 in a human cell line results in lethality, but the underlying cause of Ku essentiality in human cells has yet to be fully explored. Here, we established conditional Ku70 knockout cells using CRISPR/Cas9 editing to study the essentiality of Ku70 function. While we observed loss of cell viability upon Ku depletion, we did not detect significant changes in telomere length, nor did we record lethal levels of DNA damage upon loss of Ku. Analysis of global proteome changes following Ku70 depletion revealed dysregulations of several cellular pathways including cell cycle/mitosis, RNA related processes, and translation/ribosome biogenesis. Our study suggests that the driving cause of loss of cell viability in Ku70 knockouts is not linked to the functions of Ku in DNA repair or at telomeres. Moreover, our data shows that loss of Ku affects multiple cellular processes and pathways and suggests that Ku plays critical roles in cellular processes beyond DNA repair and telomere maintenance to maintain cell viability.

### Keywords
Ku70 hek293

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University

### Submitter
Matthew Maitland

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University


