### Accession
PXD036628

### Title
TMT6plex quantitative proteomics of 293T NME4 KO cell

### Description
To identify the role NME4,we knockout NME4 in 293T cells. Followed by protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TMT6 labeled, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed in RIPA buffer then protein was quantitate using BCA kit,100ug protein of each sample was digested by trypsin 12-16 hours. The next day, TMT6plex labeling regent was added to each sample, this reaction was maintained in room temperature in 1 hour. Then terminated reaction by adding 5% hydroxylamine. Combined each sample, then using C18 column to desalt the sample and dried.Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100-μm inner diameter × ~20-cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Uniprot (Homo sapiens). Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human nme4 tmt6

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ( lab head )
westlake university

### Submitter
shaofang xie

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Li
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ( lab head )


