### Accession
PXD001947

### Title
Identification and characterization of the first Nα-acetyltransferase in plastids

### Description
Protein Nα-terminal acetylation represents one of the most abundant protein modifications of higher eukaryotes. In humans, six Nα-acetyltransferases (Nats) are responsible for the acetylation of approximately 80% of the cytosolic proteins. N-terminal protein acetylation has not been evidenced in organelles of metazoans, but in higher plants, it is a widespread modification not only in the cytosol but also in the chloroplast. In this study, we identify and characterize the first organellar-localized Nat in eukaryotes. A primary sequence-based search in Arabidopsis thaliana revealed seven putatively plastid-localized Nats of which AT2G39000 (AtNAA70) showed the highest conservation of the acetyl-CoA binding pocket. The chloroplastic localization of AtNAA70 was demonstrated by transient expression of AtNAA70:YFP in Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts. Homology modeling uncovered a significant conservation of tertiary structural elements between human HsNAA50 and AtNAA70. The in vivo acetylation activity of AtNAA70 was demonstrated on a number of distinct protein N alpha-termini with a newly established Nat-activity global profiling after expression of AtNAA70 in E. coli. AtNAA70 predominately acetylated proteins starting with M, A, S, and T, providing an explanation for most protein N-termini acetylation events found in chloroplasts.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells over-expressing specific and selected AtNAA70 were centrifuged at 5000 rpm 4°C and pellets frozen at -80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 8 plus 250 mM NaCl, subjected to sonication and cell debris were removed by centrifugation. This lysate (1 mg of material) was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide (complete description in Bienvenut et al., same issue) required for Stable Isotope Labelling Protein N-terminal Acetylation (SILProNAc) quantitation. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min on 40 min separation gradients. SCX-LC fractions were evaporated to dryness before storage at -20°C.Analysis of the SCX-LC fractions were performed as described in Bienvenut et al. (same issue). Selected samples are loaded on the pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nano-separation,) of the Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) followed by the separation on a C18 reverse phase column (NikkyoTechnos capillary column,) at a flow of 300 nL/min on 40 min gradient. The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo Scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration (lock mass) using the Top-20 acquisition method with 20 seconds exclusion time. Raw data files were extracted and exported with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Ver. 1.4) for ion signal higher than 1 counts and S/N higher than 1.5. LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched peptides has been performed as in Bienvenut et al.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.4 software was used for protein identification and co/post-translational modification characterization using the E. coli K12 strain reference proteome subset extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112) which also included the sequence of the recombinant proteins AtNAA10, AtNAA15, AtNAA70. Trypsin/P rules were used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, Lys acetylation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 25 are retained for the final data treatment. To extract specifically N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported in XML format and submitted to an in-house script written in python. The parsing function searched for modifications and collected peptides with defined modifications such as d0/d3-NTA.  SILProNAc quantification required the aid of Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to combine the processing of the raw data and Mascot identification results. Extraction parameters, protein identification and quantitation parameters were optimized as described in Bienvenut et al. (same issue). Mascot Distiller raw quantification results were exported in xml file which was processed by an in house Python script (EnCOUNTer, Manuscript in preparation) providing the calculation of the N-terminus acetylation yield for each distinct protein N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Protein N(&#x3b1;) -terminal acetylation represents one of the most abundant protein modifications of higher eukaryotes. In humans, six N(&#x3b1;) -acetyltransferases (Nats) are responsible for the acetylation of approximately 80% of the cytosolic proteins. N-terminal protein acetylation has not been evidenced in organelles of metazoans, but in higher plants is a widespread modification not only in the cytosol but also in the chloroplast. In this study, we identify and characterize the first organellar-localized Nat in eukaryotes. A primary sequence-based search in Arabidopsis thaliana revealed seven putatively plastid-localized Nats of which AT2G39000 (AtNAA70) showed the highest conservation of the acetyl-CoA binding pocket. The chloroplastic localization of AtNAA70 was demonstrated by transient expression of AtNAA70:YFP in Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts. Homology modeling uncovered a significant conservation of tertiary structural elements between human HsNAA50 and AtNAA70. The in vivo acetylation activity of AtNAA70 was demonstrated on a number of distinct protein N(&#x3b1;) -termini with a newly established global acetylome profiling test after expression of AtNAA70 in E. coli. AtNAA70 predominately acetylated proteins starting with M, A, S and T, providing an explanation for most protein N-termini acetylation events found in chloroplasts. Like HsNAA50, AtNAA70 displays N(&#x3b5;) -acetyltransferase activity on three internal lysine residues. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001947 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001947).

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Atnaa70, Nα-acetyltransferase, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy V Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.


