### Accession
PXD021788

### Title
Human vitreous TMT labelled LC-MS/MS

### Description
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is a severe complication of diabetes and can cause blindness. However, the available therapeutic modalities to PDR have unsatisfactory efficacies and incur adverse effects, which is due to the paucity in the understanding of pathogenic mechanisms responsible for the disease. In this study, tandem mass tag labeling technology combined with liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry were utilized to identify differentially expressed proteins in vitreous humor of patients with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and PDR.

### Sample Protocol
Vitreous humor samples were collected during vitrectomy from the patients with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD, control group) or PDR (PDR group). The samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Total protein concentration was measured. The 100 μg pritein from each sample were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. The TMT-labelled digested peptides were pre-prepared off-line and examined by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The FC was reported as the ratio of the abundance of a particular protein in the PDR group over its abundance in the RRD group. The differentially expressed proteins were screened out using the filtering criteria as P value < 0.05 and FC > 1.20 or < 0.83. Moreover, GO enrichment, KEGG pathway, and PPI network were analyzed. The GO enrichment of differentially expressed proteins were determined by DAVID 6.8 (http://david-d.ncifcrf.gov) software. The PPI network was constructed by introducing the information from the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting genes (STRING) database into Cytoscape (3.5.1. version) software and delineating the interactive network.

### Publication Abstract
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is a severe complication of diabetes and can cause blindness. However, the available therapeutic modalities to PDR have unsatisfactory efficacies and incur adverse effects, which is due to the paucity in the understanding of pathogenic mechanisms responsible for the disease. In this study, tandem mass tag labeling technology combined with liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry were utilized to identify differentially expressed proteins in vitreous humor of patients with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and PDR. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021788. Afterwards, the downregulated protein expression of Cathepsin B, D, and L was verified in vitreous and serum of another cohort. The gene expression profiling of the 3 cathepsins was confirmed in blood cells of an extra cohort. Furthermore, in high glucose (HG)-treated retinal vascular endothelial cell cultures recapitulating the cathepsin expression patterns, Cathepsin B or D downregulation mediated the HG-induced anti-autophagic and pro-apoptotic effects, thereby may contribute to vascular lesions under hyperglycemia. This study demonstrates previously undescribed expression patterns of cathepsins, reveals a novel cathepsin-involved pathogenic mechanism under PDR, and sheds light on potential therapeutic targets to this debilitating retinal disease.

### Keywords
Ctsb, Ctsd, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University Eye Hospital, Eye Institute and School of Optometry
Eye Institute and School of Optometry, Tianjin Medical University Eye Hospital,

### Submitter
Yan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Zhang
Eye Institute and School of Optometry, Tianjin Medical University Eye Hospital,


