### Accession
PXD026435

### Title
Schistosoma mansoni cercarial head and tail LC-MSMS

### Description
Label-Free Quantitative analysis of the proteome of infectious cercaria of the species Schistosoma mansoni. The proteome of the cercarial head and cercarial tail were compared to elucidate differences in stored proteins that control biological function during development.

### Sample Protocol
Cercarial heads and tails, ~60,000 per replicate, were thawed on ice for 30 minutes in a 300 µL 2% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Sonication was performed on all samples at 50% amplitude with a probe sonicator then vortexed; this procedure was repeated for four cycles with an intervening ice incubation between cycles. SDS detergent removal and alkalylation were performed following the FASP protocol (Wisniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009).  After homogenization was complete, samples were processed using the FASP protocol and Amicon Ultra MWCO 3K filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Samples were reduced and akalylated on filter with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Acros, Fair Lawn, NJ) and 25 mM iodoacetamide (Acros, Fair Lawn, NJ). Samples were then concentrated to a final volume of 40 µL in 8 M urea. The sample concentration was determined using the Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hecules, CA).  Following sample cleanup using FASP, 10 µg of total protein was aliquoted for digestion. The concentration of urea was reduced to 4 M using 50 mM Tris pH 8. Protein digestion was performed using mass spectrometry grade lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) using a digestion enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:40 and 2-hour incubation at 37oC. Following lysyl digestion, the urea concentration was further reduced to 2M using 50 mM Tris pH 8, and samples were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a digestion enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:40 overnight at 37 oC. Samples were then diluted using 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All identification and quantitation were performed using Peaks X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, CA) (Tran et al., 2019; Tran et al., 2016; Tran, Zhang, Xin, Shan, & Li, 2017). De Novo sequencing from spectra was performed with a parent mass error tolerance of 15.0 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.5 Da. Fixed and variable modifications accounted for in sequencing: Fixed- carbamidomethylation 57.02, and variable- deamidation (NQ) 0.98, oxidation (M) 15.99.  The max variable PTM per peptide was set at 3. Following de novo sequencing PEAKS database search using Wormbase parasite protein annotation release 14 with cRAP contaminants database. Following PEAKS database search PEAKS PTM search was performed with a de novo score threshold of 15 and a peptide hit threshold of 30.0 (-10logP). Following PEAKS PTM search, the SPIDER Homology match search was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomes require both molluscan and mammalian hosts for development. The larval cercaria exits the snail host and swims to identify and invade the mammalian host. The cercaria has two macrostructures, the head and the tail. The head invades the host, where it matures into an adult worm. The tail is lost after host invasion. Translation in the cercaria differs in each macrostructure, with higher levels of translation in the cercarial tail and little to no translational activity in the cercarial head. We compared the transcriptome and proteome of the cercarial head and tail and observed stark differences between the two macrostructures. We identified unique and differentially expressed transcripts and proteins, including ribosomal components expressed in higher levels in tails than in heads, which may explain the differences in translation levels between heads and tails. We also characterized the weak correlation between transcription and translation in infectious cercarial heads and tails.

### Keywords
Cercaria, Head, Tail, Schistosoma

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University 
Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, USA Center for Global Health and Disease,Case Western Reserve University, USA

### Submitter
Emmitt Jolly

### Lab Head
Dr Emmitt Randolph Jolly
Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, USA Center for Global Health and Disease,Case Western Reserve University, USA


