### Accession
PXD019951

### Title
Proteom-wide analysis of lysine N-homocysteinylation and Hcy-induced proteom changes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae - SILAC data

### Description
Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) inhibits growth and is cytotoxic to bacterial, yeast, and mammalian cells. The aim of this study was to determine the changes in proteome of the yeast induced by HHcy and map N-homocysteinylated sites. We identified 38 up- and 32-down-regulated proteins as well as 244 N-homocysteinylation sites in 98 proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae; with 57 sites in 34 proteins occurring in vivo. The bioinformatics analysis indicated that the N-homocysteinylated proteins were involved in a wide range of cellular functions with mostly cytosolic and ribosomal localizations. Furthermore, we discovered that lysine N-homocysteinylation sites are surrounded by neutral, hydrophobic and buried amino acid residues, and 60% of them occur within helix. The KEGG enrichment pathway analysis of these N-Hcy-proteins suggested that N-homocysteinylation disrupts metabolism of amino acids, ribosome biogenesis and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. These findings suggest that protein N-homocysteinylation and dysregulation of cellular proteostasis affecting ribosomal proteins, biosynthesis of amino acids and changes in basic cellular pathways signaling are involved in the toxicity of HHcy in yeast. Homologous proteins are likely to be involved in HHcy toxicity in human and animal cells. We believe that the collection of N-homocysteinylation sites presented here is an important resource for future functional studies of N-homocysteinylation in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC (stable isotope labeling in cell culture) based proteomics quantification was used to study the proteome change due to Hcy treatment. Protein solutions were subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 μl of 0.1 μg/µl trypsin. Peptides mixture was acidify with 5% TFA to final concentration 0.1%.  The resulting peptide mixtures were applied to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched with MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 version, against UniProt reference database (6723 protein entries), with following settings: digestion Trypsin-specific, max 2 missed cleavages, variable modification: methionine oxidation and protein n-term acetylation, match between runs (window 0.7 min., alignment 20min), type of search: standard, multiplicity: 2, heavy label Lys8. Protein FDR 0.01. Silac Ratio for given protein was defined as heavy intensity divided by light intensity. Further analysis was done both with Scaffold Q+S platform and by methods described in next sections. Data are deposited at PrideRepository

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation by a homocysteine (Hcy) metabolite, Hcy-thiolactone, is an emerging post-translational modification (PTM) that occurs in all tested organisms and has been linked to human diseases. The yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is widely used as a model eukaryotic organism in biomedical research, including studies of protein PTMs. However, patterns of global protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation in yeast are not known. Here, we identified 68 <i>in vivo</i> and 197 <i>in vitro N</i>-homocysteinylation sites at protein lysine residues (<i>N</i>-Hcy-Lys). Some of the <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation sites overlap with other previously identified PTM sites. Protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation <i>in vivo</i>, induced by supplementation of yeast cultures with Hcy, which elevates Hcy-thiolactone levels, was accompanied by significant changes in the levels of 70 yeast proteins (38 up-regulated and 32 down-regulated) involved in the ribosomal structure, amino acid biosynthesis, and basic cellular pathways. Our study provides the first global survey of <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation and accompanying changes in the yeast proteome caused by elevated Hcy level. These findings suggest that protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation and dysregulation of cellular proteostasis may contribute to the toxicity of Hcy in yeast. Homologous proteins and <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation sites are likely to be involved in Hcy-related pathophysiology in humans and experimental animals. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020821.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, N-homocysteinylation, Yeast, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Poznan University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Joanna Perła-Kajan
Poznan University of Life Sciences


