### Accession
PXD015610

### Title
Proteomic analysis of brain region and gender-specific synaptic protein expression in the adult mouse brain

### Description
In a wide range of synaptopathies a sex/gender bias in prevalence and clinical course has been reported. Therefore, analysis of the synaptic proteinaceous inventory in different brain regions in males and females is very desirable in understanding the molecular basis of brain function and the etiology of its diseases. In this study we analyzed the synaptic proteome of the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, striatum and cerebellum in male and female mice. Our efforts should serve as a neurobiological framework to better understand the regional and sex/gender-specific synaptic function both in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
- Isolation and enrichment of synaptic junctions by ultracentrifugation, - Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), - UPLC-ESI-MS/MS (Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC + Waters Synapt G2S mass spectrometer), - Data-independent acquisition (UDMSE)

### Data Protocol
- Raw data processing by Apex3D (v2.128.9.0) and Pep3D (v2.96.0.0), - Peptide/protein identification by iaDBs (v2.135.0), - Label-free quantification by ISOQuant (v1.8)

### Publication Abstract
Genetic disruption of synaptic proteins results in a whole variety of human neuropsychiatric disorders including intellectual disability, schizophrenia or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In a wide range of these so-called synaptopathies a sex bias in prevalence and clinical course has been reported. Using an unbiased proteomic approach, we analyzed the proteome at the interaction site of the pre- and postsynaptic compartment, in the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, striatum and cerebellum of male and female adult C57BL/6J mice. We were able to reveal a specific repertoire of synaptic proteins in different brain areas as it has been implied before. Additionally, we found a region-specific set of novel synaptic proteins differentially expressed between male and female individuals including the strong ASD candidates DDX3X, KMT2C, MYH10 and SET. Being the first comprehensive analysis of brain region-specific synaptic proteomes from male and female mice, our study provides crucial information on sex-specific differences in the molecular anatomy of the synapse. Our efforts should serve as a neurobiological framework to better understand the influence of sex on synapse biology in both health and disease.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Synaptic junction, Striatum, Sex/gender bias, Prefrontal cortex, Hippocampus, Label-free quantification, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Mainz
University Medical Center Mainz Insitute for Immunology Langenbeckstr. 1, 55118 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University Medical Center Mainz Insitute for Immunology Langenbeckstr. 1, 55118 Mainz, Germany


