### Accession
PXD034368

### Title
Large-scale Top-down Proteomics of the Arabidopsis thaliana Leaf and Chloroplast Proteomes

### Description
We present a large-scale top-down proteomics study of plant leaf and chloroplast proteins, achieving the identification of over 4700 unique proteoforms. Using capillary zone electrophoresis coupled with tandem mass spectrometry analysis of offline size-exclusion chromatography fractions, we identify 3198 proteoforms for total leaf and 1836 proteoforms for chloroplast, with 1024 and 363 proteoforms having post-translational modifications (PTMs), respectively. The electrophoretic mobility prediction of CZE allowed us to validate PTMs that impact the charge state such as acetylation and phosphorylation. Identified PTMs included Trp (di)oxidation events on six chloroplast proteins that may represent novel targets of singlet oxygen sensing. Furthermore, our top-down proteomics data provides direct experimental evidence of the N- and C-terminal residues of numerous mature proteoforms from chloroplast, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and other sub-cellular localizations. With this information, we propose transit peptide cleavage sites and correct sub-cellular localization signal predictions. This large-scale analysis illustrates the power of top-down proteoform identification of PTMs and intact sequences that can benefit our understanding of both the structure and function of hundreds of plant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Total leaf sample: Two trays of eight-week-old A. thaliana (ecotype Columbia-0) were grown at 16/8 light/dark photoperiod, 20 °C. Leaves were cut from 64 plants, pooled and flash frozen in a mortar with liquid nitrogen, and thoroughly ground. The powder was then mixed with a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 2% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail by pipetting, and then vortexed for 25 s. After centrifugation (13,000 rpm for 2.5 min), the supernatant containing the extracted proteins was collected and stored in -80 °C. Chloroplast sample: 4 trays (128 plants) of 39-day-old A. thaliana Col-0 were grown at 10/14 light/dark photoperiod. Leaves were cut and washed in pre-cold water, and ground in isolation buffer (330 mM sorbitol, 20 mM Hepes, 13 mM Tris-HCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% fat-free BSA, 5 mM ascorbic acid, and 5 mM reduced cysteine, and phosphatase inhibitors) using a Waring blender with medium intensity for 10 seconds. Lysate was filtered through 1 layer of gauze, and then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1500g. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in the wash buffer (330 mM sorbitol and 50 mM Hepes with phosphatase inhibitors). Pellet was washed and re-collected with 5 min centrifugation at 1500 g, after which the pellet was resuspended in 6 mL osmotic shocking buffer (0.6 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tricine, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors), sitting on ice for 30 minutes. Samples were collected in 15 mL falcon tubes, lyophilized, and stored in -80 °C. A 4:1 (v/v) ratio of acetone was added to solubilized protein samples (both chloroplast and total leaf) with overnight precipitation. A 10,000 x g centrifugation removed the supernatant, and the protein pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), denatured at 37 °C for 30 minutes, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 30 minutes and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature without light for 20 minutes. Then, samples were desalted by a 30 kDa molecular weight cut off centrifugal filter (Millipore Sigma, Inc.) washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). Finally, sample was diluted into 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). Samples were fractionated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) in preparation for CZE-MS/MS analysis. For total leaf sample, the SEC column was 4.6 x 300 mm, 3 µm particles, 300 Å pores from Agilent, the mobile phase was 0.1% (v/v) FA, and the flow rate was 0.25 mL/min. The column temperature was kept at 40 °C. We collected 6 fractions from 10-22 min (2 min for each fraction) from 120 μL 1mg/mL samples for total leaf sample. For chloroplast sample, the Bio SEC-5 column (4.6 x 300 mm, 3 µm particles, 300 Å pores) from Agilent was used. The mobile phase was 0.4% (v/v) FA, and the flow rate was 0.25 mL/min. The column temperature was kept at 40 °C. We collected 9 fractions from 10-36 min (4 min for each fraction except 2 min for the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th fraction) from 60 μL 2mg/mL protein input. An automated ECE-001 CE autosampler and a commercialized electro-kinetically pumped sheath flow CE−MS interface from CMP Scientific (Brooklyn, NY) was coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The protocol of a 100-min CZE-MS/MS and parameters of QE-HF were according to McCool, et al [26]. Briefly, a fused silica capillary (50 µm i.d., 360 µm o.d., 1 m) was coated with linear polyacrylamide (LPA) and etched with hydrofluoric acid at the end near the CE-MS interface to reduce the outer diameter of the capillary. Acetic acid, 10% (v/v), was used as the background electrolyte. The sheath buffer was 0.2% (v/v) formic acid containing 10% (v/v) methanol. Sample injection was carried out by applying pressure (5 psi) for 40 seconds (200 nL) at the sample injection end and the injection periods were calculated based on Poiseuille’s law for different sample loading volume. For chloroplast sample, the injection amount is 200/ 250 nL. And for total leaf sample, the injection volume is 500 nL. 30 kV of high voltage was applied at the injection end of the capillary and around 2-2.2 kV was applied for electrospray.MS parameters are listed as follows. Microscan is 3 for both full MS and MS/MS. For full MS, the resolution was 240,000 at m/z 200, and AGC target value was 1E6 with 50 ms maximum injection time. The scan range was 600-2000 m/z and the top 5 ions of the highest intensity in full MS were isolated with a 4 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a 20% normalized collision energy. The resolution for MS/MS is 120,000 at m/z 200, and the AGC target was 1E5 with 200 ms maximum injection time. Intact protein mode and exclude isotopes settings were on. Proteins with 1-5 charge state were excluded and the dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s

### Data Protocol
All .raw files were converted to mzML by MSconvert tool and then analyzed with the TopFD and TopPIC pipeline with an estimated 1% FDR at the spectrum level and 5% FDR at the proteoform level. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The maximum number of unexpected modifications was 2. The precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were 15 ppm. The maximum mass shift of unknown modifications was 500 Da.

### Publication Abstract
We present a large-scale top-down proteomics (TDP) study of plant leaf and chloroplast proteins, achieving the identification of over 4700 unique proteoforms. Using capillary zone electrophoresis coupled with tandem mass spectrometry analysis of offline size-exclusion chromatography fractions, we identify 3198 proteoforms for total leaf and 1836 proteoforms for chloroplast, with 1024 and 363 proteoforms having post-translational modifications, respectively. The electrophoretic mobility prediction of capillary zone electrophoresis allowed us to validate post-translational modifications that impact the charge state such as acetylation and phosphorylation. Identified modifications included Trp (di)oxidation events on six chloroplast proteins that may represent novel targets of singlet oxygen sensing. Furthermore, our TDP data provides direct experimental evidence of the N- and C-terminal residues of numerous mature proteoforms from chloroplast, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and other sub-cellular localizations. With this information, we suggest true transit peptide cleavage sites and correct sub-cellular localization signal predictions. This large-scale analysis illustrates the power of top-down proteoform identification of post-translational modifications and intact sequences that can benefit our understanding of both the structure and function of hundreds of plant proteins.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Post-translational modification, Transit peptide, Proteoform, Singlet oxygen, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University


