### Accession
PXD027933

### Title
Proteomic profiling to predict therapeutic response to anti-PD1 therapy in advanced melanoma – SWATH MS dataset - glycopeptides

### Description
MS-based proteomics based on data-independent acquisition / SWATH MS was used to study the response of melanoma patients to anti-PD1 therapy. Human serum samples were collected from patients at the start of their therapy and later categorized into responders and non-responders based on clinical outcome. Samples were subjected to glycocapture and glycopeptides were quantified by SWATH MS followed by analysis using mapDIA to protein levels.

### Sample Protocol
Solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycoproteins of serum samples was performed in a multi-well format using an automated liquid handling system (Thermo Versette). Glycoproteins were bound to tip columns (Thermo Disposable Automation Research Tips) filled with resin (Bio-Rad, Affi-Gel Hydrazine resin) using coupling buffer (100mM sodium acetate buffer, 1M NaCl, pH5.5), and alinine. Afterwards, non-glycoproteins were washed off with urea buffer (8M urea, 0.4M ammonium bicarbonate, pH8.0). Reduction and alkylation of glycoproteins was performed with 0.5M TCEP (10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 132mM IAA (iodoacetamide). Tryptic digestion took place overnight at 37°C. Several washing steps were performed to remove all non-glycopeptides before releasing and harvesting N-linked glycopeptides with PNGase F (NEB). Eluted samples were de-salted by C18 clean-up (The Nest Group) and dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Labconco CentriVap). N-linked glycopeptides were resuspended and corresponding to 2µl of patient blood samples were used for each sample MS injection. iRT peptides (Biognosys RT-kit WR) were added and peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography was performed on a NanoLC-Ultra 2D Plus system (Eksigent-AB Sciex) with linear LC gradient for 120min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Subsequent MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer operated in SWATH MS mode. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Recorded raw SWATH data files were converted into mzXML format using Proteo Wizard. openSWATH integrated in the iPortal workflow was used for targeted data extraction using a serum N-linked glycopeptides spectral library generated during a previous study ( Röst HL, et al Nat Biotechnol. 2014;32:219–23.). After openSWATH identification, feature intensities were filtered through SWATH2stats to reduce data size and remove low-quality features before final data quantification. Then data was imported into MSstats (v2.3.5) by which data was converted to relative protein abundance to obtain fold changes and p-values of all proteins compared, using the statistical analysis supported by MSstats and mapDIA. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma; serum; immunodepletion; drug response; therapeutic efficacy; anti-pd1 therapy; biomarker discovery

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


