### Accession
PXD016534

### Title
Impaired iloprost-induced platelet inhibition and phosphoproteome changes in patients with confirmed pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia, linked to genetic mutations in GNAS

### Description
Patients diagnosed with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (PHP Ia) suffer from hormonal resistance. This is often accompanied by abnormal postural and facial features, brachydactyly and dermal calcifications, a condition classified as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) syndrome. Typically, this is the result of maternal inheritance of a mutation (or epigenetic defect) in the GNAS complex locus, encoding for the GTPase subunit Gsα. However, accurate diagnosis is often difficult. In blood platelets, Gsα couples to receptors for prostaglandin E1 and iloprost, and provides a master signal for platelet inhibition via adenylyl cyclase and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Here, we evaluated the iloprost-induced functional changes and phosphoproteome in platelets from eight patients with confirmed or suspected PHP Ia, one of the largest cohorts examined. Our aim was to asses how current proteomics techniques can help to find phosphorylation aberrations in these patients, and hence to improve future diagnosis  Platelets from six out of eight patients (4 families), with confirmed GNAS mutations, displayed impairments in Gsα-dependent functional responses, i.e. VASP phosphorylation, aggregation, and microfluidic thrombus formation. Detailed analysis of platelet phosphoproteome revealed a consistent set of 2,516 protein phosphorylation sites, of which 453 were recognised as regulated by iloprost-Gsα, and 263 were upregulated. In five patients with AHO, we detected impairments in the iloprost-induced platelet phosphoproteome that were linked to a dysregulated platelet inhibition. The changes in these patients concerned: (i) both upregulated and downregulated phosphopeptides; (ii) a high Gsα and PKA dependency of the upregulated phosphopeptides; (iii) multiple phosphoproteins implicated in key platelet functions and biological pathways. Confirmation of these changes in iloprost-induced phosphoproteome was obtained using a panel of 14 targeted phosphopeptide assays. In contrast, or one patient with GNAS mutation diagnosed as non-AHO, we noticed reversed changes in the iloprost phosphoproteome.  This combination of phosphoproteomic approaches can be a powerful tool to assist in future molecular diagnosis of patients with suspected PHP Ia. 

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analyses, purified washed platelets (5 × 108/mL) in Hepes buffer pH 7.45 were incubated with vehicle or iloprost (1- 10 nM) for 1.0 min at 37 °C. Reactions were stopped by addition of 50% lysis buffer, and incubation on ice. Protein digestion and iTRAQ labelling for proteomics analysis. Lysed samples of the highly purified platelets (5 × 108/mL) were diluted to the same protein concentration. Cysteines were reduced (30 min, 56 °C) and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated (30 min, room temperature, in darkness) with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 30 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Samples of sets I-IV were handled in equivalent manners, as described below. For sets I and II, subsamples containing 100 µg of protein were diluted 10-fold with ice-cold ethanol and incubated for 1 h at -40 °C. The mixtures were centrifuged for 30 min at 4 °C and 18,000 g, and supernatants were carefully removed. The precipitates were washed using 50 µL of ice-cold acetone, followed by a 15 min centrifugation. Precipitated proteins were re-solubilised into 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, and digested in-solution with trypsin at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio, with a final concentration of 0.2 M guanidine hydrochloride, 2 mM CaCl2 and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (14 h, 37 °C). Digests were individually labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex labels. After drying in vacuum, the samples were dissolved in iTRAQ 8-plex dissolution buffer, and labelled according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples per set were pooled at 1:1 ratios, were desalted by C18 solid phase extraction  and dried under vacuum. For sets III and IV, 150 µg protein per sample was loaded onto a 30 kDa molecular weight cut off spin filter to perform filter-aided sample preparation. Proteins were digested (14 h, overnight) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.2 M guanidine hydrochloride, 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.5 with trypsin 1:25. The peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min. To increase peptide yield, filters were additionally washed with 50 µL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and subsequently with 50 µL water. Digests were individually labelled with TMT 10-plex labels. Equal peptide amounts of vacuum dried samples were reconstituted into 100 µL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and labelled with 0.8 mg reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples per set were pooled at 1:1 ratios, and further treated as samples of sets I+II. The multiplexed iTRAQ or TMT pools were analysed for determination of the global proteome and the phosphoproteome, after TiO2 enrichment. Hereto, 10% (iTRAQ) or 3.5% (TMT) of a pooled mixture was pre-fractioned on a U3000 HPLC by reversed-phase chromatography (C18 column; BioBasic-18 0.5 mm ID x 15 cm 5 µm particle size 300 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient. For iTRAQ pools, this gradient was ranging from 3-50% solvent B (mobile phase A: 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.0, B: 10 mM ammonium acetate, 84% acetonitrile, pH 6.0, 75 min). For TMT pools, a linear gradient ranged from 3-50% solvent B (mobile phase A: 10 mM ammonium formate pH 8.0, B: 10 mM ammonium formate, 84% acetonitrile, pH 8.0, 75 min) to obtain 20 concatenated fractions for LC-MS analysis.  For phosphopeptide analysis, the remaining of the pooled iTRAQ or TMT samples were subjected to a TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment protocol. Briefly, samples were resuspended in TiO2 loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid, 1 M glycolic acid), and incubated with TiO2 beads for 10 min. Incubations first had a peptide to bead ratio of 1:6, and then a ratio of 1:3. For set III or IV, an additional incubation at 1:1.5 ratio was performed. Subsequently, the beads of all incubation steps were combined in one Eppendorf tube, and washed and eluted. In short, 80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid was used for washing step 1, and 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for washing step 2. The phosphopeptides were eluted by incubation with 1% NH4OH for 10 min. The eluates were acidified using formic acid (pH < 2). To obtain better phosphopeptide recovery, the enrichment procedure was repeated once with a slight variation, i.e. a loading buffer of 70% acetonitrile, 2% trifluoroacetic acid, and a washing buffer of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Phosphopeptides were eluted as described above and then acidified. The acidic phosphopeptides were desalted using Oligo R3 micro-columns, and fractionated on a U3000 RSLC system in hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) mode (Polar phase TSKgel Amide-80; 150 µm ID × 15 cm length; 5 µm particle size; 80 Å pore size, Tosoh Bioscience, Tessenderlo, Belgium), using a binary gradient ranging from 10-35% solvent B (solvent A: 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid; solvent B: 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) in 40 min (flow rate: 4 µL/min). A total of 9 fractions per set were collected for subsequent LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive or Lumos mass spectrometer on-line couple to nano-LC. Raw data was then processed in Proteome Discoverer. As Proteome Discoverer only provided 7 (9) ratios for the 8 (10) samples, an artificial 113/113 (126/126) ratio was created and set to 1.0 per protein and all ratios were log2 transformed. Per channel, the median ratio over all proteins was calculated, from which the median of all eight (ten) values was determined to define normalisation factors per iTRAQ (TMT) channel. These factors compensated for systematic errors (i.e. unequal sample amounts derived from pipetting errors or inaccurate protein determination results) and allowed to obtain normalised ratios per protein. The normalised ratios were divided by the median (log2 transformed) over all eight (ten) values to obtain scaled normalised abundance values (NAVs) for all proteins and channels. The NAVs (log2 transformed) allowed determination of inter-sample ratios for platelets from the patients and control subjects for each condition. Inter-individual variation for the global proteome was estimated by separate analysis of the samples from all subjects (combined sets) in comparison to averaged control values (C1-4). Differences from average control values were thresholded based on altered ratios log2 transformed (≥25% up or downregulation: range of -0.322 to +0.322). For determination of confident phosphorylation sites at the peptide level, a ready-to-use Excel macro provided by Mechtler lab (http://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=phosphors) was used. Data were normalised as described above. NAVs were calculated per phospho-site, as described for the global proteome. Average NAVs were calculated per iTRAQ or TMT channel, after grouping per phosphopeptide sequence, phosphorylation site and protein. Treatment effects were estimated based on an arbitrary cut-off of ≥25% up- or downregulation (log2 range of -0.322 to +0.322). Thresholds for relevant changes in patient samples were more strictly set at 2 × (-0.322 to +0.322); comparisons were made to mean control NAVs, for up- or downregulation per phosphopeptide.

### Publication Abstract
Novel platelet and megakaryocyte transcriptome analysis allows prediction of the full or theoretical proteome of a representative human platelet. Here, we integrated the established platelet proteomes from six cohorts of healthy subjects, encompassing 5.2&#xa0;k proteins, with two novel genome-wide transcriptomes (57.8&#xa0;k mRNAs). For 14.8&#xa0;k protein-coding transcripts, we assigned the proteins to 21 UniProt-based classes, based on their preferential intracellular localization and presumed function. This classified transcriptome-proteome profile of platelets revealed: (i) Absence of 37.2&#xa0;k genome-wide transcripts. (ii) High quantitative similarity of platelet and megakaryocyte transcriptomes (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.75) for 14.8&#xa0;k protein-coding genes, but not for 3.8&#xa0;k RNA genes or 1.9&#xa0;k pseudogenes (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.43-0.54), suggesting redistribution of mRNAs upon platelet shedding from megakaryocytes. (iii) Copy numbers of 3.5&#xa0;k proteins that were restricted in size by the corresponding transcript levels (iv) Near complete coverage of identified proteins in the relevant transcriptome (log2fpkm&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.20) except for plasma-derived secretory proteins, pointing to adhesion and uptake of such proteins. (v) Underrepresentation in the identified proteome of nuclear-related, membrane and signaling proteins, as well proteins with low-level transcripts. We then constructed a prediction model, based on protein function, transcript level and (peri)nuclear localization, and calculated the achievable proteome at&#x2009;~&#x2009;10&#xa0;k proteins. Model validation identified 1.0&#xa0;k additional proteins in the predicted classes. Network and database analysis revealed the presence of 2.4&#xa0;k proteins with a possible role in thrombosis and hemostasis, and 138 proteins linked to platelet-related disorders. This genome-wide platelet transcriptome and (non)identified proteome database thus provides a scaffold for discovering the roles of unknown platelet proteins in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human platelets, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Tmt, Itraq, Albright hereditary osteodystrophy

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


