### Accession
PXD015504

### Title
Impact of in ovo administered pioneer colonizers on intestinal proteome of young broiler chickens

### Description
Pioneer colonization of the gastrointestinal tract by bacteria is thought to have major influence on neonatal tissue development. Previous studies have shown in ovo inoculation of embryos with saline (S), species of Citrobacter (C, C2), or lactic-acid bacteria (LAB) resulted in an altered microbiome on day of hatch (DOH) and by 10 days of age. The current study investigated GIT proteomic changes in relation to different inoculations at DOH and by 10 days of age.

### Sample Protocol
Once all chicks were hatched, 10 chicks were randomly chosen from among the hatchers within each of the treatments and were immediately euthanized via cervical dislocation. The intestine was removed, from the duodenum to the cloaca. Tissues were placed in individual 2mL tubes and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Immediately post-hatch, the remaining 128 chicks were placed into treatment-separate brooder battery cages and had ad libitum access to a standard corn-soy diet and water (Nutrient Requirements of Poultry, 1994). At 10 days post-hatch, 12 chicks per treatment were randomly selected for ileal proteome analysis. The tissue of the region above the ileocecal junction designated as lower ileum was collected. Since there were three mortalities in the CF, only nine birds were sampled for this treatment. Ileum tissue was also frozen and stored at -80 °C until further use.   Once GIT samples were thawed, a cumulative total of 0.1g was individually placed into 5mL of buffer (8 M urea/2 M thiourea, 2 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris, 5% SDS, pH 6.8). The extraction protocol is a modified version described previously by Iqbal et al., 2004a and Kong et al., 2016a. In brief, samples were homogenized for 5 seconds (PRO250 Homogenizer, Pro Scientific, Oxford, CT, USA), then 500 µl of solution were placed in tubes 2ml tubes containing 0.1g stainless steel beads (SSB14B Next Advance, Averill Park, NY, USA). Samples were homogenized for 3 min total in 30-second intervals (MiniBeadbeater-16, Model 607, BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and centrifuged at 4ºC at 14,000 rpg for 20 min. The supernatant was collected, aliquoted, and placed into -80ºC until further use.   To ensure proper extraction, concentration of total protein was quantified with the Bradford assay (Bradford reagent, VWR, Suwanee, GA, USA) and a standard bovine serum albumin curve (VWR, Suwanee, GA, USA) on a Synergy HTX multi-mode plate reader (BioTek U.S., Winooski, VT, USA). Samples were mixed to create pooled samples from two birds per treatment/time and sent to the Ohio State University Proteomics Core lab for in solution digestion and mass spectrometry performing established methods.

### Data Protocol
Samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and then resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. A total of 5mL of DTT (5[Symbol]g/[Symbol]L in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added, and the samples were incubated at 56ºC for 15 min. After incubation, 5[Symbol]L of iodoacetamide (15 mg/ml in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added, and the samples were kept in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample with an estimation of 1:20/1:100 enzyme-substrate ratio set at 37ºC overnight. The reaction was quenched the following day by adding acetic acid for acidification. Once samples were quenched, the peptide concentration was measured by Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000; Waltham, MA, USA).   Capillary-liquid chromatography-nanospray tandem mass spectrometry (Capillary-LC/MS/MS) of global protein identification was performed on a Thermo Fisher Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were separated on a Thermo Nano C18 column (UltiMate™ 3000 HPLC system, Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA). The MS/MS data sequences were scanned and based on the preview mode data dependent TopSpeed™ method with CID and ETD as fragmentation methods. The raw data was searched on Sequest via proteome Discoverer (Proteome Discoverer™ software, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The data were searched against the most recent Uniprot Gallus gallus database for the identification of proteins. Only proteins with less than 0.05 false discovery rate (FDR) were reported. Proteins with a Mascot score of 50 or higher with a minimum of two unique peptides from one protein having a -b or -y ion sequence tag of five residues or better were accepted. Any modifications or low score peptide/protein identifications were manually checked for validation.

### Publication Abstract
Given that recent advances in metagenomics have highlighted the importance of intestinal microbes for poultry health, there has been a corresponding search for early manipulation strategies of intestinal microbiota in order to advance immune system development and optimize functional properties of growth. In this study, we used the <i>in ovo</i> technique as an experimental model to address how early bacterial intestinal colonization could affect the development and establishment of the mature ileal microbiota. Inoculations containing one of the following: 0.2 mL of 0.9% sterile saline (S), approximately 10<sup>2</sup> cells of <i>Citrobacter freundii</i> (CF), <i>Citrobacter</i> species (C2) or lactic acid bacteria mixture (L) were administered via <i>in ovo</i> into the amnion. Results showed that <i>Enterobacteriaceae</i> abundance was negatively correlated with aging, although its high population at day of hatch affected the microbiota composition, delaying mature microbiota establishment. L treatment increased colonization of butyrate-producing bacteria by 3 and 10 days, and segmented filamentous bacteria in the lower ileum by 10 days. On the other hand, L-probiotic decreased the population of <i>Enterococcaceae</i>. In addition, L and C2 microbial communities were less diverse at 10 than 3 days of age in the upper ileum. Importantly, these findings provide a valuable resource for a potential study model for interactions between microbial colonization and associated immune responses. In conclusion, our analysis demonstrates that intestinal pioneer colonizers play a critical role in driving the course of microbial community composition and diversity over time, in which early life exposure to L-based probiotic supported selection alongside greater colonization of symbiotic populations in the ileum of young broilers.

### Keywords
Probiotics, Early colonization, Immunity

### Affiliations
Animal Sciences Department, Ohio Sate University
Ohio State University

### Submitter
Denise Russi Rodrigues

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa Bielke
Animal Sciences Department, Ohio Sate University


