### Accession
PXD007743

### Title
Two cancer-promoting stromal gene expression programs depend on lung function

### Description
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an independent risk factor for lung cancer, suggesting that COPD stroma favors cancer initiation. Therefore, we used proteomics and polysome-profiling to identify gene expression programs that distinguish stroma of patients harboring lung cancer from those that do not, with varied COPD severities. This profiling unveiled distinct COPD-dependent cancer-associated gene expression programs predominantly manifesting as alterations in mRNA translation. Mechanistically, such programs are downstream of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in mild COPD and pathological extracellular matrix in more severe COPD; and both programs parallel activation of distinct pro-cancer fibroblast-derived secretomes. Therefore, depending upon COPD severity, the lung stroma can exist in two states favoring cancer initiation, which likely result in distinct disease entities.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Processing: Lung tissue samples (100 mg) were washed in 1X PBS solution until cleared of blood. Washed samples were placed in Eppendorf SafeLock tubes (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY) containing 75 μL 2.0 mm Zirconium Oxide beads, 50 μL 1.0 mm Zirconium Oxide beads (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY), 50 μL 0.5 mm Zirconium Oxide beads with 6X sample-volume lysis buffer consisting of 0.4 M TEAB, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20% methanol and 4 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The Bullet Blender Storm bead mill homogenizer (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY) was utilized to thoroughly homogenize the sample at 4o C and maximum agitation for 10 minutes (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY). Thorough lysis membrane-bound protein release, and complete cellular membrane disruption was achieved using a Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA). The samples underwent thirty cycles at 36o C, 35,000 psi for 30 seconds and ~0 psi for 10 seconds in pressure cycling technology tubes (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA) containing 150 μL of sample buffer. Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to achieve a final concentration of 8 mM. The samples were transferred to a 1.6 mL microfuge Protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY) and incubated 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were microfuged at 4o C, 12,000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant transferred to a new Protein LoBind microfuge tube (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY). Enzymatic (Tryptic) Digestion of Protein: Total protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A 60 μg aliquot of each sample was added to a 1.6 mL tube and all samples were brought to equal volume with sample lysis buffer without TCEP. Samples were diluted four-fold with mass spec grade water (Fisher Scientific W5SK-1, Pittsburgh, PA). Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a trypsin to total protein ratio of 1:30. Samples were incubated for 16 hours at 37o C, frozen at -80o C for 0.5 hours and dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Quantitative Mass Spectrometry (iTRAQ): Labeling and Detection: A 20 μg aliquot of each processed sample was labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ABSciex, Framingham, MA). Following the labeling reaction, all samples and controls were multiplexed, vacuum dried and purified using a Resprep 3 cc MCX cartridge (Restek, Bellefonte, PA). Protein Fractionation and Data Acquisition: Each sample was re-suspended in Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile) and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reversed-phase (RP) chromatography followed by fraction concatenation for 2D proteomic analysis. A MAGIC 2002 HPLC (Michrom BioResources, Inc., Auburn, CA) was used with a C18 Gemini-NX column, 150 mm x 2 mm internal diameter, 5 µm particle, 110 Å pore size (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA). The flow rate was 150 µl/minute with a gradient from 0-35% Buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 10:90 water:acetonitrile) over 60 minutes, followed by 35-60% over 5 minutes. Fractions were collected every 2 minutes and UV absorbance was monitored at 215 and 280 nm. Peptide containing fractions were divided into two equal numbered groups, “early” and “late”. The first “early” fraction was concatenated with the first “late” fraction, and so on. Concatenated samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in load solvent (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid).  Digested peptide mixtures were desalted with C18 resin according to the stop and go procedure(61). Aliquots of 1-1.5 µg of total peptide were dissolved in 5.5 µL of load solvent A (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid) and loaded directly onto a 12 cm X 75 µm internal diameter fused silica pulled-tip (New Objective Woburn, MA) capillary column packed in-house with MagicC18AQ  resin (5 µm, 200 Å pore size; Michrom BioResources Auburn, CA) with load solvent at a flow rate of 800 nL/min using an Eksigent 1D+LC nanoflow system (Dublin, CA) and a MicroAS autosampler. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 10–40% B Solvent over 55 at 320 nL/min. The column was mounted in a nanospray source directly in line with a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ data processing and normalization Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos XL Mass Spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP where they were converted to .mzML format using msconvert and then into .mgf files using MGF formatter. Protein Pilot 4.5 search was performed with a target-decoy version database generated from the Human UniProt database (10/1/2012) and ABSciex contaminant database. False discovery rate (FDR) analysis employed the Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software within the ProteinPilot suite of software. The resulting peptide level data was filtered (“used”=1 and Confidence>95%) and subjected to normaliztion. Normalization of iTRAQ data has been suggested to be most efficiently performed at the peptide level using linear models accounting for various biases such as those from unequal quantification of different peptides and that samples are distributed across multiple runs. To perform such normalization we recently developed the Normalization of Mass Spectrometry Data (NOMAD) algorithm in R (https://github.com/carlmurie/NOMAD). We performed default NOMAD normalization on log2 transformed data (which accounts for peptide, protein, iTRAQ run and iTRAQ label). Protein assembly using the default Tukey’s biweight robust mean of peptide signals was used to generate protein signals. Data were filtered per protein such that a maximum of 12 missing data points was allowed for inclusion in subsequent analysis. In total 1259 proteins were analyzed across the 58 samples. A random data set where sample classes were randomly sampled (using the sample function in “R”) for each protein separately was also generated and used to assess various expected distributions.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a known risk factor for developing lung cancer but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. We hypothesise that the COPD stroma contains molecular mechanisms supporting tumourigenesis.We conducted an unbiased multi-omic analysis to identify gene expression patterns that distinguish COPD stroma in patients with or without lung cancer. We obtained lung tissue from patients with COPD and lung cancer (tumour and adjacent non-malignant tissue) and those with COPD without lung cancer for profiling of proteomic and mRNA (both cytoplasmic and polyribosomal). We used the Joint and Individual Variation Explained (JIVE) method to integrate and analyse across the three datasets.JIVE identified eight latent patterns that robustly distinguished and separated the three groups of tissue samples (tumour, adjacent and control). Predictive variables that associated with the tumour, compared to adjacent stroma, were mainly represented in the transcriptomic data, whereas predictive variables associated with adjacent tissue, compared to controls, were represented at the translatomic level. Pathway analysis revealed extracellular matrix and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase-protein kinase B signalling pathways as important signals in the tumour adjacent stroma.The multi-omic approach distinguishes tumour adjacent stroma in lung cancer and reveals two stromal expression patterns associated with cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Copd, Transcriptomics, Lung cancer, Proteomics, Emphysema, Translatomics, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Division Medicine Department University of Minnesota - TC Minneapolis, MN
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Brian Sandri

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Wendt
Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Division Medicine Department University of Minnesota - TC Minneapolis, MN


