### Accession
PXD028950

### Title
Impact of fetal growth restriction on neonatal microglia proteome in rat.

### Description
Microglia activation is a key modulator of brain vulnerability in response to intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR). However, the consequences of IUGR on microglia development and on microglia proteome are still unknown. We used a model of IUGR induced by a gestational low-protein diet (LPD) in rat. Microglia were isolated from control and LPD animals at P1 and P4. The aim of this work was characterize the consequence of IUGR on microglia development and investigate the consequences of IUGR exposure on microglia proteome during the first postnatal days using a bioinformatics approach associated with functional assays.

### Sample Protocol
Primary microglial cells were sorted at P1 and P4 using MACS MicroBead Technology column-based magnetic cell isolation with CD11b/c antibody (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). Four brains per sample at P1 and 3 brains per sample at P4 were pooled in both CTRL and LPD experimental groups. In order to remove the bovine serum albumin (BSA) contamination, elution was performed in cold PBS1X and an additional wash step with cold PBS1X was performed after the final centrifugation.   Cells were solubilized in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. Protein extracts were clarified by centrifugation at 21’000×g for 1 hour at 4°C. Protein concentration of the supernatant was estimated and normalized using image intensity integration of the Coomassie blue G250-colored SDS PAGE, loaded with the same volume of each lysate. Bottom-up experiments tryptic peptides were obtained by Strap Micro Spin Column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Protifi, NY, USA). Briefly, 30μg of proteins from the above lysate were diluted to 100μL in lysis buffer. Proteins were digested during 14h at 37°C with 1µg Trypsin sequencing grade (Promega, Charbonnières-les-Bains, France). The Strap Micro Spin Column was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After speed-vacuum drying, eluted peptides were solubilized in 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) Stage-Tips. LC-MS analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). After drying, peptides from SCX Stage-Tip, the 5 fractions were solubilized in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA containing 10 % acetonitrile (ACN). One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length mounted to the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell, Australia) with a 120 minutes run time with a gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DDA PASEF mode with a 1.1 second/cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) mode enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in PASEF mode. This enabled a recurrent loop analysis of a maximum of the 120 most intense nLC-eluting peptides which were CID-fragmented between each full scan every 1.1 second. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 50 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive mode with the PASEF mode set to « on » in the 100-1.700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MSMS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the otof control software, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 2’500 arbitrary units (a.u.) and resequenced until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20’000 a.u. taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 0.40 s elution gap.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.17. The database used was a concatenation of Rattus norvegicus sequences from the Uniprot and-Swissprot databases (release 2020-10) and a list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin’s. The precursor’s and fragment’s mass tolerances were set to 20ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as permanent modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time 0.7 min window and an alignment time window of 20min. For differential analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were quality-checked using PTXQC, then imported into the Perseus software (version 1.6.14) to eliminate “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site”.  Protein set enrichment analysis was performed with GSEA (GSEA_4.1.0) developed by the Broad institute on the following experimental groups (CTRL and LPD P1; CTRL and LPD P4). Protein were ranked accordingly to the Signal2Noise metrics and the enrichment statistic was based on the weighted Kolmogorov–Smirnov-like. A phenotype permutation was performed 1000 times for the analysis and GSEA was used to identify protein sets against the Reactome database. Reactome pathways defined by a FDR <0.25 and by a p value <0.05 were considered as significant. Proteins differentially expressed were analyzed using the WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (http://www.webgestalt.org). An Over-Representation Analysis (ORA) against the Reactome and the geneontology (GO) database was performed in order to identify the enriched reactome pathway and biological process. Our specific microglia proteome data set was used as a reference protein set for the analysis.  Samples reproducibility was analyzed by a principal component analysis (PCA) performed on Log2 tranformed LFQ value appling the filter 100% valid values. Accordingly to the PCA results two outlier samples (1 CTRL P1 and 1 CTRL P4) were excluded from the analysis. Heat map were builted using Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus) and clusterization was analyzed by raw and columns Pearson Correaltion on Z-score transformed values. CTRL IL-1b and LPD IL-1b samples were excluded from the analysis and not included in the publication.

### Publication Abstract
Microglial activation is a key modulator of brain vulnerability in response to intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR). However, the consequences of IUGR on microglial development and the microglial proteome are still unknown. We used a model of IUGR induced by a gestational low-protein diet (LPD) in rats. Microglia, isolated from control and growth-restricted animals at P1 and P4, showed significant changes in the proteome between the two groups. The expression of protein sets associated with fetal growth, inflammation, and the immune response were significantly enriched in LPD microglia at P1 and P4. Interestingly, upregulation of protein sets associated with the oxidative stress response and reactive oxygen species production was observed at P4 but not P1. During development, inflammation-associated proteins were upregulated between P1 and P4 in both control and LPD microglia. By contrast, proteins associated with DNA repair and senescence pathways were upregulated in only LPD microglia. Similarly, protein sets involved in protein retrograde transport were significantly downregulated in only LPD microglia. Overall, these data demonstrate significant and multiple effects of LPD-induced IUGR on the developmental program of microglial cells, leading to an abnormal proteome within the first postnatal days.

### Keywords
Microglia; iugr; inflammation; proteome; brain development; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Inserm UMR 1141 NeuroDiderot, F-75019Paris
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Baud
Université de Paris, Inserm UMR 1141 NeuroDiderot, F-75019Paris


