### Accession
PXD038148

### Title
IP-MS of human YKT6 upon mutation of possible ULK1-phosphorylation sites

### Description
Autophagy is a catabolic process during which cytosolic material is enwrapped in a newly formed double membrane structure called the autophagosome, and subsequently targeted for degradation in the lytic compartment of the cell. The fusion of autophagosomes with the lytic compartment is a tightly regulated step and involves membrane-bound SNARE proteins. These play a crucial role as they promote lipid mixing and fusion of the opposing membranes. Among the SNARE proteins implicated in autophagy, the essential SNARE protein YKT6 is the only evolutionary conserved SNARE protein from yeast to human. Alterations in YKT6 function, in both mammalian cells and nematodes, produces early and late autophagy defects that result in reduced survival. Moreover, mammalian autophagosomal YKT6 is phospho-regulated by the ULK1 kinase, preventing premature bundling with the lysosomal SNARE proteins and autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Together, our findings reveal that timely regulation of theYKT6 phosphostatus is crucial throughout autophagy progression and cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Samples eluted from immunoprecipitation experiments were reduced and alkylated by adding 1 mM TCEP, 4 mM CAA (final concentration) in 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 and incubation for 10 min at 95°C. Digestion was performed with 500 ng LysC/Trypsin in 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 overnight (16 h) at 37°C and cleaned-up according to the iST protocol (Kulak et al, 2014). Briefly, digestion was stopped with the same volume of 1% TFA in isopropanol and directly loaded on in-house assembled SDB-RPS STAGE tips. Following two wash steps with 1% TFA in isopropanol and 0.2% TFA in water, peptides were eluted with 1.25% ammoniumhydroxide in 80% ACN and dried for storage at -20° until LC-MS measurements. Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75 µm ID home-made fused-silica emitter packed with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient from 4-32% acetonitrile over 60 min and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1650 m/z) were acquired in Profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 10 peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 54 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Singly charged ions, ions with a charge state above 5 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize selection of already fragmented precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.17.0)(Tyanova et al, 2016a). Acquired spectra were searched against the human reference proteome protein sequences (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (“One Sequence Per Gene”; 17-Apr-2022; 20509 sequences without isoforms) and sequences of the variants of YKT6 as well as a collection of common contaminants (244 entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al, 2011). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007).  First, proteins identified by a single modified peptide, reversed proteins from the decoy database and contaminant proteins (Proteases, Keratins) were removed from “proteinGroups.txt”. In order to obtain a “common” YKT6 abundance without losing quantitative information, intensities from the expected YKT6 variants were added to the intensity of the WT for each sample, because the protein grouping algorithm from MaxQuant always allocated the shared peptides to the WT due to principles of parsimony. Only proteins quantified in all 3 replicates in at least one group were considered for further analysis. iBAQ intensities from MaxQuant were normalized by global intensity (GI), normalisation and statistical analysis were performed with limma, both using the NormalyzerDE package (Willforss et al, 2019). GI-normalized intensities were adjusted to YKT6 abundance using the “Subtract row cluster”-function in Perseus (v 1.6.15.0) before statistical analysis (Tyanova et al, 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is a catabolic process during which cytosolic material is enwrapped in a newly formed double-membrane structure called the autophagosome, and subsequently targeted for degradation in the lytic compartment of the cell. The fusion of autophagosomes with the lytic compartment is a tightly regulated step and involves membrane-bound SNARE proteins. These play a crucial role as they promote lipid mixing and fusion of the opposing membranes. Among the SNARE proteins implicated in autophagy, the essential SNARE protein YKT6 is the only SNARE protein that is evolutionarily conserved from yeast to humans. Here, we show that alterations in YKT6 function, in both mammalian cells and nematodes, produce early and late autophagy defects that result in reduced survival. Moreover, mammalian autophagosomal YKT6 is phospho-regulated by the ULK1 kinase, preventing premature bundling with the lysosomal SNARE proteins and thereby inhibiting autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Together, our findings reveal that timely regulation of the YKT6 phosphorylation status is crucial throughout autophagy progression and cell survival.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ip-ms, Q exactive hf, Lfq, Ykt6

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ZBMZ, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Claudine Kraft
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ZBMZ, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


