### Accession
PXD009442

### Title
Linezolid  suppresses growth of tumours dervived from triple negative breast cancer, cancer chemoresistant and cancer stem-like cells through the induction of mitochondrial dysfunction

### Description
Cancer cells are known to reprogram their metabolism to adapt to adverse conditions dictated by tumor growth and microenvirontment. A subtype of cancer cells with stem-like properties, known as cancer stem cells (CSC) is thought to be responsible for tumour recurrence. These consequences are fatal for cancer patients as metastatic tumors are much more aggressive than the primary tumors from which they originate. Since both CSC and chemoresistant cancer cells may share common qualities and implicate involvement of mitochondria, drugs inducing mitochondrial dysfunction as for example, bactericidal antibiotics, may effectively suppress growth of cancer cells. In the current study, we demonstrate that CSC and chemoresistant cells derived from triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells display enrichment of up- and down-regulated proteins from metabolic pathways that suggest a direct link to mitochondria. Both cancer cell types (resistant cells and CSC) can be targeted by antibiotics, in particular, linezolid which decreases tumour growth rate by suppressing mitochondrial functions. As autophagy itself can “feed” cancer cells in their trial to reduce ROS induction by antibiotics, we propose that specific bactericidal antibiotics used in combination with autophagy blocker may suppress cancer cell proliferation and decrease tumour growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using SDT buffer (4 % SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 7.6) for 30min at 95°C while shaking (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf). Cleared protein solutions (20min 20,000×g; 5804, Eppendorf) were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski, J. R., Ostasiewicz, P. & Mann, M. J Proteome Res 10, 3040–3049 (2011). The samples were mixed with 8M UA buffer (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), loaded onto the Microcon device with MWCO 10 kDa (Merck Millipore) and centrifuged at 7,000× g (the next centrifugation steps done at 14,000× g) for 30 min at 20°C. The retained proteins were washed with 200 μL UA buffer. The final protein concentrates kept in the Microcon device were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 20 min. After the next centrifugation step, the samples were washed three times with 100 μL UA buffer and three times with 100 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 18 h at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were finally eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50mM NaHCO3. Resulting peptides were extracted into LC-MS autosampler vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) d concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% formic acid (FA), the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with PicoTip emitter SilicaTip (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12). ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.6) and Sequest search engines utilisation. MS/MS ion searches were done at first against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 111 sequences in total) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc. MS/MS spectra assigned by Mascot search engine to any cRAP protein peptide with Mascot ion score >30 were excluded from the next database searches. Final database searches were done against UniProtKB proteome database for Homo sapiens (taxonomy ID 9606; database version 2017-07, number of proteins 20,975). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and one enzyme miss cleavage were set for all searches. Percolator was used for post-processing of the search results. Peptides with q-value <0.01, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered only. Proteins matching the same set of peptides were reported as protein groups. Protein groups/proteins were reported only if they had at least one unique peptide. Label-free quantification using protein area calculation in Proteome Discoverer was used (“top 3 protein quantification”). Protein group reports from all individual samples were combined into a single supergroup (SG) report where each SG is list of proteins reported within a single protein group in at least single sample report.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells are known to reprogram their metabolism to adapt to adverse conditions dictated by tumor growth and microenvironment. A subtype of cancer cells with stem-like properties, known as cancer stem cells (CSC), is thought to be responsible for tumor recurrence. In this study, we demonstrated that CSC and chemoresistant cells derived from triple negative breast cancer cells display an enrichment of up- and downregulated proteins from metabolic pathways that suggests their dependence on mitochondria for survival. Here, we selected antibiotics, in particular - linezolid, inhibiting translation of mitoribosomes and inducing mitochondrial dysfunction. We provided the first <i>in vivo</i> evidence demonstrating that linezolid suppressed tumor growth rate, accompanied by increased autophagy. In addition, our results revealed that bactericidal antibiotics used in combination with autophagy blocker decrease tumor growth. This study puts mitochondria in a spotlight for cancer therapy and places antibiotics as effective agents for eliminating CSC and resistant cells.

### Keywords
Therapy resistance, Antibiotics, Ros, Lc-ms/ms, Cancer stem cells, Autophagy, Cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics - Zbyněk Zdráhal, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics - Zbyněk Zdráhal, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic


