### Accession
PXD017892

### Title
altered bovine lymphocyte secretome after pokeweed mitogen stimulation

### Description
Vaccination with a new vaccine against bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) caused unwanted immune reactions through alloreactive antibody production in 5–10% of vaccinated cows. Transfer of these alloreactive antibodies via colostrum caused highly lethal (90%) bovine neonatal pancytopenia (BNP) in calves. Despite the assumption of an immune deviant lymphocyte (PBL) phenotype, the exact immunological mechanisms driving these unwanted immune reactions are not fully understood to date. To gain deeper insight into these mechanisms, we analyzed the PBL secretome from alloreactive antibody producers (BNP cows) and non-alloreactive responders (controls) after stimulation with pokeweed mitogen (PWM).

### Sample Protocol
We isolated primary PBL from bovine venous whole blood through density gradient centrifugation. PBL from control and BNP samples were each divided into six technical replicates of 2 x 10^7 cells (in RPMI). Three replicates were stimulated separately with PWM (5µg/ml) for 48h at 37°C and 5%CO2. The remaining three replicates were kept as untreated control under the same conditions. After incubation, supernatants were pooled per group and animal for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).  LC–MSMS mass spectrometry was performed as previously described (Grosche et al, MCP, 2016, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183). Briefly, the digested peptides were loaded automatically to a HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano trap column (100μm ID x 2cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18, 5μm, 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in 95% buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in HPLC-grade water) and 5% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC-grade water) at 30µl/min. After 5 min, the peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75µm ID x 15cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18, 3µm 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) by a gradient of 5% to 50 % of buffer B at 300 nl/min flow over 140 min followed by a 5 min gradient from 50% to 100% buffer B. The eluting peptides were analyzed online in a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the HPLC system with a nano spray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 200 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with high-resolution (60000 full-width half maximum).  The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to ten), depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisional induced dissociation at a target value of 35. Target peptides already selected for MS MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were imported into Progenesis software (version 4.1). After feature alignment and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and searched against the bovine Ensembl database (version 70, 22118 sequences) with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2) with the following search parameters: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of <1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Peptide assignments were reimported into the Progenesis QI software and the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of protein ratios between supernatants from PWM stimulated cells and supernatants from untreated cells for BNP and control samples separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deviant immune reactions, Bovine neonatal pancytopenia, Ltq orbitrap xl., Polyclonal cell stimulation, Vaccine, Cow, Immune system

### Affiliations
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia Annette Deeg
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich


