### Accession
PXD013373

### Title
Tpo1‐mediated spermine and spermidine export controls cell cycle delay and times antioxidant protein expression during the oxidative stress response

### Description
Cells counteract oxidative stress by altering metabolism, cell cycle and gene expression. However, the mechanisms that coordinate these adaptations are only marginally understood. Here we provide evidence that timing of these responses in yeast requires export of the polyamines spermidine and spermine. We show that during hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) exposure, the polyamine transporter Tpo1 controls spermidine and spermine concentrations and mediates induction of antioxidant proteins, including Hsp70, Hsp90, Hsp104 and Sod1. Moreover, Tpo1 determines a cell cycle delay during adaptation to increased oxidant levels, and affects H2O2 tolerance. Thus, central components of the stress response are timed through Tpo1‐controlled polyamine export.

### Sample Protocol
Targeted proteomics was conducted with minor modifications as described previously [Gillet et al., 2012]. Strains were grown to mid-exponential phase, and treated with 1.5 mM H2O2. 30 ml of  the  yeast  cultures  corresponding  to  ~30  OD  was  sampled,  washed,  and  tryptic  peptides were prepared according to the RapidACN protocol [Bluemlein et al, 2011]. Data was acquired on an AB/Sciex TripleTOF5600 mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC 2D‐ultra operating  in  SWATH  mode,  setting  the  SWATH  m/z  acquisition  window  to  25  Da.

### Data Protocol
Automatic extraction of product ion spectra was performed using Spectronaut software (Biognosys)  monitoring  8  transitions  per  peptide,  and  allowing  only  peptides  with  a  Qvalue  <  0.01.  Analysis  of  proteins  abundance  and  clustering  was  conducted  in Expander.  For  targeted  SWATH,  selected  proteotypic  peptides  were  manually  extracted  from  SWATH  data  with  the  help  of  Skyline  software.  The  abundance  of  each  peptide  was  normalised  to  the  first  time  point,  and  overall  protein  abundance  was  calculated  by averaging  a  minimum  of  4  peptides.  Protein  abundance  was  then  normalised  to  the  corresponding  expression  of  the  GAPDH  isozyme  Tdh1,  which  served  as  internal reference control.

### Publication Abstract
Cells counteract oxidative stress by altering metabolism, cell cycle and gene expression. However, the mechanisms that coordinate these adaptations are only marginally understood. Here we provide evidence that timing of these responses in yeast requires export of the polyamines spermidine and spermine. We show that during hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) exposure, the polyamine transporter Tpo1 controls spermidine and spermine concentrations and mediates induction of antioxidant proteins, including Hsp70, Hsp90, Hsp104 and Sod1. Moreover, Tpo1 determines a cell cycle delay during adaptation to increased oxidant levels, and affects H2O2 tolerance. Thus, central components of the stress response are timed through Tpo1-controlled polyamine export.

### Keywords
Yeast

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin

### Submitter
Jakob Vowinckel

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin


