### Accession
PXD002212

### Title
Quantification of cytokines secreted by primary human cells using MRM: evaluation of analytical parameters – shotgun secretome data of untreated HUVECs

### Description
The determination of secreted proteins may provide highly valuable information about cell functions. While the typical methods for the determination of biologically relevant but low-abundant molecular species still relies on the use of specific antibodies, mass spectrometry-based methods are now gaining sufficient sensitivity to cope with such challenges. In the current study we have identified several cytokines and chemokines which were induced by inflammatory activation of primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Based on the high-resolution mass spectrometry data obtained with a Q Exactive orbitrap, we built an MRM method to quantify the most relevant molecules selected from the screening experiment. Using nano-flow Chip-HPLC coupled to a 6490 triple-quadrupole MS for MRM analyses we achieved calibration curves covering a linear range of four orders of magnitude and detection limits in the low attomol per microliter concentration range. Carryover was consistently less than 0.005%, the accuracy between 80% and 120% and the median coefficient of variation for LC/MS was only 2.2%. When including the variance introduced by biological replicates and the digestion procedure, the coefficient of variation was less than 20% for most peptides. Selection of appropriate marker molecules allowed us to monitor typical cell culture variations such as different cell densities, proliferative states and the occurrence of cell death. As a result, here we present a robust and efficient MRM-based assay for the accurate and sensitive determination of cytokines and chemokines representative for functional cell states and including comprehensive quality controls.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human umbilical vein cells (HUVEC) were purchased from Lonza (Walkersville Inc., USA). Cells were cultured in 6-well plates at 37°C and 5% CO2 in endothelial basal medium supplemented with the EGM-2 SingleQuot Kit (both EBM, Lonza Walkersville Inc., USA), 10% FCS and 100U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (both ATCC, USA) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Cells were washed once with PBS and cultured in 1.5mL serum-free medium for 6 hours. Supernatants were sterile-filtered through a 0.2µm filter and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C for isolation of secreted proteins. After precipitation, samples were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT) and the protein concentrations were determined by means of Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). For digestion of secreted proteins a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 3kD MWCO filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) were rinsed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH). 20µg of each protein sample was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15000g for 15min to get a final sample volume of 10-20µl. For reduction, 200µl of DTT solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer), pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 56°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200µl of IAA solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ABC buffer) were added and incubation was performed in the dark for 45min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, proteins on top of the filter were washed with ABC buffer. Afterwards, filters (with a maximum of 50µl sample volume) were placed in a new Eppendorf tube and 100µl ABC buffer as well as 10µl trypsin solution (0.1µg/µl) were added and incubation was performed at 37°C for 18h. After trypsin digestion, peptide samples were cleaned up with C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Therefore, columns were pre-washed two times with 500µl ACN and equilibrated with 200µl 5% ACN, 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) by centrifugation at 1500g for 1min. The peptide samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and transferred from the MWCO filters to spin columns. After centrifugation at 1500g for 1min, the flow-through was re-loaded on the column to maximize peptide binding and again centrifuged. After a washing step with 5% ACN, 0.5% TFA, the peptides were eluted two times with 40µl 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA and once with 40µl 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA into a new Eppendorf tube. Finally the digested peptide samples in the flow-through were dried and stored at -20°C until further MS analyses. For LC-MS/MS analyses dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). All samples were analyzed in duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 95min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version May 2015 with 20 198 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Determination of secreted proteins provides highly valuable information about cell functions. While the typical methods for the determination of biologically relevant but low abundant molecular species still rely on the use of specific antibodies, mass spectrometry-based methods are now gaining sufficient sensitivity to cope with such challenges as well. In the current study, we have identified several cytokines and chemokines which were induced in primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells upon inflammatory activation. Based on the high-resolution mass spectrometry data obtained with a Q Exactive orbitrap, we built an MRM method to quantify the most relevant molecules selected from the screening experiment. All experimental data are available via ProteomeXchange, PXD002211/12, and Panorama ( www.panoramaweb.org ). Using nano-flow Chip-HPLC coupled to a 6490 triple-quadrupole MS for MRM analyses, we achieved calibration curves covering a linear range of four orders of magnitude and detection limits in the low attomol per microliter concentration range. Carryover was consistently less than 0.005&#xa0;%, the accuracy was between 80 and 120&#xa0;%, and the median coefficient of variation for LC/MS was only 2.2&#xa0;%. When including the variance of quantification introduced by cell culture and digestion, the coefficient of variation was less than 20&#xa0;% for most peptides. With appropriate marker molecules, we monitored typical variations introduced by cell culture caused by differences in cell numbers, proliferative states, and cell death. As a result, here, we present a robust and efficient MRM-based assay for the accurate and sensitive determination of cytokines and chemokines representative for functional cell states and including comprehensive quality controls. Graphical Abstract Work flow diagram: Data processing steps beginning with orbitrap-based shotgun data acquisition and MaxQuant data analysis, followed by peptide and transition selection for MRM analysis using Skyline and experimental validation using triple quadrupole MS.

### Keywords
Primary human cells, Cytokines, Targeted proteomics, Proteome profiling, Inflammation, Analytical assay

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


