### Accession
PXD002409

### Title
Systematic optimization of C-TAILS approach for deep screening of C-terminomics

### Description
It is well known that protein C-termini play important roles in various biological processes, and thus the precise characterization of C-termini is essential for fully elucidating protein structure and understanding protein functions. Although many efforts have been made in the fields during the latest two decades, the progress is still far behind its counterpart, N-termini, and it necessitates more novel or optimized methods. Herein, we reported an optimized C-termini identification approach based on the C-terminal amine-based isotope labeling of substrates (C-TAILS) method. We optimized the amidation reaction conditions to achieve higher yield of fully amidated product. We evaluated different carboxyl and amine blocking reagents and found the superior performance of Ac-NHS and ethanolamine. Replacement of dimethylation with acetylation for Lys blocking resulted in the identification of 232 C-terminal peptides in E. Coli sample, about 42% higher than the conventional C-TAILS. A systematic data analysis revealed that the optimized method is unbiased to amino acid composition, more reproducible and with higher MASCOT scores. Moreover, the introduction of SCII (Single-Charge Ion Inclusion) method to alleviate the charge deficiency of small peptides allowed an additional 26 % increase in identification number. With the optimized method, we identified 481 C-terminal peptides corresponding to 369 C-termini in E. Coli in a triplicate experiments using 80 μg each. Our optimized method would benefit the deep screening of C-terminomics and possibly help discover some novel C-terminal modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from E. coli.  E.coli cells were harvested by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min. The resulted pellet was washed three times with PBS buffer (pH 7.4), and then was resuspended in lysis buffer containing  8 M Guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB and 10 mM dithiothretol (DTT). The slurry solution was sonicated for 9 min (2 s sonication time with 5 s intervals) in ice incubation, and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. 20 l sample aliquot was kept for protein determination using Bradford assay. Subsequently, the sample was submitted to reduction by incubation at 37 °C for 1 h, followed by alkylation using 30 mM acrylamide for 45 min at room temperature. The excess acrylamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT. The protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/ml with buffer containing 200 mM TEAB and 2 M guanidine hydrochloride prior to the following application.  .   Protection of primary amines by dimethylation or acetylation  The dimethylation method was adapted from Schilling4. After adding formaldehyde and NaCNBH3 to reach a final concentration of 20 mM, the sample solution was kept for 2 h at 25 °C; the procedure was repeated once with freshly prepared reagents to ensure the efficient protection. The acetylation method was adapted from Staes et al21. The sample solution was incubated twice with 20 mM Ac-NHS at 25°C for 2 h and the reaction was quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl at 30 °C for 10 min. Finally 100 mM NH2OH was added and kept at 30 °C for 30 min to reverse the undesired partial acetylation on Ser and Thr resudies22.    Protection of carboxyl group  The FASP method was adapted for the following procedures23. The samples after amine-blocking were transferred to Microcon-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800 g for three-time buffer displacement with carboxyl protection buffer (pH 4.5, 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM MES and 2 M ethanolamine). After buffer displacement, 50 mM NHS and freshly prepared 100 mM EDC were added to trigger the reaction at 25 °C.  After 2 h reaction, an additional 100 mM EDC was added into the solution and it was incubated for another 2 h. Trypsin digestion and protection of Nα-amine of tryptic peptides The samples were then submitted to another three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer (pH 7.5, 2 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM HEPES). After buffer displacement, the samples were digested at 37 °C with trypsin at a ratio of enzyme: protein as 1:100. After 2 h incubation, the samples were diluted four times with 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and same amount of trypsin was added for another 10 h digestion.  After digestion, the protection of Nα-amine of nascent tryptic peptides was carried out using dimethylation for twice as described above. The pretreatment of polyallylamine  A 6.5 mM stock solution of polyallylamine (representing a primary amine concentration of ~2 M) was prepared in 200 mM MES (pH 4.5), 2 M guanidine hydrochloride and 20% (vol/vol) acetonitrile. Prior to application, the polyallylamine solution was submitted to five-time buffer displacement using Microcon-10 in order to remove the unpolymerized monomer. Enrichment of C-terminal peptides  An equal volume of stock polyallylamine polymer solution was transferred to the sample containing filter device to achieve a primary amine concentration of ~1 M. After adjusting pH to 4.5 using 1 M HCl, 50 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC were added and the sample was kept in a Thermomixer (600 rpm, 25 °C) for 2 h. The EDC step was repeated twice with the last incubation lasting 10 h. The pH was checked at each step and adjusted if needed. After polymer coupling, the solution was filtrated out followed by washing with 10 % ACN twice. The filtrate fractions containing C-terminal peptides were pooled, vacuum-dried and then resuspended using 1 % formic acid for following analysis.  Sample desalting  The desalting was employed on a homemade Poros R3 microcolumn24. After loading the  sample onto the R3 miocrocolumn, the column was first washed with 10 μL of 1 % formic acid, and then the bound peptides were eluted with 20 μL of 30 % ACN followed by 20 μL of 70% ACN. The two eluates were pooled and dried in Speedvac.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK).26 E.coli protein Database (20140509, 4,303 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: ArgC as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine, protein N-acetylation, acetylation on lysine, ethanolamine protection on aspartate and glutamate, dimethylation on peptide N-terminal as fixed modification; ethanolamine protection on protein C-terminus, oxidation on methionine as variable modifications.  The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT p ≤ 0.01 were accepted for discussion. The introduction of MASCOT p ≤ 0.01 reduces the hit number by around 33 % in average and increases the minium Mascot score from 13 to 26.

### Publication Abstract
It is well-known that protein C-termini play important roles in various biological processes, and thus the precise characterization of C-termini is essential for fully elucidating protein structures and understanding protein functions. Although many efforts have been made in the field during the latest 2 decades, the progress is still far behind its counterpart, N-termini, and it necessitates more novel or optimized methods. Herein, we report an optimized C-termini identification approach based on the C-terminal amine-based isotope labeling of substrates (C-TAILS) method. We optimized the amidation reaction conditions to achieve higher yield of fully amidated product. We evaluated different carboxyl and amine blocking reagents and found the superior performance of Ac-NHS and ethanolamine. Replacement of dimethylation with acetylation for Lys blocking resulted in the identification of 232 C-terminal peptides in an Escherichia coli sample, about 42% higher than the conventional C-TAILS. A systematic data analysis revealed that the optimized method is unbiased to the number of lysine in peptides, more reproducible and with higher MASCOT scores. Moreover, the introduction of the Single-Charge Ion Inclusion (SCII) method to alleviate the charge deficiency of small peptides allowed an additional 26% increase in identification number. With the optimized method, we identified 481 C-terminal peptides corresponding to 369 C-termini in E. coli in a triplicate experiments using 80 &#x3bc;g each. Our optimized method would benefit the deep screening of C-terminome and possibly help discover some novel C-terminal modifications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002409.

### Keywords
Scii, Acetylation, Protein c-termini

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China
Institute of Biochemistry and Center for Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
yang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr xumin zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


