### Accession
PXD017781

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of maize roots treated with a novel protein hydrolase: comparative study with transcriptomics highlights the molecular mechanisms responsive to biostimulants

### Description
Protein hydrolysates (PHs) - based biostimulants offer a cost-effective, and sustainable approach for the regulation of physiological processes in plants to stimulate growth, and improve stress tolerance. Understanding the mode of action of PHs is challenging however, it is indispensable to improve existing candidates and to develop novel molecules with enhanced stimulatory effects. Hence, the present study aimed to understand the proteome level responses in the B73 maize roots treated with APR® at two increasing concentrations and to compare and integrate it with the transcriptomic data obtained previously under identical experimental conditions. Results indicate APR® induced dose-dependent global changes in the transcriptome and proteome of maize roots. APR® treatment altered the expression and abundance of several genes and proteins related to redox homeostasis, stress response, glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, pentose phosphate pathway and other metabolic pathways of carbohydrates, amino acids, and lipids. Further, metabolic processes of phytohormone, secondary metabolites especially phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, and terpenoids and transport, and cytoskeletal reorganization associated mechanisms were stimulated.  Our results suggest that APR® treatment altered the redox homeostasis and thus triggered an oxidative signal. This could be one of the key regulators of the cascade of downstream events involving multiple signaling, hormonal, and metabolic pathways, resulting in an altered physiological and metabolic state which consequently could lead to improved growth, and stress adaptation observed in biostimulant - treated plants.

### Sample Protocol
Zea mays L. (B73) seeds were transplanted into vases containing river sand amended with two different amounts of biostimulatn APR® (Full dose (A1) (23.52 mg) and half dose (A1/2) (11.76 mg)). Plants transplanted into vases without the APR® were considered as control. Modified Hoagland solution was used to irrigate the plants every 2 days. The experiment was carried out in an environmental chamber for 15 days with a day/night cycle of 14/10 h at 25/18 °C air temperature, 70/90% relative humidity, and 280 μmol m−2 s−1 photon flux density. Two biological replicates were maintained for control, A1/2, and A1 treatments. Roots harvested from control and APR® treated plants were stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Roots from control and APR® treated maize plants were ground to a fine powder with liquid nitrogen and suspended in 5 volumes of precooled acetone (- 20 °C) containing 10 % TCA and 0.05 % DTT. After overnight precipitation proteins were recovered by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm, 20 min, 4 °C. Protein pellets were washed thrice with cold acetone containing 0.05 % DTT, dried by lyophilization and solubilized with a buffer containing 6M urea, 50mMtriethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, and 2 % CHAPS for 3 h. Protein extracts were obtained by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm, 20 min, 10 °C and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford’s assay. Samples were loaded into a precast SDS-PAGE gel and proteins fro each sample were focused into a narrow band which was then in-gel digested with trypsin. Peptide mixtures extracted from each band were labeled with 6-plex TMTreagents according to manufacturer's instructions.  Samples were pooled and labeled peptides were suspended in 500 μL of a buffer containing 5mM KH2PO4 and 25% ACN (pH ≤ 3, adjusted with H3PO4) and loaded in an SCX cartridge (Applied Biosystems, USA) using a syringe pump at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. After thorough washing, a total of  six fractions for each batch were collected by eluting the peptides with 500 μL of 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 350mM KCl, respectively prepared in 5 mM KH2PO4, and 25% ACN. A second SCX fractionation was also performed because the first process was not satisfactory. This second time 5 fractions were obtained by eluting the peptides with the following concentrations of KCl: 40, 80, 120, 200 and 350. ACN was then removed in a speed‐vac system. Dried samples were suspended in 400 μL of water/0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 cartridges (SepPack, Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum, suspended in 0.1% FA to an estimated concentration of 1 mg/mL and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed with an LTQ‐Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer, coupled to an Ultimate 3000 NanoLC system. A total of 1 μg of each peptide mixture were loaded into a trap column, washed for 6 min at a flow rate of 8 μL/min and separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 11 cm pico-frit chromatographic column (75 µm I.D, 10 µm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 material (Aeris Peptide 3.6 µm XB-C18, Phenomenex) and a linear gradient of ACN from 3 to 50% in 90 min.  The instrument operated in a data‐dependent mode: a full MS scan at 60000 resolution was followed by the MS/MS scan of the three most intense precursor ions. Both CID (for identification) and HCD (for quantification) fragmentations were performed on the same precursors. After a first run of analysis, data were subjected to database search and all identified peptides were used to generate a static excluding list. All samples (except fractions at 200, 250 and 350 mM of the first set of experiments) were analyzed again using the same chromatographic and instrumental settings except for the application of the excluding list.

### Data Protocol
All LC‐MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 1.4) and analyzed with Mascot version 2.2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) for protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to one allowed miss cleavage. Peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Searches were done against the Zea mays sequences in the UniProt database (version March 2018, 132486 sequences) concatenated with a database of common contaminants often found in proteomics experiments. Carbamidomethyl‐Cys, 6‐plex TMT at N‐termini and 6‐plex TMT at ‐Lys were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of Met as a variable modification. Data were filtered to exclude MS/MS spectra containing less than five peaks and with a total ion count lower than 50. Percolator was used to assess the confidence of peptide and protein identification: proteins were considered as positively identified if at least two independent, unique peptides per protein were identified with a q value ≤ 0.01. Proteins were grouped into protein families according to the principle of maximum parsimony. For quantification, the reporter mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. The software detected the reporter ions and performed the quantification of relative peptide abundance after normalization to correct for technical variations between different LC‐MS/MS runs. Quantification values of each protein were exported to an excel output file, and the mean protein ratios (Treated/Control) were calculated dividing the mean quantification value of each protein in treated samples to that of control samples. A Z-test was performed to identify proteins with a significantly different abundance (p ≤ 0.05) and significant hits were further filtered to keep into account only those proteins showing a Fold Change ≥ 1.5 and ≤ -1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein hydrolase, Biostimulants, Lc-ms/ms, Maize roots, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


