### Accession
PXD008857

### Title
PSI supercomplex copurification using PSI His-tag

### Description
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii PSI-Cyt b6f complexes from sucrose density gradient fractions were identified by western blot and SMF spectroscopy, but showed high heterogeneity, as evident from the multiple bands present in the Coomassie stained SDS gel and original EM micrographs. Therefore potential PSI-Cyt b6f supercomplexes were enriched by a subsequent PsaA HisTag purification step. Only this additional enrichment enabled the identification of novel PSI supercomplexes, although the sample remained far from being homogeneous. This dataset describes the quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of the enriched PSI supercomplex fraction in comparison to unpurified samples using metabolic 15N labeling.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative mass spectrometric analysis, isotopic 14N and 15N labeling was performed for the PsaA HisTag strain. The pooled 15N labeled PSI – cytochrome b6f peak fractions (prior to HisTag purification) were mixed with an equal volume of the HisTag-purified eluate of the 14N labeled PSI – cytochrome b6f sample. Duplicates were performed with a label swap. Samples were tryptically digested in 0.5-mL Amicon Ultra ultrafiltration devices (30-kD cutoff; Millipore) according to the FASP method (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with minor modifications as described in (Bergner et al. 2015). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, part of Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phases for the loading pump consisted of 0.05 % (v/v) TFA in ultrapure water (A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.05 % (v/v) TFA in ultrapure water (B). The sample (1 µl) was loaded on a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 10 min using eluent A at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched online with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µM particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases for elution of the peptides from the column consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A*) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.08 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (B*). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and employing the following gradient profile: 2.5-10 % B* over 90 min, 10-30 % B* over 90 min, 30-50 % B* over 30 min , 50-99 % B* over 5 min, 99 % B* for 15 min. Afterwards the column was re-equilibrated with 99 % A* for 30 min. The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). MS full scans (m/z 350 - 1600) were acquired in positive ion mode by FT-MS in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 (FWHM) with internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.12003. The 12 most intense ions were fragmented with 27 % normalized collision energy. Automatic gain control (AGC) was enabled with target values of 1 x 106 and 5 x 104 for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively. One microscan was acquired per MS/MS spectrum and maximum ion trap fill time was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 60s, repeat count of 1, list size of 500 and exclusion mass width of +/- 5 ppm. Unassigned charge states, single charged and charged equal or bigger 7 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified using the search engines X!Tandem (version Vengeance, Craig et al 2003) and MS-GF+ (version v9979, Kim et al 2014) within the Python framework Ursgal (version 0.4.0, profile ‘QExactive+’, Kremer et al 2016). Searches were performed against a database containing protein sequences of the Chlamydomonas v5.5 gene models (Joint Genome Institute) merged with mitochondrial and chloroplast protein sequences from NCBI databases BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1 as well as sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) resulting in a database with 18,941 proteins. Additionally, decoy sequences generated by peptide shuffling were included for all target proteins. A precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm have been applied. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was included as potential post translational modifications. Post processing was performed using percolator (v. 2.08) (Kall et al. 2007) and a threshold 1% posterior error probability (PEP) was applied. Potential modifications by incomplete DSS crosslinking, i.e. DSS mono-links, were included in the search but modified peptides were not taken into account for the quantification. All other peptides were subjected to quantification using pyQms (Leufken et al 2017). Peptide amounts were normalized to PsaA (DAA01471.1) for each label (14N or 15N) separately. Peptide ratios were calculated for each spectrum containing both labelling states and combined on protein level as the mean of all peptide ratios, requiring ratios for at least two different spectra or charge states.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic linear electron flow (LEF) produces ATP and NADPH, while cyclic electron flow (CEF) exclusively drives photophosphorylation to supply extra ATP. The fine-tuning of linear and cyclic electron transport levels allows photosynthetic organisms to balance light energy absorption with cellular energy requirements under constantly changing light conditions. As LEF and CEF share many electron transfer components, a key question is how the same individual structural units contribute to these two different functional modes. Here, we report the structural identification of a photosystem I (PSI)-light harvesting complex I (LHCI)-cytochrome (cyt) b<sub>6</sub>f supercomplex isolated from the unicellular alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> under anaerobic conditions, which induces CEF. This provides strong evidence for the model that enhanced CEF is induced by the formation of CEF supercomplexes, when stromal electron carriers are reduced, to generate additional ATP. The additional identification of PSI-LHCI-LHCII complexes is consistent with recent findings that both CEF enhancement and state transitions are triggered by similar conditions, but can occur independently from each other. Single molecule fluorescence correlation spectroscopy indicates a physical association between cyt b<sub>6</sub>f and fluorescent chlorophyll containing PSI-LHCI supercomplexes. Single particle analysis identified top-view projections of the corresponding PSI-LHCI-cyt b<sub>6</sub>f supercomplex. Based on molecular modeling and mass spectrometry analyses, we propose a model in which dissociation of LHCA2 and LHCA9 from PSI supports the formation of this CEF supercomplex. This is supported by the finding that a <i>&#x394;lhca2</i> knockout mutant has constitutively enhanced CEF.

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, His-tag, Psi, Supercomplex

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster


