### Accession
PXD003269

### Title
human salivary extracellulae vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
using a facile method to prepare human salivary extracellular vesicles, and using LC-MS/MS to analysis the salivary extracellular vesicles proteomic. then we compared the healty donors with the lung cancer to discover potential biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
For protein identification, protein digests were analyzed using an LC system (Nano Pump, Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Thermofisher) coupled with an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Maxis Impact UHR Q-TOF, Impact, Bruker Daltonik, Germany). Briefly, each peptide sample was re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and then loaded onto a peptide trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, Dionex, Thermofisher). Then trapped peptides were eluted to a C18 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, Dionex, Thermofisher). The peptides were eluted for 90 min with a gradient of 2-80% v/v of acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid at flow rate of 400 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Combined MS and MS/MS spectra were submitted for database search using MASCOT software (version 2.0) to identify proteins from the Swissprot database (548208 sequences). The peak list was directly generated from raw data using centroid algorithm with peak width set as 0.1 m/z and intensity above 100. No peak smooth or filter process was applied. The parameters for searching were enzyme of trypsin, 2 missed cleavage, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications of oxidation (M). A mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for MS precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. Peptide charges of +2, +3,and +4 were selected. The criteria of two peptides and C.I.%>95 were used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membrane surrounded structures released by cells, which have been increasingly recognized as mediators of intercellular communication. Recent reports indicate that EVs participate in important biological processes and could serve as potential source for cancer biomarkers. As an attractive EVs source with merit of non-invasiveness, human saliva is a unique medium for clinical diagnostics. Thus, we proposed a facile approach to prepare salivary extracellular vesicles (SEVs). Affinity chromatography column combined with filter system (ACCF) was developed to efficiently remove the high abundant proteins and viscous interferences of saliva. Protein profiling in the SEVs obtained by this strategy was compared with conventional centrifugation method, which demonstrated that about 70% more SEVs proteins could be revealed. To explore its utility for cancer proteomics, we analyzed the proteome of SEVs in lung cancer patients and normal controls. Shotgun proteomic analysis illustrated that 113 and 95 proteins have been identified in cancer group and control group, respectively. Among those 63 proteins that have been consistently discovered only in cancer group, 12 proteins are lung cancer related. Our results demonstrated that SEVs prepared through the developed strategy are valuable samples for proteomics and could serve as a promising liquid biopsy for cancer.

### Keywords
Human; saliva; vesicles; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Laboratory of Analytical Biochemistry and Bioseparation, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
yan sun

### Lab Head
Dr hua xiao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Laboratory of Analytical Biochemistry and Bioseparation, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China


