### Accession
PXD018872

### Title
Evaluation of proteomics strategies for low cell numbers: SP3- and C18-based protocols combined with five cell lysis methods

### Description
New advances in the transcriptomics and flow cytometry fields have allowed the discovery of new immune cell subsets. However, most of them are extremely small populations, hampering their analysis using mass spectrometry strategies since currently these procedures are not highly efficient in small sample sizes. In this context, recent studies have improved sample processing for quantity-limited samples. Here, we aim at evaluating the combination of five cell lysis methods and two sample clean-up techniques (i.e. C18 and SP3) for the analysis of small cell numbers (2.500, 10.000, 50.000) of THP-1, differentiated THP-1 and HT-29 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines: the THP-1 monoblastic cell line was selected to mimic monoblasts; additionally, these THP-1 cells were differentiated with 200 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) to resemble macrophages. Also, HT-29 colorectal cancer cell line was chosen as a non-myeloid lineage related control. To simulate the challenge of variability in size of biological cell populations, different numbers of cells were processed (i.e. 2.500, 10.000 and 50.000 cells). As a reference for maximum protein identification, 20 g of protein extracted from 1 million of cells was included. Samples were lysed with five lysis buffers and two clean-up methods, as indicated below. Sample processing: cells were harvested after culture and lysed with use of several lysis buffers as described:  P1) Urea-based lysis buffer: 20 mM HEPES, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate (adapted from Sielaff M et al., 2017). P2) TEAB-based lysis buffer: 8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 (Bensaddek D et al., 2016). P3) SDS-based lysis buffer: 0.5% SDS, 50 mM HEPES; 1 ug/uL DNase, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Hughes CS et al., 2014). P4) TFE-based lysis buffer: 50% v/v TFE in 50 mM AB, pH 8.0 (Wang H et al., 2005).   P5) Hypotonic lysis buffer: 30 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. DTT and IAA were used for reduction and alkylation of proteins, respectively, following the indicated protocols. Protein digestion was performed with Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were purified by either C18 StageTip columns or superparamagnetic beads (SP3, as described by Hughes CS et al, 2014). Purified peptides were freeze-dried and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Three replicates per condition (protocol, cell line and cell number) were performed. Samples were run on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM Tribrid mass spectrometer using 60 (file names ending by ¨a¨) or 160 min LC gradients.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mgf using MSConvert software. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) on SearchGUI v3.3.5. Protein identification was conducted on PeptideShaker v 1.16.31 against a concatenated target/decoy UniProtKB database (release Oct 2018, 42517 (target) sequences), including the cRAP database . Search parameters were set as follows: fully tryptic digestion (no P rule) with up to 3 missed cleavages; 10 ppm and 0.02 Da as precursor and fragment mass tolerances, respectively; and carbamidomethylation of C and acetylation of protein N-term and oxidation of M as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptide spectrum matches (PSM), peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics profiling has undoubtedly increased the knowledge about cellular processes and functions. However, its applicability for paucicellular sample analyses is currently limited. Although new approaches have been developed for single-cell studies, most of them have not (yet) been standardized and/or require highly specific (often home-built) devices, thereby limiting their broad implementation, particularly in non-specialized settings. To select an optimal MS-oriented proteomics approach applicable in translational research and clinical settings, we assessed 10 different sample preparation procedures in paucicellular samples of closely-related cell types. Particularly, five cell lysis protocols using different chemistries and mechanical forces were combined with two sample clean-up techniques (C18 filter- and SP3-based), followed by tandem mass tag (TMT)-based protein quantification. The evaluation was structured in three phases: first, cell lines from hematopoietic (THP-1) and non-hematopoietic (HT-29) origins were used to test the approaches showing the combination of a urea-based lysis buffer with the SP3 bead-based clean-up system as the best performer. Parameters such as reproducibility, accessibility, spatial distribution, ease of use, processing time and cost were considered. In the second phase, the performance of the method was tested on maturation-related cell populations: three different monocyte subsets from peripheral blood and, for the first time, macrophages/microglia (MAC) from glioblastoma samples, together with T cells from both tissues. The analysis of 50,000 cells down to only 2,500 cells revealed different protein expression profiles associated with the distinct cell populations. Accordingly, a closer relationship was observed between non-classical monocytes and MAC, with the latter showing the co-expression of M1 and M2 macrophage markers, although pro-tumoral and anti-inflammatory proteins were more represented. In the third phase, the results were validated by high-end spectral flow cytometry on paired monocyte/MAC samples to further determine the sensitivity of the MS approach selected. Finally, the feasibility of the method was proven in 194 additional samples corresponding to 38 different cell types, including cells from different tissue origins, cellular lineages, maturation stages and stimuli. In summary, we selected a reproducible, easy-to-implement sample preparation method for MS-based proteomic characterization of paucicellular samples, also applicable in the setting of functionally closely-related cell populations.

### Keywords
Human, Thp-1, Ht-29, Small populations, Sp3, Low cell number, C18, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Immune monitoring lab Department of Immunohematology and Blood transfusion Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands
Immune monitoring group - Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion Department
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC=

### Submitter
Paula Díez

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Díez, PhD
Immune monitoring lab Department of Immunohematology and Blood transfusion Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands


