### Accession
PXD045535

### Title
Ultra-sensitive platelet proteome maps the O-glycosylation landscape and identifies a new form of domain-specific O-fucosylation

### Description
Platelet activation induces the secretion of proteins that promote platelet aggregation and inflammation. However, detailed analysis of the released platelet proteome is hampered by platelets’ tendency to pre-activate during their isolation and a lack of sensitive protocols for low abundance releasate analysis. Here we detail the most sensitive analysis to date of the platelet releasate proteome with the detection of >1,300 proteins. Unbiased scanning for post-translational modifications within releasate proteins highlighted O-glycosylation as being a major component. For the first time, we detected O-fucosylation on previously uncharacterised sites including multimerin-1 (MMRN1), a major alpha granule protein that supports platelet adhesion to collagen and is a carrier for platelet factor V. The N-terminal elastin microfibril interface (EMI) domain of MMRN1, a key site for protein-protein interaction, was O-fucosylated at a conserved threonine within a new domain context. Our data suggest that either protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1), or a novel POFUT, may be responsible for this modification. Mutating this O-fucose site on the EMI domain led to a >50% reduction of MMRN1 secretion, supporting a key role of EMI O-fucosylation in MMRN1 secretion. By comparing releasates from resting and thrombin-treated platelets, 202 proteins were found to be significantly released after high-dose thrombin stimulation. Complementary quantification of the platelet lysates identified >3,800 proteins, which confirmed the platelet origin of releasate proteins by anti-correlation analysis. Low-dose thrombin treatment yielded a smaller subset of significantly regulated proteins with fewer secretory pathway enzymes. The extensive platelet proteome resource provided here (larancelab.com/platelet-proteome) allows identification of novel regulatory mechanisms for drug targeting to address platelet dysfunction and thrombosis.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet isolation from whole blood Platelets were isolated from whole blood within 3-4 hours post-venepuncture. Whole blood was fractioned by centrifugation (200 x g for 20 minutes, brake = 0) to separate platelet rich plasma (PRP) from red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) fractions. All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature. PRP was rested for 30 minutes in a water bath at 37°C before the addition of 20% (v/v) pre-warmed (37°C) acid citrate-dextrose (ACD) (Cat# C3821, Sigma-Aldrich). Platelets were separated from plasma by centrifugation (800 x g for 10 minutes, brake = 4) and plasma stored at -80oC. The platelets were resuspended in pre-warmed (37°C) modified HEPES/Tyrodes (HTGlc) buffer (129 mM NaCl, 0.34 mM Na2HPO4, 2.9 mM KCl, 12 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM HEPES, 5 mM glucose, 1 mM MgCl2; pH 7.4). Resuspended platelets were rested for 20 minutes in a 37°C water bath following the addition of 10% (v/v) pre-warmed (37°C) ACD and 0.02 U/mL apyrase. Platelets were pelleted by centrifugation (800 x g for 5 minutes, brake = 4) before resuspension in prewarmed HTGlc buffer at the working concentration of 400 x 103/µL. Addition of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) (~2 µM) took place before all centrifugation steps to minimize platelet activation. Platelet concentration was maintained below 106 / µL during washing stages. Platelet concentration was measured using a Sysmex KX-21N haemocytometer. Separation of platelet releasate and lysate for proteomics Washed platelets (400 x 103/µL) were divided into 250 µL aliquots. To a resting control, 0.02 U/mL apyrase was added, while another aliquot was activated with thrombin at a final activity of 0.2 U/mL for maximal stimulation or 0.025 U/mL for submaximal stimulation (50µL and 6.25µL of a 1 U/mL stock respectively). Both samples were incubated in a 37°C water bath for 5 minutes. Following incubation, PPACK (25 µM) was added to the thrombin-stimulated sample and 2 µM PGE1 was added immediately prior to centrifugation (800 x g for 10 minutes) of the resting sample. The supernatant at this point was regarded as the “platelet releasate” and was aspirated and stored under argon at -80°C. The remaining platelet protein was regarded as the “platelet lysate”. Pellet lysate was obtained via resuspension in SDC lysis buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and heating at 95°C for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (ThermoFisher). Platelet lysates were aliquoted and stored under argon at -80°C. Protein sample preparation for mass-spectrometry Proteins (5 μg for lysates, 1 μg for releasates, and 70 μg for plasma) were denatured, reduced and alkylated by resuspension in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0), followed heating to 95oC for 10 min. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 1% SDC using water and digested for 16 h with MS-grade trypsin 1:50 (Sigma Cat# T6567) at 37oC at 1000 rpm in a Thermomixer-C (Eppendorf). Samples were mixed 1:1 (vol:vol) with 99% ethyl acetate 1% TFA and vortexed until all the precipitated SDC was resuspended. StageTips were prepared and sample purification performed as described previously28, and only the lower aqueous phase containing peptides (only 20 μg peptides for plasma samples) was added to the StageTips. Peptides were reconstituted with 5% formic acid in MS-grade water at ~0.2 μg/μL and stored at 4oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteome Analysis with LC-MS/MS and spectra analysis Peptide samples were injected onto a 50cm x 75 μm C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a 10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over a gradient from 5%-35% acetonitrile over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV. MS/MS analysis was performed using a Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) with HCD fragmentation. Spectra were attained in a data-dependent acquisition of the top 20 most abundant ions at any individual point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were analysed using the integrated quantitative proteomics software and search engine MaxQuant29 (version 1.6.3.4). A false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy was used for protein and peptide identification. The database provided to the search engine for identification contained the Uniprot human database downloaded on the 5th of May 2020 alongside the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS2 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn/Gln, pyro-Glu/Gln, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment30. Byonic wildcard (open) search for modifications Data from all high thrombin-treated patient releasates was combined and searched using the Byonic (v3.11.3) package38. Initially the search was performed against the whole human proteome database without modification. This identified 1,529 proteins that were converted into a focused database (Supplementary File 1) for use in subsequent “wildcard” searches to identify unknown modifications39. A false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy was used for protein and peptide identification. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 4 ppm for precursor ions and MS2 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of Met (common2), deamidation of Asn/Gln (common1), pyro-Glu/Gln(rare1), and protein N-terminal acetylation (rare1) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. Total common max and total rare max were both set to 1. The wildcard search was applied to “unmodified” peptides with a range from -40 to 1000 Da on any amino acid. Statistical analysis All proteomics data were analysed using R (version 4.03) and plotted using Tableau (version 2020.4), outliers greater than 1.5 times the inter-quartile range were excluded for some plots to aid visualisation. Fold-changes were calculated based on median values on a per group basis. Statistical significance was determined using a repeated-measures one-way ANOVA for activation (resting vs thrombin), each dose was analysed separately. Outputs were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction, with significance being set at P<0.05 at an FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Platelet activation induces the secretion of proteins that promote platelet aggregation and inflammation. However, detailed analysis of the released platelet proteome is hampered by platelets' tendency to preactivate during their isolation and a lack of sensitive protocols for low abundance releasate analysis. Here, we detail the most sensitive analysis to date of the platelet releasate proteome with the detection of &gt;1300 proteins. Unbiased scanning for posttranslational modifications within releasate proteins highlighted O-glycosylation as being a major component. For the first time, we detected O-fucosylation on previously uncharacterized sites including multimerin-1 (MMRN1), a major alpha granule protein that supports platelet adhesion to collagen and is a carrier for platelet factor V. The N-terminal elastin microfibril interface (EMI) domain of MMRN1, a key site for protein-protein interaction, was O-fucosylated at a conserved threonine within a new domain context. Our data suggest that either protein O-fucosyltransferase 1, or a novel protein O-fucosyltransferase, may be responsible for this modification. Mutating this O-fucose site on the EMI domain led to a &gt;50% reduction of MMRN1 secretion, supporting a key role of EMI O-fucosylation in MMRN1 secretion. By comparing releasates from resting and thrombin-treated platelets, 202 proteins were found to be significantly released after high-dose thrombin stimulation. Complementary quantification of the platelet lysates identified &gt;3800 proteins, which confirmed the platelet origin of releasate proteins by anticorrelation analysis. Low-dose thrombin treatment yielded a smaller subset of significantly regulated proteins with fewer secretory pathway enzymes. The extensive platelet proteome resource provided here (larancelab.com/platelet-proteome) allows identification of novel regulatory mechanisms for drug targeting to address platelet dysfunction and thrombosis.

### Keywords
Platelet, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.


