### Accession
PXD019834

### Title
Differential protein expression between ESCC and normal tissues

### Description
To understand the difference of protein expression between paired esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and adjacent normal tissues, we collected 10 paired ESCC and normal tissues from surgical resected specimems for high-throughput proteomic experiments. From comparative analysis, the dysregulated signaling pathways in ESCC could be uncovered.

### Sample Protocol
Reduced and tryptic digested peptides from samples were labeled with 8 isobaric ItraQ reagent for an individual run and mixed at an equimolar ratio. Resuspended labeled peptides were pH optimized and separated through strong cation ion chromatography. Samples prepared as such were run through reverse phase LC-MS. The isobaric labeling and LC-MS quantifications were operated in Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI) using optimized quantitative MS-MS protocols66.

### Data Protocol
For Protein identification and data analysis, IQuant was used67. For improved protein identification, a Mascot Percolator and Mascot Parser, a customized post-processing tool was used. The signal to noise ratio was decreased by variance stabilization normalization (VSN). Due to the low abundance or low ionization of peptides, missing the reporter ions is a common phenomenon in isobaric data, and may hinder downstream analysis. A missing reporter was imputed as the lowest observed values to avoid estimation bias. Nonunique peptides and outlier peptide ratios are removed before quantitative calculation (Tukey JW. Exploratory data analysis. Addison_Wesley, Reading, MA. 1997). The weight approach proposed is employed to evaluate the ratios of protein quantity based on reporter ion intensities 68. The ratio between normal and tumor samples were generated for each match control pairs. This way three distinct datasets were generated for ten pairs of tumor and normal samples. Sample number 7 (for both tumor and normal, T7 versus N7) was run in each time to standardize among three datasets. For dataset integration, each dataset was normalized by the T7/N7 ratio for the abundance of the protein in all datasets. Dataset normalized as such was represented as a matrix so that protein abundance (row-wise) can be compared across ten different samples as tumor versus normal quantitative ratios (column-wise) generated from three separate runs.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic landscapes can shape physiologic and disease phenotypes. We used integrative, high resolution multi-omics methods to delineate the methylome landscape and characterize the oncogenic drivers of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We found 98% of CpGs are hypomethylated across the ESCC genome. Hypo-methylated regions are enriched in areas with heterochromatin binding markers (H3K9me3, H3K27me3), while hyper-methylated regions are enriched in polycomb repressive complex (EZH2/SUZ12) recognizing regions. Altered methylation in promoters, enhancers, and gene bodies, as well as in polycomb repressive complex occupancy and CTCF binding sites are associated with cancer-specific gene dysregulation. Epigenetic-mediated activation of non-canonical WNT/&#x3b2;-catenin/MMP signaling and a YY1/lncRNA ESCCAL-1/ribosomal protein network are uncovered and validated as potential novel ESCC driver alterations. This study advances our understanding of how epigenetic landscapes shape cancer pathogenesis and provides a resource for biomarker and target discovery.

### Keywords
Protein expression, Escc

### Affiliations
Univeristy of California, San Francisco
UCSF

### Submitter
Wei Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Univeristy of California, San Francisco


