### Accession
PXD019807

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis provides insights into the aluminum-responsive in Tamba black soybean

### Description
Aluminum (Al) toxicity is one of the most important limitations to agricultural production worldwide. The overall response of plants to Al stress has been documented, but the contribution of protein phosphorylation to Al detoxicity and tolerance in plants is unclear. Using a combination of tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling, immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry /mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), Al-induced phosphoproteomic changes in roots of Tamba black soybean (TBS) was investigated in this study. After AlCl3 treatment, 314 proteins harbouring 420 phosphosites, were significantly changed (fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83, p < 0.05) with 151 up-regulated, 157 down-regulated and 6 up/down-regulated. Enrichment and protein interaction analyses revealed that differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) under Al treatment was mainly related to G-mediated signaling, Ca2+, transcription, translation, transporters and carbohydrate metabolism, roughly clustered for one of associated with inhibition to root growth, and another of citric acid production for resistance to Al detoxicity, which was facilitated by Al3+ through modifying phosphorylation of proteins responsible for carbohydrate metabolism. The results provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of TBS post-translational modifications in response to Al stress.

### Sample Protocol
TB seeds were disinfected with 1% sodium hypochlorite for 20 min and washed in double distilled water for three times. The seeds were incubated on filter moistened papers at 25 °C. After germination, seedlings were transplanted into 8 L aquariums containing 1/2 Hoagland’s nutrient solution (pH 6.0), which was renewed every two days. The seedlings were grown in an artificial lighting room at 27 °C/22 °C (day/night) under constant light (200 μmol/m2/s) for 2 weeks. For treatment, uniform seedlings were pre-grown overnight in a 0.5 mM CaCl2 solution (pH 4.5) at 25 °C under constant light as described above. Then, every ten seedlings were transferred into a 0 (control) or 50 μM AlCl3 (both containing 0.5 mM CaCl2, pH = 4.5) for 72 h. The harvested root tips were stored in −80 °C freezer after snap freezing in liquid nitrogen for future use. For phosphoproteomic analysis, there were three replicates per treatment, namely, CK (1), CK (2), CK (3) for the control groups, and Al (1), Al (2), Al (3) for the AlCl3 groups. The root apices from each biological replicate were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen. The powder was transferred to a 50 mL centrifuge tube homogenized mixing with four volumes of lysis buffer (10% trichloroacetic acid and 65 mM Dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). After centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the proteins were precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 12,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min. The precipitate was washed with cold acetone thrice and then redissolved in STD buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). The protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). In order to enhance the precision subsequent analysis, the proteins of every biological replicate were adjusted to the same concentration. For protein digestion, trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) was added at 1:50 of trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight, and 1:100 of trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 h digestion.  The digested solutions were desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, California, USA) and were vacuum-dried, dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB, and then labeled as CK (3)-126, CK (2)-127, CK (1)-128, Al (3)-129, Al (2)-130, Al (1)-131 using a TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, America). The TMT-labeled peptides were separated to 60 fractions in acetonitrile with a gradient, then were recombined into 8 fractions and dried with the method of vacuum centrifugation. For phosphopeptides enrichment, peptides of each fraction were incubated and gently vibrated in IMAC microspheres suspension, namely loading buffer. The phosphopeptides absorbed by IMAC microspheres were saved by centrifugation, and washed with 50% acetonitrile plus 6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile plus 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with 10% NH4OH and then lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system and then subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) separated on a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). A four–step linear gradient of 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% B in 8 min, 80% B in 3 min and 80% B for the last 3 min were employed at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on the UPLC system. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV and the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan with a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using normalization collision energy settings as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5-E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was applied to processing the MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Phytozome 12.1-Glycine max Wm82.a2.v1 database concatenated with reverse decoy database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was > 40. The thresholds for identification of the significantly differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) was set at fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83, p < 0.05. Functional annotation of DPPs was performed using the Uniprot-GoA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) for GO annotation or InterPro database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) for domain annotation. Firstly, identified protein ID was converted to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function.Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant.For each category proteins, InterPro database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) online service tools (https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) was used to perform KEGG pathway mapping to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Wolfpsort was applied to predict protein subcellular localization. Only categories with a two-tailed Fisher’s corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered as significant enrichment of DPPs against all identified proteins. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their p-values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with p-value <0.05. This filtered p-value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (p-value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. Soft Motif-X was applied to analyzing phosphorylation motifs in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of a site) in the whole protein sequences. The significant threshold was set at p < 0.000001 and the minimum occurrence of motifs was at 20. PPI was analyzed by the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interaction Genes/Proteins (STRING) database (http://string-db.org/). All differentially expressed phosphorylated protein name identifiers were searched against the STRING database version 10.0 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. The interaction confidence score was set at a high level (≥ 0.7). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape (http://www.cytoscape.rog/).

### Publication Abstract
Aluminum (Al3+) toxicity is one of the most important limitations to agricultural production worldwide. The overall response of plants to Al3+ stress has been documented, but the contribution of protein phosphorylation to Al3+ detoxicity and tolerance in plants is unclear. Using a combination of tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), Al3+-induced phosphoproteomic changes in roots of Tamba black soybean (TBS) were investigated in this study. The Data collected in this study are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019807. After the Al3+ treatment, 189 proteins harboring 278 phosphosites were significantly changed (fold change &gt; 1.2 or &lt; 0.83, p &lt; 0.05), with 88 upregulated, 96 downregulated and 5 up-/downregulated. Enrichment and protein interaction analyses revealed that differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) under the Al3+ treatment were mainly related to G-protein-mediated signaling, transcription and translation, transporters and carbohydrate metabolism. Particularly, DPPs associated with root growth inhibition or citric acid synthesis were identified. The results of this study provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of TBS post-translational modifications in response to Al3+ stress.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; aluminum stress; tamba black soybean; tmt labelling; roots tips

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Southwest University
Southwest University

### Submitter
Rongrong Han

### Lab Head
Dr Yongxiong Yu
Southwest University


