### Accession
PXD015494

### Title
Myelin basic protein phospholipid complexation likely competes with deimination in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model

### Description
Analysis of deimination of MBP in the precence of different phospholipid classes

### Sample Protocol
15 µg of total protein from aqueous phase sample were added to 4 times the volume of acetone at 4°C and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 g at 4°C for 30 minutes (Thermo Fisher Megafuge 8R). Supernatant was discarded and pellet (very small) was air dried for 10 minutes. The pellet was re-suspended and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 minutes at room temperature. Following reduction, the re-suspended pellet was alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes while maintained in darkness. Two times the volume of acetone at room temperature were added and centrifuged at 21,000 g at room temperature for 15 minutes (Thermo Fisher Megafuge 8R). Supernatant was discarded and pellet (very small) was air dried for 10 minutes. Pellet was re-suspended in 0.1 ug/µl of chymotrypsin (Promega, V106A) in 15 mM 4-ethylmorpholine, and incubated overnight (~16 hours) at 37°C. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 g at room temperature for 5 minutes (Thermo Fisher Megafuge 8R) and dried utilizing speed vacuum at a temperature of 40°C, leaving about 50 µl of sample. Samples were stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry proteomics was performed on a Q-Exactive instrument after fractionation on a coupled Easy nLC 1000 nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described in our other published reports (59). Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Software Version 2.2.0.388, Released 2017)

### Publication Abstract
Multiple sclerosis has complex pathogenesis encompassing a variety of components (immunologic, genetic, and environmental). The autoimmunogenicity against the host's myelin basic protein is a major contributor. An increase in myelin basic protein deimination (a post-translational modification) and a change in phospholipid composition have been associated with multiple sclerosis. The interaction of myelin basic protein with phospholipids in the myelin membrane is an important contributor to the stability and maintenance of proper myelin sheath function. The study of this aspect of multiple sclerosis is an area that has yet to be fully explored and that the present study seeks to understand. Several biochemical methods, a capillary electrophoresis coupled system and mass spectrometry, were used in this study. These methods identified four specific phospholipids complexing with myelin basic protein. We show that lysophosphatidylcholine 18:1 provides a robust competitive effect against hyper-deimination. Our data suggest that lysophosphatidylcholine 18:1 has a different biochemical behavior when compared to other phospholipids and lysophosphatidylcholines 14:0, 16:0, and 18:0.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mbp

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA


