### Accession
PXD013459

### Title
Rye gluten characterisation - Rye, wheat and barley contain gluten, proteins that trigger immune-mediated inflammation of the small intestine in people with coeliac disease (CD)

### Description
Rye, wheat and barley contain gluten, proteins that trigger immune-mediated inflammation of the small intestine in people with coeliac disease (CD). The only treatment for CD is a lifelong gluten-free diet. To be classified as gluten-free by the World Health Organisation the gluten content must be below 20 mg/kg, but Australia has a more rigorous standard of no detectable gluten and not made from wheat, barley, rye or oats. The purpose of this study was to devise an LC-MS/MS method to detect rye in food. An MS-based assay could overcome some of the limitations of current immunoassays, wherein antibodies often show cross-reactivity and lack specificity due to the diversity of gluten proteins in commercial food and the homology between rye and wheat gluten isoforms. Comprehensive proteomic analysis of 20 rye cultivars originating from 12 countries enabled the identification of a panel of candidate rye-specific peptide markers. The peptide markers were assessed in 16 cereal and pseudo-cereal grains, and in 10 breakfast cereals and 7 snacks foods. Spelt flour was contaminated with rye at a level of 2% and trace levels of rye were found in a breakfast cereal that based on its labelled ingredients should be gluten-free.

### Sample Protocol
Gluten extraction: The gluten-enriched fraction was prepared by dissolving grain or food-derived flour (20 mg) in 200 μL 55% (v/v) propan-2-ol (IPA), 2% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) with incubation at 50°C for 30 min (32). The solutions were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,800 xg and the supernatant was used for subsequent analysis.  Protein digestion: Gluten-enriched extracts (100 μL, n=4) were applied to a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Millipore, Australia), washed with two 200 μL volumes of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) with centrifugation (20,800 xg, 15 min). For cysteine alkylation, 100 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl was added (100 μL) and incubated at RT in the dark for 20 min. The filters were centrifuged (20,800 xg, 10 min) to remove excess iodoacetamide and washed with 200 μL volumes of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl with centrifugation (20,800 xg, 15 min). The buffer was exchanged using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) by two consecutive wash/centrifugation steps. Sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, Sydney Australia) at a concentration of 250 μg/mL in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (200 μL, ~20:1 protein to enzyme ratio) was added to the protein on the 10 kDa filters and incubated for 16 h at 37°C in a wet chamber. The filters were transferred to fresh centrifuge tubes and the filtrates (digested peptides) were collected following centrifugation (20,800 xg, 15 min). The filters were washed with 200 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the filtrates were combined and lyophilised. The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 100 μL of 1% formic acid and stored at 4°C until analysis.  Global proteomic profiling: Gluten-enriched fractions (5 μL) of 20 rye cultivars were analysed with chromatographic separation using a nano HPLC system (Shimadzu Scientific, Rydalmere, Australia) directly coupled to a 6600 TripleTOF MS (SCIEX, Redwood City, USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was undertaken using ProteinPilot™ 5.0 software (SCIEX) using the parameters: Sample type: Identification; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 6600; ID Focus: Biological Modifications; and, Search Effort: Thorough ID. Tandem mass spectrometry data collected for the 20 rye cultivars was searched against in silico tryptic digests of Poaceae proteins of the Uniprot database (version 2019/01; 1,795,884 sequences) appended with the Common Repository of Adventitious Protein (cRAP).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Prolamin, Gluten, Rye

### Affiliations
CSIRO Agriculture and Food

### Submitter
Michelle Colgrave

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Lisa Colgrave
CSIRO Agriculture and Food


