### Accession
PXD030081

### Title
Quantitative proteomic comparison between wild type Col and acinus-2 pinin-1 mutant using 15N metabolic labeling

### Description
ACINUS and PININ genes regulate transcription and alternative splicing (Bi et al., 2021)  and we hypothesize that some proteins should have altered expression in the double mutant. Therefore, MS experiments were designed to identify these altered proteins on a global scale using 15N metabolic labeling.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and acinus-2 pinin-1 plants were grown on Hoagland medium containing 14N or 15N (1.34 g/L Hogland’s No. 2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6 g/L Phytoblend, and 1 g/L KNO3 or 1 g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), pH 5.8). Proteins were extracted from six samples (one 14N-labeled Col, two of 15N-labeled Col, two of 14N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1, and one 15N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1) individually using SDS sample buffer and mixed as the following: one forward sample F1 (14N Col/15N acinus-2 pinin-1) and two reverse samples R1 and R2 (14N acinus-2 pinin-1/15N Col) and separated by the SDS-PAGE gel with a very short run (~3 cm). Two segments (upper part (U) ranging from the loading well to ~50 KD; lower part (L) ranging from ~50 KD to the dye front were excised and trypsin digested. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For data-dependent acquisition, the Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and the top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were extracted using an in-house script PAVA, and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the same TAIR database (TAIR10), to which random sequence versions were concatenated (a total of 35,386 entries) to allow estimation of a false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal methionine loss, N-terminal Glutamate to Pyroglutamate Conversion, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Data were searched with a 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01 and 0.05. 15N labeled amino acids were also searched as a fixed modification for 15N data. 15N labeling efficiency was calculated as about 94%, 97%, and 97% for F1, R1, and R2 respectively, by manually comparing experimental peak envelop data of the 15N labeled peptide from the top 10 proteins in the raw data to theoretical isotope distributions using Software Protein-prospector (MS-Isotope module). Quantification was done using Protein Prospector which automatically adjusts the L/H ratio with labeling efficiency. The WT/acinus-2 pinin-1 ratio was normalized using the median ratio of the top 100 proteins. 15N labeling samples, in general, have less identification rates of proteins because of incomplete labeling.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pinin, Quantification, Arabidopsis, Acinus, 15n metabolic labeling, Protein prospector

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford


