### Accession
PXD044033

### Title
Proteomics of  tumor associated microglia, tumor tissue from SB28 glioblastoma mice, and control microglia

### Description
The 18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO) emerges as an important PET biomarker to assess the tumor microenvironment (TME) in glioblastoma. However, various cellular sources hamper interpretation and biological understanding of TSPO and other immune biomarkers in the TME. Thus, we established a novel method, combining immunomagnetic cell sorting after radiotracer injection (scRadiotracing) with 3D histology via light sheet microscopy and proteomics to dissect cellular allocation of TSPO enrichment in glioblastoma. Single tumor cells of implanted SB28 glioblastoma mice indicated 1.37-fold higher TSPO tracer uptake and 1.46-fold higher TSPO protein expression levels when compared to tumor associated microglia/macrophages (TAMs). Using proteomics, we compared the proteome of tumor associated microglia/macrophages (TAMs), Tumor tissue (TT) and control microglia from WT mice without glioblastoma. This analysis identified TAM specific targets for PET radioligand development with additional potential to monitor diverse TAM subpopulations in vivo. In summary, our data indicate that tumor cells need to be acknowledged as the main contributor to TSPO as a biomarker in glioblastoma. Combining cellular tracer uptake measures with 3D histology facilitates precise allocation of complex PET signal sources and will serve to validate novel TAM specific radioligands.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated TAMs (n=5) and tumor cells (n=3), as well as control microglia isolated from wild-type mice (n=6) were prepared for mass spectrometry based label free protein quantification. The cell pellets were lysed in 50 µL of RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, pH 8.0) at 4°C with intermediate vortexing. DNA was disrupted by ultrasonication (M220 Focused-ultrasonicator, Covaris, US). The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16000 x g and 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatants were transferred to protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). Proteins were reduced at 37°C for 30 min with 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by cysteine alkylation with 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 20 °C. Excess of IAA was removed by adding DTT. Detergent removal and subsequent digestion with 0.2 µg LysC and 0.2 µg trypsin (Promega, Germany) was performed using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation as previously described (Hughes et al., 2019). After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. The peptide amount of tumor cell samples was estimated using a fluorescence based protein assay (Qubit Protein assay, Thermofisher Scientific, US). For mass spectrometry, the injected volume was adjusted on the basis of the counted cell numbers to analyze equal cell numbers with a maximum injection amount of 400 ng of peptides. The peptides were separated on a nanoElute nanoHPLC system (Bruker, Germany) using a 5 mm trapping column (Thermo Scientific, US) and an in-house packed C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated with a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 300 nL/min (0 min, 2% B; 2 min, 5% B; 70 min, 24% B; 85 min, 35% B; 90 min, 60% B) and a column temperature of 50°C. The nanoHPLC was online coupled to a TimsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker, Germany). A Data Independent Acquisition Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) method for spectrum acquisition. Briefly, ion accumulation and separation using Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) was set to a ramp time of 100 ms. One scan cycle included one TIMS full MS scan and with 26 windows with a width of 27 m/z covering a m/z range of 350-1002 m/z. Two windows were recorded per PASEF scan. This resulted in a cycle time of 1.4 s.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis and protein label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with the software DIA-NN version 1.8. The data was analyzed using a spectral library including 13912 protein groups and 208218 precursors in 174909 elution groups generated with the same samples and additional murine microglia samples using DIA-NN searching against a one protein per gene database from Mus musculus (download date: 2022-01-25, 21994 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment ion m/z ranges were limited from 350 to 1002 and 200 to 1700, respectively. Precursor charge states of 2-4 were considered. The mass accuracy for peptides and peptide fragments was set to 15 and 20 ppm, respectively. A FDR threshold of 1% was applied for peptide and protein identifications. Data normalization was disabled to obtain quantification values, which reflect the protein amounts per cell.

### Publication Abstract
Various cellular sources hamper interpretation of positron emission tomography (PET) biomarkers in the tumor microenvironment (TME). We developed an approach of immunomagnetic cell sorting after in vivo radiotracer injection (scRadiotracing) with three-dimensional (3D) histology to dissect the cellular allocation of PET signals in the TME. In mice with implanted glioblastoma, translocator protein (TSPO) radiotracer uptake per tumor cell was higher compared to tumor-associated microglia/macrophages (TAMs), validated by protein levels. Translation of in vitro scRadiotracing to patients with glioma immediately after tumor resection confirmed higher single-cell TSPO tracer uptake of tumor cells compared to immune cells. Across species, cellular radiotracer uptake explained the heterogeneity of individual TSPO-PET signals. In consideration of cellular tracer uptake and cell type abundance, tumor cells were the main contributor to TSPO enrichment in glioblastoma; however, proteomics identified potential PET targets highly specific for TAMs. Combining cellular tracer uptake measures with 3D histology facilitates precise allocation of PET signals and serves to validate emerging novel TAM-specific radioligands.

### Keywords
Tumor associated microglia, Tumor tissue, Sb28 glioblastoma, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


