### Accession
PXD030239

### Title
Hypoxia-Induced Regulation of the Proteome in Multiple Myeloma Cell Lines

### Description
Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy, which is characterized by clonal proliferation of neoplastic plasma cells in the bone marrow. This microenvironment is characterized by low oxygen levels (1-6% O2), known as hypoxia. For MM cells, hypoxia is a physiologic feature that has been described to promote an aggressive phenotype and to confer drug resistance. However, studies on hypoxia are scarce and show little conformity. Here, we analyzed the global proteome in MM cells and the stromal cell line HS-5 to reveal hypoxia-dependent regulation of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For protein expression profiling, lysates from SILAC were mixed in equal amounts and separated by SDS-PAGE using precast Bis-Tris minigels (NuPAGE Novex 4–12%, Life Technologies). After protein staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Serva) each gel lane was cut into 23 slices. The separated proteins in each gel piece were reduced with DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). After in-gel protein digestion with trypsin (Serva) over night, the peptides were extracted from the gel matrix and analyzed by liquid chromatography / tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were first desalted on a trap column (20 × 0.1 mm; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 5 μL/·min in loading buffer [2% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% FA] and then separated on an analytical column (320 × 0.075 mm; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH) using an 80-min linear gradient from 5% to 42% buffer B [95% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% FA] over buffer A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent acquisition scheme selecting the top 20 most abundant precursor ions (charge states 2 to 4) for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and an NCE setting of 28%. Survey spectra (MS) in the range of m/z 350–1600 were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM at m/z 200 and product ion spectra (MS/MS) using a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM at m/z 200. AGC target values and maximum injection times for MS and MS/MS were set to 1 × 106 in 50 ms and 5 × 104 in 50 ms, respectively. Fragmented ions were excluded from isolation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1, MPI for Biochemistry).  Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database containing 88,993 protein entries (downloaded November 2016) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants with the Andromeda search engine [32]. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on both the peptide and the protein level using a forward-and-reverse decoy database approach. For SILAC quantitation, multiplicity was set to two for double labeling (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+8/Arg+10) and at least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantitation. Both the “match between runs” and “re-quantify” options of MaxQuant were enabled. Subsequent evaluation of MaxQuant output data was conducted with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7, MPI for Biochemistry). After removal of hits from the decoy database search and potential contaminants the SILAC ratios were log2-transformed. To assign regulated proteins for each cell line, the SILAC ratios were filtered for 2-fold up- or down-regulation in at least 2 biological replicates. For statistical evaluation of hypoxia-induced protein expression changes a one-sample t-test of log2-transformed SILAC ratios was conducted applying a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <5% to adjust p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy, which is characterized by clonal proliferation of neoplastic plasma cells in the bone marrow. This microenvironment is characterized by low oxygen levels (1-6% O<sub>2</sub>), known as hypoxia. For MM cells, hypoxia is a physiologic feature that has been described to promote an aggressive phenotype and to confer drug resistance. However, studies on hypoxia are scarce and show little conformity. Here, we analyzed the mRNA expression of previously determined hypoxia markers to define the temporal adaptation of MM cells to chronic hypoxia. Subsequent analyses of the global proteome in MM cells and the stromal cell line HS-5 revealed hypoxia-dependent regulation of proteins, which directly or indirectly upregulate glycolysis. In addition, chronic hypoxia led to MM-specific regulation of nine distinct proteins. One of these proteins is the cysteine protease legumain (LGMN), the depletion of which led to a significant growth disadvantage of MM cell lines that is enhanced under hypoxia. Thus, herein, we report a methodologic strategy to examine MM cells under physiologic hypoxic conditions in vitro and to decipher and study previously masked hypoxia-specific therapeutic targets such as the cysteine protease LGMN.

### Keywords
Human, Multiple myeloma, Plasma cells, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University
Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7
60590 Frankfurt am Main

University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University Department of Medicine Hematology/Oncology Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt am Main Germany

### Submitter
Frank Schnütgen

### Lab Head
Dr Hubert Serve
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University Department of Medicine Hematology/Oncology Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt am Main Germany


