### Accession
PXD019400

### Title
Architecture of the chromatin remodeler RSC and insights into its nucleosome engagement

### Description
Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into nucleosome arrays, which are repositioned by chromatin remodeling complexes to control DNA accessibility. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae RSC (Remodeling the Structure of Chromatin) complex, a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler family, plays critical roles in genome maintenance, transcription, and DNA repair. Here, we report cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and crosslinking mass spectrometry (CLMS) studies of yeast RSC complex and show that RSC is composed of a rigid tripartite core and two flexible lobes. The core structure is scaffolded by an asymmetric Rsc8 dimer and built with the evolutionarily conserved subunits Sfh1, Rsc6, Rsc9 and Sth1. The flexible ATPase lobe, composed of helicase subunit Sth1, Arp7, Arp9 and Rtt102, is anchored to this core by the N-terminus of Sth1. Our cryo-EM analysis of RSC bound to a nucleosome core particle shows that in addition to the expected nucleosome-Sth1 interactions, RSC engages histones and nucleosomal DNA through one arm of the core structure, composed of the Rsc8 SWIRM domains, Sfh1 and Npl6. Our findings provide structural insights into the conserved assembly process for all members of the SWI/SNF family of remodelers, and illustrate how RSC selects, engages, and remodels nucleosomes.

### Sample Protocol
RSC was purified from Saccharomyces cerivisiae using a TAP-tag method. A strain modified with a TAP tag at the C terminus of RSC2 was obtained from GE Dharmacon and grown at 30 °C in YPD. 10 L of cells were harvested at OD 7 and lysed using a cryo-mill. The ground cells were resuspended in a lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 250 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 μM ZnSO4, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, 10 μM leupeptin, protease inhibitor, 0.05% NP-40) and dounced to ensure homogenization, followed by an addition of 18 μL of benzonase (Sigma) while spinning on ice. After 10 min, another 18 μL of benzonase were added. Heparin (Sigma) was then added slowly to a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL and incubated for 10 min. The lysate was then spun for 90 min at 17,000 g. Supernatant was collected and clarified through a column frit, then bound to 2.5 mL packed IgG resin and incubated for 4 hours at 4 °C. After incubation, the supernatant was removed. TCEP was added to the lysis buffer for a final concentration of 0.5 mM and washed 5x over the resin. The sample was released via overnight incubation with 25 μg TEV protease in one volume buffer. Following cleavage, samples were spun to collect supernatant. The CaCl2 concentration of the supernatant was brought up to 2 mM and loaded onto 100 μL CBP resin equilibrated five times with wash buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 150 mM KCl, 50 μM ZnCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 10 μM leupeptin, 1 mM TCEP, 0.01% NP-40). After 4 hours of incubation, the supernatant was removed and the resin was washed 2x with wash buffer with 750 mM KCl, then 3x with wash buffer with 250mM KCl buffer, then 1x with wash buffer without CaCl2. The sample was eluted with one volume (20mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 150 mM KCl, 50 μM ZnCl, 2 mM EGTA, 10 μM leupeptin, 1 mM TCEP, 0.01% NP-40) for 30 minutes, then 15 minutes for each subsequent elution. Samples were aliquoted, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
We used the ~250 ug RSC2 TAP-tag purified RSC complex and crosslinked by 4mM bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) at RT for 2 hours. Sample processing and mass spectrometry data analyses were done as described before 15. After plink2 and Nexus database searches against the RSC subunit sequences, about 6.6% of interlinked spectra and 3.1% intralinked spectra were removed after manually spectrum checking. All the crosslinked spectra can be viewed at https://www.yeastrc.org/proxl_public/viewProject.do?project_id=234.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into nucleosome arrays, which are repositioned by chromatin remodeling complexes to control DNA accessibility. The <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> RSC (<u>R</u>emodeling the <u>S</u>tructure of <u>C</u>hromatin) complex, a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler family, plays critical roles in genome maintenance, transcription, and DNA repair. Here, we report cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and crosslinking mass spectrometry (CLMS) studies of yeast RSC complex and show that RSC is composed of a rigid tripartite core and two flexible lobes. The core structure is scaffolded by an asymmetric Rsc8 dimer and built with the evolutionarily conserved subunits Sfh1, Rsc6, Rsc9 and Sth1. The flexible ATPase lobe, composed of helicase subunit Sth1, Arp7, Arp9 and Rtt102, is anchored to this core by the N-terminus of Sth1. Our cryo-EM analysis of RSC bound to a nucleosome core particle shows that in addition to the expected nucleosome-Sth1 interactions, RSC engages histones and nucleosomal DNA through one arm of the core structure, composed of the Rsc8 SWIRM domains, Sfh1 and Npl6. Our findings provide structural insights into the conserved assembly process for all members of the SWI/SNF family of remodelers, and illustrate how RSC selects, engages, and remodels nucleosomes.

### Keywords
Yrsc cxms cryo-em

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute for Systems Biology


