### Accession
PXD009350

### Title
Proteomics at large: Discovery and replication of plasma proteomic biomarkers in independent cohorts - Overweight and obese patients of the Weight Management Clinical program of The Ottawa Hospital

### Description
Holistic human proteome maps are expected to complement comprehensive profile assessment of health and disease phenotypes. However, methodologies to analyze proteomes in human tissue or body fluid samples at relevant scale and performance are still limited in clinical research. Their deployment and demonstration in large enough human populations are even sparser. In the present study, we have characterized and compared the plasma proteomes of two large independent cohorts of obese and overweight individuals using shotgun MS-based proteomics. One cohort comes from a Canadian single-center clinical weight management program while the other one belongs to a multicenter pan-European weight loss study (i.e., the DiOGenes study for which MS proteomic data have been already deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD005216).  The MS proteomic data deposited herein corresponds to the cohort coming from the Weight Management Clinical program of The Ottawa Hospital.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Full details characterizing the workflow and describing the laboratory analysis methodology were previously reported in [1] and [2]. From 25 µL of each plasma sample, 14 abundant plasma proteins were removed, following the manufacturer instructions, with MARS columns (Agilent Technologies) and HPLC systems (Thermo Scientific) equipped with HTC-PAL (CTC Analytics AG) fraction collectors. After immuno-depletion, samples were snap-frozen. Buffer exchange was performed with Strata-X 33u Polymeric RP (30mg/1mL) cartridges mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold, all from Phenomenex. Samples were subsequently evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 °C. Reduction, alkylation, digestion, tandem mass tag (TMT) sixplex (Thermo Scientific) labeling, and solid-phase extraction sample purification (Oasis HLB (cartridges (1cc, 30 mg) from Waters) and SCX (cartridges from Phenomenex)) were performed on a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler (Hamilton). The pooled sixplex TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. RP-LC MS/MS. The samples were dissolved in 500 µL H2O/CH3CN/FA 96.9/3/0.1 for RP-LC MS/MS. LC MS/MS was performed on two identical systems composed of a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1.  For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1500. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation at 35% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2), with a resolution of 15000, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms in the OT. A maximum of 10 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge-states were rejected from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed once on each of the two independent but identical RP-LC MS/MS platforms.  References: [1] Cominetti, O., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Oller Moreno, S., et al., Proteomic biomarker discovery in 1000 human plasma samples with mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2016, 15, 389-399. [2] Dayon, L., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Cominetti, O., Kussmann, M., Comprehensive and scalable highly automated MS-based proteomic workflow for clinical biomarker discovery in human plasma. J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 3837-3845.

### Data Protocol
The UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (08/12/2014 release) including the bovine β-lactoglobulin (LACB) sequence (20194 sequences in total) was used for protein identification. Mascot 2.4.2, (Matrix Sciences) was used as search engine. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and sixplex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus. Sixplex TMT-labeled lysine was set as fixed modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da.  All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+ 4.4.3 (Proteome Software) to be further searched with X! Tandem. Both peptide and protein false discovery rates were fixed at 1%, with a two unique peptide criterion to report protein identification. Relative quantitative protein values were calculated with respect to their measurements in the biological references. The biological references were identical pools of individual plasma samples.

### Publication Abstract
Holistic human proteome maps are expected to complement comprehensive profile assessment of health and disease phenotypes. However, methodologies to analyze proteomes in human tissue or body fluid samples at relevant scale and performance are still limited in clinical research. Their deployment and demonstration in large enough human populations are even sparser. In the present study, we have characterized and compared the plasma proteomes of two large independent cohorts of obese and overweight individuals using shotgun mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Herein, we showed, in both populations from different continents of about 500 individuals each, the concordance of plasma protein MS measurements in terms of variability, gender-specificity, and age-relationship. Additionally, we replicated several known and new associations between proteins, clinical and molecular variables, such as insulin and glucose concentrations. In conclusion, our MS-based analyses of plasma samples from independent human cohorts proved the practical feasibility and efficiency of a large and unified discovery/replication approach in proteomics, which was also recently coined "rectangular" design.

### Keywords
Obesity, Biomarker, Plasma association map, Proteomics, Replication, Mass spectrometry, Overweight

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


