### Accession
PXD022499

### Title
Proteomic analyses of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Fusarium graminearum in response to tebuconazole and carbendazim

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a newly discovered post-translational modification in some prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Here, we carried out proteome-wide analysis of Khib in Fusarium graminearum, identifying the reshaping of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome by tebuconazole or carbendazim, using the most recently-developed high-resolution LC-MS/MS in combination with high-specific affinity enrichment. In total, 3035 quantifiable Khib sites on 937 proteins were identified. With the criteria of fold changes over 1.3, normalized with total proteins, 1083 Khib sites of 509 proteins were considered as significantly affected by tebuconazole treatment, while 344 Khib sites of 227 proteins were significantly affacted by carbendazim. Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis were conducted.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The mycelia were first ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. After addition of four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), samples were lysed by sonication. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. After that, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C and then samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min. The resulting pellets were then washed three times with cold acetone. Finally，the protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each treatment, protein extracted from three independent biological replicates was mixed together for the subsequent assays. Before trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. And then, 100 mM TEAB was used to dilute urea to the concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  TMT labeling and affinity enrichment For TMT labeling, peptide was first desalted and vacuum dried, and then reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB. After that, the sample was processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried. Before enrichment, tryptic peptides were first dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with pre-washed anti-Khib antibody beads (PTM Bio, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. After that the bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, following by four times wash with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  UPLC-MS/MS Analysis  UPLC separation was performed on a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The tryptic peptides were first dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). The mobile phase, composed of solvent A and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), was pumped at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The gradient elution was set as follows: 0-26 min, 6-23% solvent B; 26-34 min, 23-35% solvent B; 35-38 min, 35-80% solvent B; then holding at 80% solvent B for at last 3 min. The peptides were then subjected to nano-electrospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Database Search MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to process the raw MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot F. graminearum database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme with up to 4 missing cleavages allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set as 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on methionine were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 0.01 and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). All the Khib proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. The KEGG pathways of all identified Khib proteins were annotated using KEGG online service tools KAAS (https://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas/) and KEGG mapper (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/mapper.html). The protein domain annotation was performed by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. The program WoLF PSORT, an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II, was used for subcellular localization predication. The soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was employed to analyze the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the Khib site) in all protein sequences. All the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters with default. For enrichment analyses of Gene Ontology, KEGG pathway and protein domain, a Perl module (https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::NSP::Measures::2D::Fisher) were used to perform a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to verify the enrichment of Khib proteins against all identified proteins. In all analyses, a term with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant.  Protein-protein interactions of the Khib proteins were generated by STRING against the STRING database version 10.1 and visualized in R package “networkD3” (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=networkD3). All interactions with a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence) were fetched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; fusarium graminearum; tebuconazole; carbendazim

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Disease and Pest Management of Shandong Province; College of Plant Health Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yanxiang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Jinguang Huang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Disease and Pest Management of Shandong Province; College of Plant Health Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University


