### Accession
PXD029503

### Title
Chicken small yellow and F6 follicles LC-MSMS

### Description
we compared the phosphoproteomes of SY and F6 follicles in laying hens and identified several genes involved in chicken follicle selection.

### Sample Protocol
After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column. LC-MS/MS Analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8).  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database. The InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO  Functional. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain  database was used. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)database was used to annotate protein pathway. we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Soft motif-x was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Follicle, Chicken

### Affiliations
SDAU
Shandong Agricultural University

### Submitter
qiuyue chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yunliang Jiang
Shandong Agricultural University


