### Accession
PXD037932

### Title
The effect of multiple phaJ deletions Pseudomonas putida KT2440 on polyhydroxyalkanoates synthesis

### Description
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a well-known model organism for the medium chain length (mcl) PHA accumulation. (R)-Specific enoyl-coenzyme A hydratase (PhaJ) was considered to be the main supplier of monomers for PHA synthesis by converting the -oxidation intermediate, trans-2-enoyl-CoA to (R)-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA when fatty acids (FA) are used. Three PhaJ homologues, PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC are annotated in P. putida KT2440. To investigate the relationship of fatty acids - PHA metabolism and the role of each PhaJ in PHA biosynthesis in P. putida KT2440, a series of P. putida KT2440 knockouts was obtained.  PHA content and monomer composition in WT and mutants under different growth conditions were analysed.  However, when all three PhaJ homologues were deleted, the mutant still accumulated PHA up to 10.7 % of the cell dry weight (CDW). To identify other potential PHA monomer suppliers by analysing the proteome of the phaJ1maoCphaJ4.  The proteomes of the WT, phaJ1phaJ4 and phaJ1maoCphaJ4 strains in MSM medium with octanoate under nitrogen limited condition were detected. In addition, we found that the deletion of PhaJ1 in P. putida KT2440 has a negative impact on the PHA accumulation in cells cultivated on glucose with nitrogen limitation conditions. It seems PhaJ1 also mediates the synthesis of PHA when glucose was used as the carbon and energy source. To investigate the role of PhaJ1 in PHA accumulation with glucose, the proteomes of P. putida KT2440 wild type, phaJ1, phaJ1phaJ4 and phaJ1maoCphaJ4 mutant growing on glucose were detected and compared.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type P. putida KT2440, as well as phaJ1, phaJ1phaJ4, phaJ1maoCphaJ4 deletion strains were grown in 50 ml of MSM medium with either sodium octanoate or glucose under nitrogen-limited condition. Cell pellets were harvested from 50 ml of culture by centrifugation at 7800 xg, at 4C for 10 min at exponential growth phase and then lysed by 8 M urea solution. The samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. pH was adjusted to 7 with 200 mM NH4HCO3, and proteins were digested using proteomics grade trypsin. The pH of the solution was brought to 2.5 with formic acid, and peptides were purified using ZipTip C18 columns. The resulting tryptic peptide mixtures were resuspended in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and analysed by Q Exactive Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Scientific, Paisley, UK) connected to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system (buffer A: 97 % water, 2.5 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % acetic acid; buffer B: 97 % acetonitrile, 2.5 % water, 0.5 % acetic acid. All solvents are of LCMS grade). Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75 μm ID, pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instrument P2000)), packed with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9 μm) reverse phase media column, and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nL min−1. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C and a potential of 2300 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired with the MS operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution (70,000) MS scan (300–1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using HCD.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were identified, and proteins were quantified using the Andromeda peptide identification algorithm integrated into MaxQuant (v2.1.4.0), searching against the UniProt database of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 ((taxonomy_id:160488) in UniProtKB search (5529) | UniProt). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used to compare the expression level of proteins present in different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a well-known model organism for the medium-chain-length (mcl) polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) accumulation. (R)-Specific enoyl-coenzyme A hydratase (PhaJ) was considered to be the main supplier of monomers for PHA synthesis by converting the &#x3b2;-oxidation intermediate, trans-2-enoyl-CoA to (R)-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA when fatty acids (FA) are used. Three PhaJ homologues, PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC, are annotated in P. putida KT2440. To investigate the relationship of fatty acids-PHA metabolism and the role of each PhaJ in PHA biosynthesis in P. putida KT2440, a series of P. putida KT2440 knockouts was obtained. PHA content and monomer composition in wild type (WT) and mutants under different growth conditions were analysed. PhaJ4 was the main monomer supplier for PHA synthesis with FA as sole carbon and energy source, with preference towards C8 and C10 substrate, whereas PhaJ1 showed preference for the C6 substrate. However, when all three PhaJ homologues were deleted, the mutant still accumulated PHA up to 10.7% of the cell dry weight (CDW). The deletion of (R)-3-hydroxydecanoyl-ACP:CoA transacylase (PhaG), which connects de novo FA and PHA synthesis pathways, while causing a further 1.8-fold decrease in PHA content, did not abolish PHA accumulation. Further proteome analysis revealed quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogenases PedE and PedH as potential monomer suppliers, but when these were deleted, the PHA level remained at 2.2-14.8% CDW depending on the fatty acid used and whether nitrogen limitation was applied. Therefore, it is likely that some other non-specific dehydrogenases supply monomers for PHA synthesis, demonstrating the redundancy of PHA metabolism. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; &#x3b2;-oxidation intermediates are converted to PHA monomers by hydratases PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC in Pseudomonas putida KT2440. &#x2022; When these are deleted, the PHA level decreases, but it is not abolished. &#x2022; PHA non-specific enzyme(s) also contributes to PHA metabolism in KT2440.

### Keywords
De novo fatty acid synthesis, Enzyme redundancy, -oxidation pathway, Polyhydroxyalkanoate, Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science
UCD Earth Institute and School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland BEACON - Bioeconomy Research centre, Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland

### Submitter
Si Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin E. O’Connor
UCD Earth Institute and School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland BEACON - Bioeconomy Research centre, Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland


