### Accession
PXD020788

### Title
Global analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in wheat leaf

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel naturally occurring PTM, which is firstly discovered in histone. The system Khib detection at proteomics level has been performed in various species and tissues for the function and role characterization of Khib in biological activities. However, the Khib study in plant species is relatively less and the plant root, one of the critical plant organ, haven’t been studied. In the present study, the first root tissues lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis was performed in wheat specie with antibody immunoprecipitation affinity and high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Bioinformatics analyses including function classification, subcellular location predication, gene ontology enrichment and pathway enrichment were conducted to demonstrate the roles of these Khib sites and proteins in wheat root. In total, 6328 Khib sites corresponding to 2186 proteins were repeatedly identified in three replicates. These Khib proteins showed a wide subcellular location distribution while cytoplasm was the primary subcellular compartment where Khib protein located. Function and pathways characterization of these Khib proteins indicated that many cellular functions and metabolism pathways potentially were affected by this modification. Protein and amino acid metabolism related process may be regulated by Khib, especially ribosome activities and proteins biosynthesis process. Carbohydrate metabolism and energy production related processes including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were also the hotspots where protein Khib occurred. Our work illustrated the potential regulation role of Khib in wheat leaf physiology and biology, which could be used as a useful reference for Khib studies in plant leaf.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The protein extraction was conducted according to previous report with some modifications20. Briefly, clean wheat root tissues were grinded into powder in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. Then the powder were transfer to a tube and re-suspended in ice cold extraction buffer (250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 3μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After and 5 minutes sonication on ice, the extraction buffer was mixed with same volume ice-cold Tris buffer phenol (pH 8.0) and agitated for 15 minutes. After centrifugation at 15000 g for 20 min, transfer the phenolic phase to a new tube and add four volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol to the tube and keep the tube at -20°C for 12 hours. Following centrifugation (15 min, 15000 g), the precipitated protein pellet was rinsed three times with ice-cold acetone, vacuum-dried and stored at −80°C.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was carried out referring previous report with a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer combineing EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 22. The dried peptides were re-suspended in sovent A (0.1% FA, 100% H2O) and centrifuged at 15000g for 10 min. Transfer the supernatant to a RP analytical column (Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 75 μm×50 mm) in an EASY-nLC UPLC instrument (Ultimate RSLCnano 3000). The LC flow rate was set at 250 nl/min and the gradient was 2% to 10% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) for 6 min, 10% to 20% for 45 min, and to 80% within 4 min then holding at 80% for 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Protein metabolism, Key words; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Wheat leaf

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Li
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, China


