### Accession
PXD017230

### Title
HDAC3 preferentially binds to RUNX1 in t(8;21) AML cells and collaborates with RUNX1 to repress AML1-ETO-mediated transcriptional activation

### Description
Human histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) plays an important role in gene transcription in diseased human cells, such as leukemia. The t(8;21) chromosomal translocation is one of the most commonly observed genetic abnormalities associated with acute myeloid leukemia. This translocation generates the AML1-ETO fusion protein between the wild-type RUNX1 transcription factor and wild-type ETO transcriptional corepressor. To better understand the role of HDAC3 in t(8;21) leukemogenesis, the human HDAC3-containing complexes were isolated from stably-transfected HeLa cells by using anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation. The resulting complexes were resolved in SDS-PAGE. The components of the complexes were identified using LC-MS/MS. We report here that the human RUNX1 transcription is a component of the HDAC3 complexes. We demonstrate that HDAC3 and RUNX1 collaboratively repress AML1-ETO-mediated transcription. These results reveal new insight into how AML1-ETO, RUNX1, and HDAC3 crosstalk to deregulate gene transcription in t(8;21) leukemia cells.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). FLAG-tagged human HDAC3 cloned in PCIN4 vector was stably transfected into the HeLa S3 cells. Upon selection by G418 for 5 days, the stably transfected cell clones were expanded into the suspension culture. Nuclear (NE) and cytoplasmic (S100) extracts were isolated by treating cells with a hypotonic buffer, followed by homogenization and extraction with 0.4 M KCl. The resulting NE and S100 extracts were then used for immunoprecipitation with the M2-conjugated agarose. The immunoprecipitated materials were eluted from the beads by using a buffer containing 200ug/ml FLAG peptide. The eluted samples were resolved on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with a buffer containing zinc sulfate. The gel was then cut into small slices, destained, and the proteins in the gel slices were extracted. The extracted proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. The digested peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph, a 75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trapping column, and a 75 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, and an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT searching engines against a human Refseq protein database from NCBI (of 7/6/2015) containing 99,969 sequences.

### Publication Abstract
In up to 15% of acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs), a recurring chromosomal translocation, termed t(8;21), generates the AML1-eight-twenty-one (ETO) leukemia fusion protein, which contains the DNA-binding domain of Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and almost all of ETO. RUNX1 and the AML1-ETO fusion protein are coexpressed in t(8;21) AML cells and antagonize each other's gene-regulatory functions. AML1-ETO represses transcription of RUNX1 target genes by competitively displacing RUNX1 and recruiting corepressors such as histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3). Recent studies have shown that AML1-ETO and RUNX1 co-occupy the binding sites of AML1-ETO-activated genes. How this joined binding allows RUNX1 to antagonize AML1-ETO-mediated transcriptional activation is unclear. Here we show that RUNX1 functions as a <i>bona fide</i> repressor of transcription activated by AML1-ETO. Mechanistically, we show that RUNX1 is a component of the HDAC3 corepressor complex and that HDAC3 preferentially binds to RUNX1 rather than to AML1-ETO in t(8;21) AML cells. Studying the regulation of interleukin-8 (<i>IL8</i>), a newly identified AML1-ETO-activated gene, we demonstrate that RUNX1 and HDAC3 collaboratively repress AML1-ETO-dependent transcription, a finding further supported by results of genome-wide analyses of AML1-ETO-activated genes. These and other results from the genome-wide studies also have important implications for the mechanistic understanding of gene-specific coactivator and corepressor functions across the AML1-ETO/RUNX1 cistrome.

### Keywords
Hdac3, Aml, T(8;21) translocation, Leukemia, Runx1

### Affiliations
The Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope
City of Hope

### Submitter
Markus Kalkum

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
The Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope


