### Accession
PXD011883

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of melanoma metastases derived from adherent cells or suspended cells.

### Description
Detachment of melanoma and survival under anchorage-independency were recognized as initial step of tumor metastasis. Our previous studies showed altered gene expression contributed to loss of cell invasiveness, enhanced chemosensitivity, and enhanced subcutaneous tumor formation. In this study, we demonstrated that melanoma cell detachment altered vascular phenotype of melanoma metastases through disruption of expression axis of aminopeptidase-N/syndecan-1/integrin beta4, which would contribute to melanoma heterogeneity.

### Sample Protocol
The protein contents in adherent, suspended, and re-attached melanoma cells were quantified using dimethyl peptide labeling approach.  The cell lysis and protein extraction were separated into cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions using NE-PER™ Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA). Protein lysates were lyophilized and resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 8M urea. The proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 min and S-alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The resulting proteins were sequentially digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO, Tokyo, Japan) at room temperature for 2 h, and further digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega corporation, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) at room temperature overnight. Digested peptides from suspended or re-attached melanoma cells were labeled with isotopic formaldehyde (13CD2O, heavy-labeled); while those from adherent melanoma cells were labeled with formaldehyde (CH2O, light-labeled). After dimethyl labeling, equal amounts of the heavy- and light-labeled peptides were mixed and desalted. To increase peptide identification, the dimethyl-labeled peptides were further separated into 5 fractions using a strong cation exchange StageTip (Empore Cation Exchange-SR membrane; 3M Company, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA) by elution with different salt concentrations (30, 60, 90, 200, and 500 mM ammonium acetate in 15% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). The eluted peptides were desalted, vacuum-dried, and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid for mass analysis. The fractionated peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system online-coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA). The peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm × 15 cm tip column with 3-μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reverse-phase beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 500 nl/min by gradient elution with two mobile phases: 0.5% acetic acid in water (solution A) and a mixture of 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile (solution B). The gradient was 5–10% B (5 min), 10–40% B (60 min), 40–100% B (5 min), and 100% B (10 min). The LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode with spray voltage of 2400 V. The full MS scan spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired with solution of 60,000 at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap analyzer with auto gain control value of 5×105. The top 10 most intense precursor ions with charge state ≥ +2 were sequentially isolated with an isolation width of 2 Da and auto gain control value of 1×104. The selected precursor ions were then fragmented using collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. The activation q was set to 0.25, and the activation time was set to 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 90 s with an exclusion list size of 500. A lock mass of m/z 445.120024 was applied for all LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). The peak lists were searched with SWISS-PROT sequence database. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine. The search setting included minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, enzyme specificity with maximum of 2 missed cleavages, peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of ±0.5 Da, and false discovery rates (FDRs) at 1%. The results from adherent melanoma cells was as control, and those from suspended or re-attached melanoma cells were compared.

### Publication Abstract
The detachment of tumor cells from extracellular matrix and survival under anchorage-independence were recognized as the initial step of tumor metastasis. Previously we had demonstrated that anchorage-independence altered gene expressions and showed characteristics of cell invasiveness loss, enhanced chemosensitivity, and enhanced subcutaneous tumor formation. However, whether it affected histological phenotypes in tumor tissues remained unclear. Melanoma metastases were generated in nude mice using adherent or suspended melanoma cells. Examination of melanoma metastases revealed histological features of extensive vascular structures in adherent cell-derived tumors, while not seen in suspended cell-derived tumors. Quantitative proteomic analysis at adherent, suspended, and re-attached melanoma cells suggested that aminopeptidase N was potentially downregulated upon cell suspension or reattachment. Downregulation of aminopeptidase N by gene-specific shRNAs showed reduced cell invasiveness and enhanced subcutaneous tumor formation that was consistent with previous observations. Experiments by suppression or overexpression of aminopeptidase N expression demonstrated that aminopeptidase N regulated syndecan-1 and integrin &#x3b2;4 expression through PKC&#x3b4; pathway. Histological analysis at melanoma metastases further suggested that CD31<sup>+</sup>/aminopeptidase N<sup>+</sup>/syndecan-1<sup>+</sup>/integrin &#x3b2;4<sup>+</sup> phenotypes were associated with vascular structures. In summary, we suggested the expression axis of aminopeptidase N/syndecan-1/integrin &#x3b2;4 in melanoma cells was suppressed by detachment stress, which diminished vascular phenotypes of melanoma metastases.

### Keywords
Human, Anchorage independency, Melanoma

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan
Fu Jen Catholic University

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Shao-Chen Lee
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan


