### Accession
PXD013749

### Title
E. coli Affinity purification MS/MS

### Description
The tRNA linked repeat sequence rrB was tagged in either 5'- or 3'- end with the MS2 aptamer and expressed from a plasmid in E. coli. Using the MS2 aptamer, the RNAs were affinity purified after cell lysis. The co-purifying proteins were identified by NanoLC-MS/MS and compared to the proteins co-purifying with the MS2 sequence alone.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) were reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes and separated on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 2 h, each gel lane was cut into 13 slices.  In-Gel Digestion The excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 3 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 30-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied.  A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt E. coli database or Salmonella database. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages.  Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used [2]. Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.    Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. For discrimination of unspecifically enriched proteins, LFQ intensities were quantile normalized, and median intensities were calculated. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly enriched proteins, boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of sample versus control with values outside a 1.5x (potential) or 3x (extreme) interquartile range (IQR), respectively, were considered as significantly enriched  [2] Cox, J. et al. MaxLFQ allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction. Mol Cell Proteomics mcp.M113.031591 (2014). doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.031591

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna, Coli, Tlr, Ms2, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen, Department of biology (BIO) Ole Maaloe vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Thoams Stenum

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Askvad Sørensen
University of Copenhagen, Department of biology (BIO) Ole Maaloe vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


