### Accession
PXD003113

### Title
Stoichiometry of the bacterial type III secretion export apparatus

### Description
Bacterial type III secretion systems are cell envelope-spanning effector protein-delivery machines essential for colonization and survival of many Gram-negative pathogens and symbionts. The membrane-embedded core unit of these secretion systems is termed needle complex. The needle complex is composed of a base that anchors the machinery to the inner and outer membranes, a hollow filament formed by inner rod and needle subunits that serves as conduit for substrate proteins, and a membrane-embedded export apparatus facilitating substrate translocation. While the stoichiometry of the base and of the major export apparatus protein have been revealed by structural analyses, the stoichiometries of the other export apparatus components and of the inner rod remain unknown.  We employed peptide concatenated standard and absolute quantification-based strategies to analyze the stoichiometry of the entire needle complex by mass spectrometry. Here we provide evidence that the export apparatus of the type III secretion system encoded on Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 contains 5 SpaP, 1 SpaQ, 1 SpaR, and 1 SpaS. We have corroborated the previously suggested stoichiometry of 9 InvA per needle complex and describe a loose association of InvA with other needle complex components that may reflect its function. These numbers indicate that the inner membrane patch of the needle complex base houses 104 transmembrane domains in total, a dense assembly whose function in the secretion process we merely understand. Furthermore, we present evidence that not more than 6 PrgJ form the inner rod of the needle complex.

### Sample Protocol
Needle complex purification by immunoprecipitation Membrane fractionation, solubilization, and immunoprecipitation (IP) was carried out as previously described (1, 2).  Needle complex purification by CsCl gradient centrifugation Purification of needle complexes of wild type and SpaSN258AFLAG bacteria was carried out as published previously (3, 4) but LDAO was replaced by DDM (0.7% for lysis/extraction, 0.1% for maintenance) for lysis of cells and extraction of NCs throughout the protocol. Furthermore, an initial concentration of 35% (wt/vol) of CsCl was used to prepare the gradient.  Protein in-gel digestion For identification and selection of suitable peptides for PCS construction, the stained protein bands corresponding to the NC were excised from BN-PAGE gels and in-gel digested with trypsin (5). For a better recovery remaining proteins in the gel were again subjected to another tryptic digestion step. After each step extracted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (6). Corresponding eluates were combined and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. For QCAT analysis, BN gel bands showing the purified complex were mixed with the gel bands showing the “heavy” labeled purified QCAT construct prior to in gel digestion. For AQUA analysis, combined eluates were divided into three equal parts. The synthetic AQUA peptides QVIFLALAK (SpaQ) and VGVPVIVDIK (SpaS), labelled with Lys8 on the C terminus (Thermo Fisher Scientific), were added to the digested proteins in three different amounts: 0.375, 0.75 and 1.5 pmol. The peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analyses were performed either on an EasyLC II nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), or on an EasyLC 1000 nano-UHPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), both as described previously (7, 8). Peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with either a 116 min (QCAT analyses) or a 76 min gradient (AQUA analyses) of 5–33% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid). During peptide elution the flow rate was kept constant at 200 nl/min. For Orbitrap Elite analysis, the 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60s. In some cases, an inclusion list containing ions of light and heavy labeled QCAT peptides was applied. For QExactive HF the 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using HCD fragmentation. In AQUA analyses full scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from m/z 480-705 and inclusion list containing ions of light and heavy labeled peptides QVIFLALAK and VGVPVIVDIK was applied and no additional masses were allowed for fragmentation. Full scan resolution was set to 120 000. The target values for the MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were 3x106 and 105 charges (QExactive HF), or 106 and 5x103 charges (Orbitrap Elite). The maximal injection time for MS/MS fragmentation was 110ms and 25ms, respectively.  Reference 1. Wagner, S. et al. (2010) Organization and coordinated assembly of the type III secretion export apparatus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107, 17745–17750  2. Fischer, M. et al. (2014) Pre- and Post-Processing Workflow for Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry Data. J Proteome Res 13, 2239–2249  3. Kubori, T. et al. (1998) Supramolecular structure of the Salmonella typhimurium type III protein secretion system. Science 280, 602–605  4. Monjarás Feria, J. V. et al. (2015) Role of autocleavage in the function of a type III secretion specificity switch protein in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. MBio 6, e01459–15  5. Borchert, N. et al. (2010) Proteogenomics of Pristionchus pacificus reveals distinct proteome structure of nematode models. Genome Res. 20, 837–846  6. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896–1906  7. Carpy, A. et al. (2014) Absolute proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics during the cell cycle of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission Yeast). Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13, 1925–1936  8. Kelstrup, C. D. et al. (2014) Rapid and deep proteomes by faster sequencing on a benchtop quadrupole ultra-high-field Orbitrap mass spectrometer. J Proteome Res 13, 6187–6195

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (versions 1.2.2.9 and 1.5.2.8) as described previously (1, 2, 3) with slight modifications. Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (3), which is part of MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target database consisting of 10,152 protein entries from S. Typhimurium (uniprot 99287, 03/01/2009 and uniprot 216597, 07/11/2012), a database containing the PCS sequences and 248 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 parts per million (ppm) and at the fragment ion level 0.5 dalton (Da) was set for CID fragmentation. AQUA data were processed with a setting of 100% for the FDR (False Discovery Rate), the PEP (Posterior Error Probability) (4) threshold was set to 0.01.  Reference 1. Carpy, A., Krug, K., Graf, S., Koch, A., Popic, S., Hauf, S., and Macek, B. (2014) Absolute proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics during the cell cycle of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission Yeast). Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13, 1925–1936  2. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367–1372  3. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V., and Mann, M. (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10, 1794–1805  4. Käll, L., Storey, J. D., MacCoss, M. J., and Noble, W. S. (2008) Posterior error probabilities and false discovery rates: two sides of the same coin. J Proteome Res 7, 40–44

### Publication Abstract
Precisely knowing the stoichiometry of their components is critical for investigating structure, assembly, and function of macromolecular machines. This has remained a technical challenge in particular for large, hydrophobic membrane-spanning protein complexes. Here, we determined the stoichiometry of a type III secretion system of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium using two complementary protocols of gentle complex purification combined with peptide concatenated standard and synthetic stable isotope-labeled peptide-based mass spectrometry. Bacterial type III secretion systems are cell envelope-spanning effector protein-delivery machines essential for colonization and survival of many Gram-negative pathogens and symbionts. The membrane-embedded core unit of these secretion systems, termed the needle complex, is composed of a base that anchors the machinery to the inner and outer membranes, a hollow filament formed by inner rod and needle subunits that serves as conduit for substrate proteins, and a membrane-embedded export apparatus facilitating substrate translocation. Structural analyses have revealed the stoichiometry of the components of the base, but the stoichiometry of the essential hydrophobic export apparatus components and of the inner rod protein remain unknown. Here, we provide evidence that the export apparatus of type III secretion systems contains five SpaP, one SpaQ, one SpaR, and one SpaS. We confirmed that the previously suggested stoichiometry of nine InvA is valid for assembled needle complexes and describe a loose association of InvA with other needle complex components that may reflect its function. Furthermore, we present evidence that not more than six PrgJ form the inner rod of the needle complex. Providing this structural information will facilitate efforts to obtain an atomic view of type III secretion systems and foster our understanding of the function of these and related flagellar machines. Given that other virulence-associated bacterial secretion systems are similar in their overall buildup and complexity, the presented approach may also enable their stoichiometry elucidation.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Salmonella, Mass spectrometry, Type iii secretion

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine (IMIT) Section of Cellular and Molecular Microbiology Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Wagner
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine (IMIT) Section of Cellular and Molecular Microbiology Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany


