### Accession
PXD018885

### Title
Red-fleshed apples rich in anthocyanins and white-fleshed apples poor in anthocyanins modulate aorta and heart proteome in hypercholesterolemic rats. The AppleCOR study

### Description
New mechanisms-of-action of anthocyanins (ACNs) provided by a red-fleshed apple compared with a white-fleshed apple ACN-poor, and with an ACN-rich extract on the proteome profile of aorta and heart as cardiovascular key tissues were determined. Hypercholesterolemic Wistar rats were separated into the corresponding groups to analyze the proteomic profile of the aorta and heart tissues using nano-liquid chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry. Red-fleshed apple downregulated CRP, C1QB and CFP related-inflammation. White-fleshed apple reduced C1QB, CFB, CFD, C3, and C9 related to the complement system, reduced MB and CP related to iron metabolism, and increased ME1, PKM, and PC related to energy homeostasis. ACN-rich extract increased FMOD, TAGLN, and CAP1 related to cellular structure and decreased PRKACA, IQGAP1, and HSP90AB1 related to cellular signaling. Red-fleshed apple rich in ACNs suggested an anti-inflammatory effect while white-fleshed apple reduced the complement system protein-related. An apple matrix effect reduced inflammatory proteins regardless their ACN content.

### Sample Protocol
36 Wistar rats weighing between 300 and 350 g were divided into 6 groups of 6 animals each (3 males and 3 females) as follows, Group 1: standard chow diet (SCD) (TD. 02028 , Envigo, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom) Group 2: high-fat diet (HFD) (Atherogenic Rodent Diet TD. 02028, Envigo, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom) to induce hypercholesterolemia, Group 3: HFD + red-fleshed apple as a source of ACN (HFD+R), Group 4: HFD  + white-fleshed apple (HFD+W) as a matrix control, Group 5: HFD  + ACN -rich extract (HFD+A); and Group 6: high-fat diet + Atorvastatin (HFD+Atorv) as Atorvastatin as hypolipemiant drug (Supplementary Figure S1). The intervention was: SCD (Group 1) was fed with a chow diet for 9 weeks. The rest of the 5 rat groups fed for 3 weeks with an HFD and for following weeks, in 4 rat groups  the HFD was modified by substituted by 25  %  with R (2  mg ACN/rat/d; HFD-R; Group 3), or W  (Group 4), or A (2mg ACN extract/rat/d; provided via drinking water; Group 5) or Ator (4  mg/kg rat/d;(Pfizer-Egypt Company) was dissolved in the drinking water; Group 6). For 9 weeks, the Wistar rats animals were housed in metabolic cages on a 12 h light-12 h dark schedule at a controlled temperature (21 ± 1 ºC) and humidity (55 ± 10%). Food and water were available ad libitum. The body weight, food and water intake of the Wistar rats were recorded every 3 days. Moreover, on the 24 hours before and 9 weeks after the treatment,  (9 weeks), the rats were caged in metabolic cages for 24 h to collected urine and feces samples.  Proteomic analyses were performed by bottom-up approach using trypsin digestion and two-dimensional fractionation using off-gel and nano-liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Quantification of proteomic changes was performed using TMT-10plex labelling.

### Data Protocol
For Proteomics analyses, the raw data files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Madrid, Spain). For protein identification, all MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5) and were set up to search on Rattus novergicus Swiss Prot databases (8,003 sequences) and The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database containing common contaminants to remove possible false-positive findings. Two missed cleavages were allowed assuming trypsin digestion and a mass error of 0.8 Da for IT-MS/MS, 20 mmu for FT-MS/MS and 10.0 ppm for parent ion (FT-MS) were allowed . Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini were set as dynamic modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modifications and TMT-10plex was set as quantification modification. The false discovery rate and protein probabilities were calculated by Perclorator. Protein quantification was based on tandem mass tag approach, by using the ratio between the reproter ions.

### Publication Abstract
The impact of a red-fleshed apple (RFA) rich in anthocyanins (ACNs), a white-fleshed apple (WFA) without ACNs, and an extract infusion from <i>Aronia</i> fruit (AI) equivalent in dose of cyanidin-3-O-galactoside (main ACN) as RFA was determined by the proteome profile of aorta and heart as key cardiovascular tissues. Hypercholesterolaemic Wistar rats were separated into six groups (<i>n</i> = 6/group; three males and three females) and the proteomic profiles were analyzed using nanoliquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. No adverse events were reported and all products were well tolerated. RFA downregulated C1QB and CFP in aorta and CRP in heart. WFA downregulated C1QB and CFP in aorta and C9 and C3 in aorta and heart, among other proteins. AI downregulated PRKACA, IQGAP1, and HSP90AB1 related to cellular signaling. Thus, both apples showed an anti-inflammatory effect through the complement system, while RFA reduced CRP. Regardless of the ACN content, an apple matrix effect was observed that involved different bioactive components, and inflammatory proteins were reduced.

### Keywords
Apple, Rat tissues, Proteomics, Anthocyanins, Phenolic compounds

### Affiliations
Centre for Omic Sciences (COS) - Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV)-EURECAT
Eurecat, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya. Centre for Omic Sciences (COS), Joint Unit Universitat Rovira i Virgili-EURECAT. Reus, Spain

### Submitter
Pol Herrero

### Lab Head
Dr Nuria Canela
Eurecat, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya. Centre for Omic Sciences (COS), Joint Unit Universitat Rovira i Virgili-EURECAT. Reus, Spain


