### Accession
PXD009185

### Title
Systematic analysis of synergistic proteome modulations in a drug combination of cisplatin and MLN4924

### Description
Chemotherapeutic treatment regimens often take advantage of synergistic effects of drug combinations. Anticipating that synergistic effects on cell biological level likely manifest on proteome level, the analysis of proteome modulations represents an appropriate strategy to study drug combinations on molecular level. More specifically, the detection of single proteins exhibiting synergistic abundance changes could be helpful to shed light on key molecules, which contribute in mechanisms facilitating the synergistic interaction and therefore represent potential target for specific therapeutic approaches. In the reported study, we investigated the drug combination of cisplatin and the neddylation inhibitor MLN4924 in HCT-116 cells via cell biological analyses and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. From 1,789 proteins quantified with two unique peptides, activated RNA polymerase II transcriptional coactivator p15 (SUB1) was highlighted as most synergistically regulated protein using a synergistic scoring approach. Western blotting and analyses of cellular processes associated with this protein (DNA damage, oxidative stress and apoptosis) revealed supporting evidence for the synergistic regulation. Whereas the distinct role of SUB1 in the investigated drug combination needs to be elucidated in future studies, the presented results demonstrated the benefit and feasibility of synergistic scoring of proteome alterations to highlight proteins that likely contribute to the underlying molecular mechanisms of synergistic effects.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics experiments Samples (n = 6 for each condition) for quantitative proteome analyses were prepared in a 6-well plate format. A number of 100,000 cells in 2.5 ml medium were seeded per well and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Then, medium was exchanged by fresh medium containing the desired drug concentrations: cisplatin (5 µM), MLN4924 (0.2 µM), a combination of both drugs, and DMSO (1 %) as carrier control. The treatment was carried out for 48 h at 37 °C. Afterwards, cells were harvested using a cell scraper and the cell suspension was transferred into a 15 ml reaction tube followed by centrifugation at 4 °C (100 rcf, 10 min). The supernatant was removed and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml PBS and transferred into a 1.5 ml tube. After centrifugation (100 rcf, 4 °C, 10 min) and removal of the supernatant, the pellet was washed twice by resuspending in 1 ml cold PBS and subsequent centrifugation (100 rcf, 4 °C, 10 min). The resulting cell pellet was lysed in 40 µl lysis buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.1 % Rapigest) by sonication on ice for 5 min. Afterwards, cell debris were removed by centrifugation (16,000 rcf, 4 °C, 50 min) and the supernatant (approx.. 30 µl) was transferred into a fresh 0.5 ml reaction tube. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. For in-solution digestion, an amount of 4 µg protein was adjusted to a total volume of 20 µl with 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 °C, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at ambient temperature. Trypsin was added (3 μl, 0.1 μg/μl) for digestion for 16 h at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by acidification with 1.5 µl of 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 30 min at 37 °C. Insoluble hydrolyzed surfactant was removed by centrifugation (16,000 rcf, 4 °C, 10 min). The collected supernatant was separated into aliquots containing 350 ng tryptic peptides. These were dried in a centrifugal evaporator, reconstituted in 17 µL 0.1 % TFA, and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). In each run, 309 ng tryptic peptides in 15 µl 0.1 % TFA were injected. The peptides were pre-concentrated for 7 min on a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) using 30 μl/min 0.1 % TFA as eluting solvent. Subsequent separation on an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) was carried out using a gradient from 5 to 40 % solvent B in solvent A over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid; solvent B: 0.1 % formic acid, 84 % acetonitrile). A flow rate of 400 nl/min was used with a column oven temperature of 60 °C. The mass spectrometric analysis was conducted in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (mass range: 300 – 2,000 m/z, resolution: 60,000) in a data-dependent mode. The 20 most abundant ions of a spectrum acquired at MS1 level were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy: 35 %, isolation width: 2 m/z) and measured in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Peptide and protein identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_11, number of sequences: 20,194) was searched using Mascot (ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). Mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ion masses, respectively. Trypsin was set as protease with one allowed missed cleavage. Variable oxidation of methionine was considered and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification. Confidence of peptide identifications was estimated using the target decoy PSM validator function implemented in Proteome Discoverer software. Only high confident peptide identifications with false discovery rates < 1 % were considered in the analysis. Protein grouping function was disabled. Lists of peptide spectrum matches and corresponding peptide and protein identifications were exported as Excel sheets for subsequent import into the quantification software. Peptide identifications were mapped with respective LC-MS features, which were quantified in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (ver. 2.0.5, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). A detailed description of the quantification procedure was reported earlier 19,20. Briefly, all LC-MS/MS runs were matched to a reference run of a master mix consisting of equal amounts of all samples. From all selected features, only those comprising charges of 2+ to 4+ were selected. Features with two or less isotopic peaks were discarded. Afterwards, raw abundances of each feature were automatically normalized for correcting experimental variations. The samples were grouped corresponding to the experimental conditions and quantified features were mapped to peptide identification obtained from the abovementioned database searches. Protein grouping was disabled and protein quantification was conducted based on unique peptides only. The generated list of quantified proteins was exported for subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chemotherapeutic treatment regimens often take advantage of synergistic effects of drug combinations. Anticipating that synergistic effects on the cell biological level likely manifest on the proteome level, the analysis of proteome modulations represents an appropriate strategy to study drug combinations on a molecular level. More specifically, the detection of single proteins exhibiting synergistic abundance changes could be helpful to shed light on key molecules, which contribute in mechanisms facilitating the synergistic interaction and therefore represent potential targets for specific therapeutic approaches. In the reported study we aimed to provide evidence for this assumption and investigated the drug combination of cisplatin and the neddylation inhibitor MLN4924 in HCT-116 cells via cell biological analyses and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. From 1789 proteins quantified with two unique peptides, activated RNA polymerase II transcriptional coactivator p15 (SUB1) was highlighted as the most synergistically regulated protein using a synergistic scoring approach. Western blotting and analyses of cellular processes associated with this protein (DNA damage, oxidative stress and apoptosis) revealed supporting evidence for the synergistic regulation. Whereas the distinct role of SUB1 in the investigated drug combination needs to be elucidated in future studies, the presented results demonstrated the benefit and feasibility of synergistic scoring of proteome alterations to highlight proteins that likely contribute to the underlying molecular mechanisms of synergistic effects. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009185.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Synergy

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Universitätsstr. 150 D-44801 Bochum Germany
Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Dominik Andre Meger

### Lab Head
Dr Dominik Andre Megger
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Universitätsstr. 150 D-44801 Bochum Germany


