### Accession
PXD003659

### Title
Probing the protein inventory of the human pathogen Clostridium difficile

### Description
The anaerobic and spore-forming bacterium Clostridium difficile has turned into an intensively studied species which can be attributed to increasing numbers of infections and rising costs for the health care system. This dataset represents a benchmark proteome of reference strain C. difficile 630erm and provides mass spectrometry based details on identified proteins which was generally missing from hitherto published datasets. An elaborate annotation and visualization of the 3764 open reading frames will serve as a valuable base for researchers trying to evaluate results of global expression studies. Furthermore, protein expression of late exponentially growing cells in the complex medium BHI and in C. difficile minimal medium was compared. Whereas abundance of proteins of DNA metabolism, protein synthesis and cell envelope showed no variation, enzymes for the biosynthesis of some vitamins and purine as well as proteins involved in butanoate fermentation differed significantly depending on the growth medium.

### Sample Protocol
Each cell pellet was solubilized in 600 µL lysis buffer (11 M urea, 3 M thiourea, 70 mM DTT, 4% CHAPS) and lyzed by ultrasonication with permanent cooling (Bandelin Sonopuls HD 3200 with MS73, 6 cycles of 1 min 60% amplitude). Protein extracts were mixed with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone and proteins precipitated overnight at -20 °C. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 45 min, at room temperature), pellets washed with 80% acetone and 100% acetone. Air-dried protein pellets were each solubilized in 100 µl 11 M urea, 3 M thiourea and 1% SDS. Thirty µg of proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX 4-20% Precast Midi Gel, BIO-RAD) and Coomassie-stained. Gel lanes were cut into 10 slices, proteins trypsinized in-gel and peptides eluted as described previously [S3]. In brief, gel pieces were destained in 50% methanol, dehydrated with acetonitrile, rehydrated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and again completely dehydrated in acetonitrile. A 20 ng/µL trypsin solution (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dry gel pieces and protein digestion allowed overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted in five sequent incubation steps in acetonitrile, 1% acetic acid, 10 min ultrasonication in 5% acetic acid, 10 min ultrasonication in acetonitrile, and a final acetonitrile treatment until complete dryness, whereby supernatants of each incubation step where combined and eventually concentrated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge.  Peptides were desalted using Millipore Ziptips® C18. Therefor, peptides were resuspended by 15 min ultrasonication in 20 µL of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid and ziptipped as described by the manufacturer using 50% acetonitrile as activation buffer, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid as washing buffer and 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid as elution buffer. The 30 µL eluate was concentrated to dryness in a vaccum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C. Shortly before MS analysis samples were dissolved in 10 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS- analysis and raw data processing For LC–MS/MS analyses, in-house self-packed columns were prepared and used with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Fused-silica emitter tips with an inner diameter of 100 μm and an outer diameter of 360 μm were prepared by using a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments). The resulting emitter tip was then packed with Aeris C18 reversed-phase material (3.6 μm particles; Phenomenex) in a custom-built pressure bomb to obtain a 15 cm nano-LC column. Peptides were loaded onto the column by the LC system with 10 μL of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min without trapping. The peptides were subsequently eluted using a nonlinear 85 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). After a survey scan at a resolution of R= 60.000 in the Orbitrap with activated lockmass correction, the 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were not selected for MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with normalized collision energy of 35, and fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap. Database searching and quantification was performed within the framework of the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda algorithm [S4]. Only fully tryptic peptides and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Peptoclostridium difficile 630erm database (UP000032805). Methionine oxidation was considered as variable modification. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a false discovery rate (FDR) of at most 1%, requiring a minimum of at least two unique peptides for protein identification and quantification. Further data processing was performed in Perseus, part of the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.6) and in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free protein quantification, Comprehensive peptide library, Benchmark proteome, Clostridium difficile

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald phone:  ++49 3834 864073

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald phone:  ++49 3834 864073


