### Accession
PXD026332

### Title
Digestive Enzyme Activity and Protein Degradation in Plasma of Heart Failure Patients

### Description
Heart failure is associated with degradation of cell functions and extracellular matrix proteins, but the trigger mechanisms are uncertain.  Our recent evidence in acute multiorgan failure suggests that active digestive enzymes leak out of the small intestine into the systemic circulation and cause cell dysfunctions and organ failure. Accordingly, we investigated in morning fasting plasma of heart failure (HF) patients the presence of pancreatic trypsin, a major enzyme responsible for digestion.  Western analysis shows that trypsin in plasma is significantly elevated in HF compared to matched controls and their concentrations correlate with inflammatory biomarkers.  The plasma trypsin levels in HF are accompanied by elevated pancreatic lipase concentrations.  The trypsin has a significantly elevated activity as determined by substrate cleavage.  Mass spectrometry shows that the number of proteins in the HF group is similar to controls while the number of peptides was increased about 20% in the HF patients.  The peptides are derived from extracellular and intracellular protein sources and exhibit cleavage sites by trypsin as well as other degrading proteases.  These results provide first evidence that active digestive enzymes leak into the systemic circulation and may participate in myocardial cell dysfunctions and tissue destruction in HF.

### Sample Protocol
Heart failure is associated with degradation of cell functions and extracellular matrix proteins, but the trigger mechanisms are uncertain.  Our recent evidence in acute multiorgan failure suggests that active digestive enzymes leak out of the small intestine into the systemic circulation and cause cell dysfunctions and organ failure. Accordingly, we investigated in morning fasting plasma of heart failure (HF) patients the presence of pancreatic trypsin, a major enzyme responsible for digestion.  Western analysis shows that trypsin in plasma is significantly elevated in HF compared to matched controls and their concentrations correlate with inflammatory biomarkers.  The plasma trypsin levels in HF are accompanied by elevated pancreatic lipase concentrations.  The trypsin has a significantly elevated activity as determined by substrate cleavage.  Mass spectrometry shows that the number of proteins in the HF group is similar to controls while the number of peptides was increased about 20% in the HF patients.  The peptides are derived from extracellular and intracellular protein sources and exhibit cleavage sites by trypsin as well as other degrading proteases.  These results provide first evidence that active digestive enzymes leak into the systemic circulation and may participate in myocardial cell dysfunctions and tissue destruction in HF.   A third of each sample was loaded for mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were analyzed by ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization.  The nano-spray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEHTM beads (Waters Corporation).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 2 hours.  The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid).    Mass spectrometer parameters were as follows;  an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range (m/z): 400-1500  (using quadrupole isolation), 60000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2400 V, Ion transfer tube temperature of 285˚C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) was followed by data dependent scans (top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000 at in which the collision event was carried out in a high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (with ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using the PEAKS Studio 8.5™ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).  PEAKS was also used to carry out label free quantification analysis with data filtering capabilities and statistical workflows such as cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Proteomics, Digestive enzymes, Free peptides

### Affiliations
Scientist
Department of Bioengineering Center for Autodigestion Innovation University of California at San Diego La Jolla, California USA

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Geert W Schmid-Schönbein
Department of Bioengineering Center for Autodigestion Innovation University of California at San Diego La Jolla, California USA


