### Accession
PXD027402

### Title
Evaluation of burbot Lota lota spermatozoon motility, lipid composition, protein profile, and swelling rate following change of temperature and osmolality

### Description
Despite available information on the roles of osmotic pressure, potassium (K+), and calcium (Ca2+) in activation of Eurasian burbot spermatozoon motility, the changes in sperm biochemical composition and mechanisms underlying their activation at temperatures above optimal spawning temperature is still unclear. We explored sperm swelling, lipid composition, and proteome in relation to osmolality and temperature of swimming medium. Higher temperatures increase burbot spermatozoa vulnerability to osmotic pressure, decreasing motility in extremely hypotonic media, and the presence of Ca2+ decreases swelling of spermatozoa. A role of swelling in activation of spermatozoa motility at high temperature was rejected. We observed no differences in protein profile or lipid composition with respect to activation of burbot spermatozoa at high temperature. Burbot sperm activation occurs at higher temperatures without modification of the spermatozoon membrane.  Elucidation of the intrinsic signaling pathway of burbot spermatozoon spontaneous activation requires further study.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for protein analysis, separate sperm samples from 5 burbot males were diluted in SF and AM (100 µL sperm:500 µL medium), incubated for 2 min at 4 and 30 °C, and centrifuged at 3000 × g for 20 min at 4 ℃.  Protein samples were prepared as described by Xin et al. (2019) with minor modifications. Briefly, spermatozoa were suspended in 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4 supplemented with 1 % Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were sonicated and vortexed continuously for 1 h, and subsequently centrifuged at 13 000 × g for 10 min at 4 ℃. The protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Proteins were separated using 2D SDS-PAGE. Spots of interest were excised from the corresponding SDS-PAGE gel and digested with trypsin according to the protocol by Shevchenko et al. (2006). MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired using an Autoflex Speed mass spectrometer. WarpLC 1.3 (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) was used for automatic measurement of microgradient MALDI fractions.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using flexAnalysis 3.4 and ProteinScape 3.1 software (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA). Mascot Server 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) was used to conduct searches against in-house prepared databases containing protein sequences from the Gadus morhua National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (accessed 2018-06-05; 533 418 sequences) supplemented with sequences of common contaminants (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Parameters used for the database search were enzyme specificity, trypsin, two missed cleavages were allowed; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications, N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 50 ppm, and the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set at 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomolecule, Fish lipid, Sperm activation, Osmolality, Protein

### Affiliations
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Sterba
Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia


