### Accession
PXD011245

### Title
Signaling Pathways in Vasopressin-Mediated Regulation of Aquaporin-2

### Description
Vasopressin controls water excretion by regulating the water channel protein, aquaporin 2. Vasopressin acts in the renal collecting duct by binding to a G-protein coupled receptor and activating protein kinase A (PKA). Signaling events beyond PKA are largely unknown. Ultra-deep phosphoproteomic analysis of collecting duct cells isolated from rat kidneys identified and quantified 10,738 phosphorylation sites. Vasopressin significantly altered the abundance of only 219 of these phosphorylation sites, suggesting a highly selective effect on cell signaling. The regulated sites were mapped to cellular processes shown in prior studies to be involved in aquaporin-2 regulation.  The mapping and full data set was used to create an online data resource to guide future studies.

### Sample Protocol
After dDAVP treatment, IMCDs were harvested by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 1 min). The pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 7.5, with ThermoFisher Scientific Halt™ protease and phosphatase inhibitor mixture, plus phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitors NaF (5 mM) and Na vanadate (1 mM) ). Lysates were sonicated with a 0.5-second pulse/0.5-second rest interval for 1 minute followed by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 5 minutes. Protein concentration in the supernatants was determined using the BCA protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL).  1 mg of protein was used for large-scale phosphoproteome profiling. Samples were reduced for 1 hour with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. 40 mM dithiothreitol was added to quench unreacted iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to a sodium deoxycholate concentration of 0.25% and digested with Trypsin/Lys-c (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C in 50 mM TEAB.   Desalting and TMT Labeling 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the solution to reach a pH of 2. The solution was vortexed and held for 5 minutes at room temperature. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g x 5 minutes at 4°C. Peptide samples in the supernatant were desalted using 1-cc Hydrophilic-Lipophilic Balance (HLB) cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) twice and peptides were eluted using 70% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptide samples were dried and stored at -80°C. The above steps were repeated twice for a total of 3 experiments. The peptides were subsequently labeled using the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific 90110) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.  1/100th (8 l) of the sample was saved for total protein analysis and the remaining sample was used for phosphopeptide analysis.  All samples were desalted and dried.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. To obtain comprehensive spectra-peptide matches, we used both Mascot and SEQUEST.  The search criteria were set as follows: 1) 10-ppm precursor mass tolerance, 2) 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and 3) two missed cleavages allowed per peptide. Specific amino acid modifications were: a) the tandem mass isobaric tag (TMT) of lysine (K) or N-terminus (+229.163 Da), b) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C+57.021 Da), c) oxidation of methionine (M+15.995 Da), d) deamination on glutamine and asparagine (N, Q+0.984 Da), and e) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y+79.966 Da). The protein database used was the rat Swiss-Prot (July 9, 2017). The false discovery rate (FDR), was limited to 1% using the target-decoy algorithm.  The results from SEQUEST and Mascot searches were integrated in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the following filters: false discovery rate <0.01, and peptide rank = 1.   Results are reported as abundance ratios between dDAVP-treated samples and vehicle controls with independent control observations for each vasopressin-treated sample.  Control:control ratios were used to characterize the background variability of the method as described in Results.

### Publication Abstract
Vasopressin controls water balance largely through PKA-dependent effects to regulate the collecting duct water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2). Although considerable information has accrued regarding the regulation of water and solute transport in collecting duct cells, information is sparse regarding the signaling connections between PKA and transport responses. Here, we exploited recent advancements in protein mass spectrometry to perform a comprehensive, multiple-replicate analysis of changes in the phosphoproteome of native rat inner medullary collecting duct cells in response to the vasopressin V2 receptor-selective agonist 1-desamino-8D-arginine vasopressin. Of the 10,738 phosphopeptides quantified, only 156 phosphopeptides were significantly increased in abundance, and only 63 phosphopeptides were decreased, indicative of a highly selective response to vasopressin. The list of upregulated phosphosites showed several general characteristics: <i>1</i>) a preponderance of sites with basic (positively charged) amino acids arginine (R) and lysine (K) in position -2 and -3 relative to the phosphorylated amino acid, consistent with phosphorylation by PKA and/or other basophilic kinases; <i>2</i>) a greater-than-random likelihood of sites previously demonstrated to be phosphorylated by PKA; <i>3</i>) a preponderance of sites in membrane proteins, consistent with regulation by membrane association; and <i>4</i>) a greater-than-random likelihood of sites in proteins with class I COOH-terminal PDZ ligand motifs. The list of downregulated phosphosites showed a preponderance of those with proline in position +1 relative to the phosphorylated amino acid, consistent with either downregulation of proline-directed kinases (e.g., MAPKs or cyclin-dependent kinases) or upregulation of one or more protein phosphatases that selectively dephosphorylate such sites (e.g., protein phosphatase 2A). The phosphoproteomic data were used to create a web resource for the investigation of G protein-coupled receptor signaling and regulation of AQP2-mediated water transport.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms, Collecting duct

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, NHLBI, NIH

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, NHLBI, NIH


