### Accession
PXD002590

### Title
Acetaminophen Adducts of Rat Liver Microsomal Proteins using LC-MSMS

### Description
The metabolism of xenobiotics in the liver can give rise to reactive metabolites that may covalently bind to tissue macromolecules, such as proteins. Determination of proteins which are targeted by reactive metabolites is of importance in drug discovery and molecular toxicology. However, there are difficulties in the analysis of target proteins in complex biological matrices due to their low abundance. In this study, an analytical approach was developed for systematic identification of the target proteins of acetaminophen (APAP) in rat liver microsomes (RLM) using ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. RLM samples were first incubated with and without APAP, digested, and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation prior to the UHPLC-MS/MS analysis. Four data processing strategies were then combined into an efficient label-free workflow, meant to eliminate potential false positives, using peptide spectral matching, statistical differential analysis, product ion screening, and a custom-built delta-mass filtering tool to pinpoint potential modified peptides. This study revealed four proteins, involved in crucial cellular processes, to be covalently modified by APAP.

### Sample Protocol
RLM was incubated with and without APAP (in the presence of NADPH), then solubilized in DDM, reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAM, and digested with trypsin overnight. Both treated (A) and control (C) samples were prepared in triplicate (n = 3). The digest was cleaned-up on a OASIS-HLB SPE cartridge and evaporated to dryness under vacuum. SPE extracts were subjected to SCX fractionation using a Zorbax 300-SCX column and an Agilent 1200 series HPLC with a KCl/KH2PO4 (pH 2.75) gradient. Eighteen fractions were aliquoted from each sample, evaporated to dryness under vacuum, and then reconstituted in 10% ACN prior to injection onto an Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 solid core column using a Nexera UHPLC system with a water/acetonitrile gradient. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected on a high-resolution quadrupole-time-of-flight (Q-TOF) TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer in positive ion mode using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) with dynamic background subtraction. The total cycle time was 1.05 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS files from the eighteen fractions were combined and searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (release date 07/01/2015) by ProteinPilot software for rattus norvegicus using the Paragon algorithm. In order to find potential NAPQI adducts, the protein search algorithm was changed to consider a probability of 0.85 for NAPQI modification on cysteine residues. Proteins were identified with a 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) using a target-decoy database search algorithm. MarkerView software was used to generate peak lists and to find features (m/z > 300) showing a fold-change > 3 in the APAP-treated sample compared to the control (no APAP). MetabolitePilot software was employed to find LC-MS peaks with a sample-to-control signal ratio > 20 and at least one APAP-cysteine adduct-related diagnostic product ion. In the two data treatment approaches based on differential analysis, each fraction from the sample was compared to the corresponding fraction from the control. A stand-alone java application (MassBox) was also developed for redundancy removal and peak-pair finding based on a delta-mass equal to the mass of APAP for +1 to +4 charge states. MultiQuant software was used for final verification of potentially modified peptides upon their absence from the control.

### Publication Abstract
Xenobiotic metabolism in the liver can give rise to reactive metabolites that covalently bind to proteins, and determining which proteins are targeted is important in drug discovery and molecular toxicology. However, there are difficulties in the analysis of these modified proteins in complex biological matrices due to their low abundance. In this study, an analytical approach was developed to systematically identify target proteins of acetaminophen (APAP) in rat liver microsomes (RLM) using two-dimensional chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. In vitro microsomal incubations, with and without APAP, were digested and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation prior to reverse-phase UHPLC-MS/MS. Four data processing strategies were combined into an efficient label-free workflow meant to eliminate potential false positives, using peptide spectral matching, statistical differential analysis, product ion screening, and a custom-built delta-mass filtering tool to pinpoint potential modified peptides. This study revealed four proteins, involved in important cellular processes, to be covalently modified by APAP. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002590.

### Keywords
Reactive metabolites, Acetaminophen, Rat liver microsomes, Drug-induced liver injury, Covalent binding, Napqi, High-resolution tandem mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Chemistry Department / Pharmaqam, Montréal, QC, Canada
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à  Montréal (UQÀM) Montréal (Québec) Canada

### Submitter
Lekha Sleno

### Lab Head
Dr Lekha Sleno
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à  Montréal (UQÀM) Montréal (Québec) Canada


