### Accession
PXD023149

### Title
The mitochondrial surface receptor Tom70 protects the cytosol against mitoprotein-induced stress - TAH1 IP

### Description
Most mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as precursor proteins in the cytosol and post-translationally transported into mitochondria. The mitochondrial surface protein Tom70 acts at the interface of the cytosol and mitochondria. In vitro import experiments identified Tom70 as targeting receptor, particularly for hydrophobic carriers. Using in vivo methods, we revisited the Tom70 function, confirming that it supports the biogenesis of carriers and other mitochondrial proteins which considerably expands the set of Tom70-dependent mitochondrial proteins. However, the crucial activity of Tom70 is its recruitment of cytosolic chaperones to the outer membrane. Surprisingly, tethering an unrelated chaperone-binding domain onto the mitochondrial surface complements most of the defects caused by the absence of Tom70. In vivo, small single spanning inner membrane proteins can be particularly problematic when present in excess and the chaperone-binding ability of Tom70 is crucial to suppress their proteotoxicity. Thus, the predominant function of Tom70 is more that of a cytosolic co-chaperone, and its role as mitochondria-specifying receptor apparently is of less immediate relevance.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, yeast cultures (10 OD600) were harvested and washed with water. The supernatant was removed and the pellet resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) and lysed with glass bead lysis using a FastPrep-24 5 G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m s–1, 120-s breaks. The lysate was centrifuged (2 min at 13000 g, 4°C). The supernatant was transferred to a precooled tube and 300 µl dilution buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) were added. 25 µl equilibrated magnetic GFP-Trap A beads were added to the lysate and tumbled end-over-end for 1 h at 4°C.Afterwards the supernatant was discarded. The beads were then washed three times with 800 µl wash buffer I (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol, 0.05% NP40). After adding wash buffer I for the first time, the beads were transferred to a new tub to get rid of the detergent. Then the beads were washed with 500 µl wash buffer II (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol). After wash buffer II was removed completely, 50 µl elution buffer I (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/µl trypsin) was added to the beads for an on-bead digest and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. 15 ng/µl fresh trypsin was added for another 10 min at room temperature. Afterwards the supernatant containing the peptides was transferred to a fresh tube. 50 µl elution buffer II (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM chloroacetamide) was added for alkylating the peptides overnight in the dark at room temperature. For purification of peptides on C18 stage tips, the stage tips were washed with 100 µl methanol (5 min at 500 g), 100 µl buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in MS grade water) and then with 100 µl buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS grade water). To acidify the samples, they were treated with TFA to get a pH <2. The acidified peptides were then added onto the stage tips and centrifuged (5 min at 500 g). After a last wash step with 100 µl buffer A, the peptides were eluted with 60 µl buffer B (5 min, 500 g). With a speed vac, the samples were evaporated until no liquid is left. Then 9 µl buffer A and 1 µl buffer A* (0.1% formic acid, 0.1% TFAin MS grade water) is mixed and the samples was used for mass spectrometry.Peptides were separated on a 30 cm C18 column directly coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.  A 90 min gradient of 2-95% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a constant flow rate was used to elute peptides. Mass spectra were acquired in a data dependent fashion using a top15 method for peptide sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.6.17 using a label-free algorithm (Cox et al., 2014)applying default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mitochondrial protein import, Lc-ms/ms, Ae-ms

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Storchova
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern


