### Accession
PXD004514

### Title
S-Sulfenylation regulates non-enzymatic oxidative protein folding

### Description
The post-translational modification S-Sulfenylation functions as a key sensor of oxidative stress yet the dynamics of sulfenic acids in proteins is largely elusive due to it's fleeting nature. LC-MS/MS analysis has detected the evolution of this modification in oxidative and reducing states.

### Sample Protocol
A single Ig domain of the cardiac protein titin was used to study the cysteine residue modifications. Monomeric protein samples were diluted in either PBS pH 7.4, PBS pH 12.8 or PBS pH12.8 + dimedone. Trypsin digestion of the protein was performed at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4; ThermoFisher). Processed raw data was searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.2; matrix science) against an in-house database containing the protein sequence of interest. Mascot .dat output files were uploaded into Scaffold 4 software (v4.5.3 20160415) for manual verification of mass spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The post-translational modification S-sulfenylation functions as a key sensor of oxidative stress. Yet the dynamics of sulfenic acid in proteins remains largely elusive due to its fleeting nature. Here we use single-molecule force-clamp spectroscopy and mass spectrometry to directly capture the reactivity of an individual sulfenic acid embedded within the core of a single Ig domain of the titin protein. Our results demonstrate that sulfenic acid is a crucial short-lived intermediate that dictates the protein's fate in a conformation-dependent manner. When exposed to the solution, sulfenic acid rapidly undergoes further chemical modification, leading to irreversible protein misfolding; when cryptic in the protein's microenvironment, it readily condenses with a neighbouring thiol to create a protective disulfide bond, which assists the functional folding of the protein. This mechanism for non-enzymatic oxidative folding provides a plausible explanation for redox-modulated stiffness of proteins that are physiologically exposed to mechanical forces, such as cardiac titin.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Human titin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King's College London
King's College London; Physics Department

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Sergi Garcia-Manyes
King's College London; Physics Department


