### Accession
PXD004920

### Title
A complimentary benzophenone cross-linking/mass spectrometry photochemistry

### Description
We introduce a complimentary, heterobifunctional, photoactivatable, benzophenone containing cross-linker and show its successful application to cross-linking/mass spectrometry, by increasing data density, when used alongside a previously developed diazirine-based heterobifunctional cross-linker.

### Sample Protocol
The benzophenone containing cross-linker 4-(sulfosuccinimidylcarboxy)benzophenone (sulfo-SBP) was synthesised in a one-step procedure using EDC.HCl and sulfo-NHS from the corresponding carboxylic acid. Purified human blood serum (HSA)(Sigma-Aldrich) was cross-linked using either sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) (Thermo Scientific) or sulfo-SBP in a two stage reaction. Firstly, lysine residues were allowed to react with the sulfo-NHS ester component of the respective cross-linkers. The photoactivatable groups were then photo-activated using UV irradiation, at 365 nm, from a UVP CL-1000 UV Crosslinker (UVP Inc.). The resulting cross-linked mixture was separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel using MES running buffer and Coomassie blue stain followed by in-gel digestion using trypsin. The resulting digests were desalted using self-made C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 8 µm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a hybrid linear ion trap - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed using a “high/high” acquisition strategy, detecting at high resolution in the Orbitrap and analyzing the subsequent fragments also in the Orbitrap. Survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution. The eight most intense signals in the survey scan for each acquisition cycle were isolated with an m/z window of 2 Th and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap. 1+ and 2+ ions were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmentation (MS2) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 90 seconds exclusion time and repeat count equal to 1.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using default parameters except the setting for “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Peak lists were searched against a database from the sequences of target proteins provided by the CASP Organizing Committee using Xi (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, SDA; fixed modifications, none; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, SDA-loop (SDA cross-link within a peptide that is also cross-linked to a separate peptide). The linkage specificity for sulfo-SDA was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini at one end, with the other end having specificity for any amino acid residue. False discovery rates were estimated following a modified target-decoy search strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Use of a heterobifunctional photoactivatable cross-linker, sulfo-SDA (diazirine), has yielded high-density data that facilitated structure modeling of individual proteins. We expand the photoactivatable chemistry toolbox here with a second reagent, sulfo-SBP (benzophenone). This further increases the density of photo-cross-linking to a factor of 20&#xd7; over conventional cross-linking. Importantly, the two different photoactivatable groups display orthogonal directionality, enabling access to different protein regions, unreachable with a single cross-linker.

### Keywords
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry; high-density data; complimentary chemistry; protein chemistry; human serum albumin

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. 2. Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Adam Belsom

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. 2. Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


