### Accession
PXD031955

### Title
Capillary Electrophoresis Mass Spectrometry for Scalable Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
This project used a custom-built capillary electrophoresis (CE) mass spectrometry (MS) platform to demonstrate the scalable analysis of proteins from single cells of varying sizes and protein content in different vertebrate biological models. Neural tissue fated giant cells were identified in cleavage-stage Xenopus laevis (frog) embryos, and 18 ng from its protein content was analyzed. From cultured primary neurons from the mouse, diluted samples containing ~125 pg of protein digest was measured, estimating to a portion of the somal protein content. Compared to traditional nano-flow liquid chromatography (nanoLC) MS, CE-MS provided higher sensitivity and faster analysis. CE-ESI-HRMS offers a viable approach for scalable single-cell proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The Xenopus protein was collected by capillary microsampling from 16-cell stage embryos and processed for shot-gun MS analysis. Proteins were denatured and trypsin-digested. Microsampling was also used to access the soma legions of dopaminergic neurons. The final peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 50% or 75% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.05% formic acid, which was chosen to aid sensitivity via field-amplified sample stacking. Both Xenopus and mouse neuron peptides were analyzed by our custom-built capillary electrospray ionization electrospray ionization platform. Peptide ions were detected on a high-resolution quadrupole-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo). Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) controlled dynamic exclusion to maximize protein identifications.

### Data Protocol
All primary HRMS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2, Thermo) with the Minora search algorithm against the species under study. For X. laevis, we used the reference  X. laevis v9.2 genome database (downloaded from Xenbase.org on April 14th, 2021, 46,582 entries). The mouse proteome was downloaded from SwissProt on August 11th, 2021, 21,978 entries. Static and dynamic modifications were disabled for Xenopus data and enabled for analyzing mouse neuronal data. Protein identifications were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) against a reversed-sequence decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scalability, Capillary electrophoresis, Proteomics, Subcellular, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA


