### Accession
PXD036968

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 variants evolve convergent strategies to remodel the host response: Infection proteomics

### Description
We sought to compare differences in the human cellular response to distinct SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Here, we infected Calu-3 lung epithelial cells with each of the SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Omicron) compared to two early-lineage controls (VIC and IC19). We performed global abundance proteomics and phosphoproteomics at 10, 24, and, for certain samples, 48 hours post infection to comprehensively characterize the host response to infection.

### Sample Protocol
Following the infection time course, cells in six-well plates were washed quickly three times in ice cold PBS. Next, cells were lysed in 500uL per well of 6M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma) in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and scraped with a cell spatula for complete collection of the sample. Samples were then boiled for 5min at 95°C to inactivate proteases, phosphatases and virus. Samples were frozen at 80°C and shipped to UCSF on dry ice. On arrival, samples were thawed and samples were sonicated for 3x for 10s at 20% amplitude. Insoluble material was pelleted by spinning samples at maximum speed for 10min. Supernatant was transferred to a new protein lo-bind tube and protein was quantified using a Bradford assay. The entire sample (approximately 600ug of total protein) was subsequently processed for reduction and alkylation using a 1:10 sample volume of tris-(2-carboxyethyl) (TCEP) (10mM final) and 2-chloroacetamide (4.4mM final) for 5min at 45°C with shaking. Before protein digestion, the 6M guanidine hydrochloride was diluted 1:6 with 100mM Tris-HCl pH8 to enable the activity of trypsin and LysC proteolytic enzymes, which were subsequently added at a 1:75 (wt/wt) enzyme/substrate ratio and placed in a 37°C water bath for 16-20h. After digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample to a final pH of around 2. Samples were desalted under vacuum using 50mg Sep Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was activated with 1ml 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated with 3 x 1ml of 0.1% TFA. After sample loading, cartridges were washed with 4 x 1ml of 0.1% TFA, and samples were eluted with 2 x 0.4ml 50% ACN/0.25% formic acid (FA). Sixty micrograms of each sample was kept for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. The same sample was used for abundance proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis. For phosphopeptide enrichment, IMAC beads (Ni-NTA from Qiagen) were prepared by washing 3Ã— with HPLC water, incubating for 30min with 50mM EDTA pH 8.0 to strip the Ni, washing 3x with HPLC water, incubating with 50mM FeCl3 dissolved in 10% TFA for 30min at room temperature with shaking, washing 3x with, and resuspending in, 0.1% TFA in 80% ACN. Peptides were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using a King Flisher Flex. For a detailed protocol, please contact the authors. Phosphorylated peptides were found to make up more than 85% of every sample, indicating high-quality enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data from each DDA dataset were used to build separate libraries for DIA searches using the Pulsar search engine integrated into Spectronaut by searching against a database of Uniprot Homo sapiens sequences and both wild-type and mutated SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences. For protein abundance samples, data were searched using the default Biognosys (BGS) settings, variable modification of methionine oxidation, static modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and filtering to a final 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide, peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. For phosphopeptide-enriched samples, BGS settings were modified to include phosphorylation of S, T and Y as a variable modification. The generated search libraries were used to search the DIA data. For protein abundance samples, default BGS settings were used, with no data normalization performed. For phosphopeptide-enriched samples, the significant post-translational modification (PTM) default settings were used, with no data normalization performed, and the DIA-specific PTM site localization score in Spectronaut was applied.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we used unbiased systems approaches to study the host-selective forces driving VOC evolution. We discovered that VOCs evolved convergent strategies to remodel the host by modulating viral RNA and protein levels, altering viral and host protein phosphorylation, and rewiring virus-host protein-protein interactions. Integrative computational analyses revealed that although Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta ultimately converged to suppress interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), Omicron BA.1 did not. ISG suppression correlated with the expression of viral innate immune antagonist proteins, including Orf6, N, and Orf9b, which we mapped to specific mutations. Later Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5 more potently suppressed innate immunity than early subvariant BA.1, which correlated with Orf6 levels, although muted in BA.4 by a mutation that disrupts the Orf6-nuclear pore interaction. Our findings suggest that SARS-CoV-2 convergent evolution overcame human adaptive and innate immune barriers, laying the groundwork to tackle future pandemics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Host response, Infection, Covid-19, Lung, Omics, Host

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco (UCSF)

### Submitter
Mehdi Bouhaddou

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco (UCSF)


