### Accession
PXD020561

### Title
Smooth muscle-specific MMP17 (MT4-MMP) defines the intestinal ECM niche

### Description
Smooth muscle is an essential component of the intestine, both to maintain its structure and produce peristaltic and segmentation movements. However, very little is known about other putative roles that smooth muscle may have. Here, we show that smooth muscle is the dominant supplier of BMP antagonists, which are niche factors that are essential for intestinal stem cell maintenance. Furthermore, muscle-derived factors can render epithelium reparative and fetal-like, which includes heightened YAP activity. Mechanistically, we find that the matrix metalloproteinase MMP17, which is exclusively expressed by smooth muscle, is required for intestinal epithelial repair after inflammation- or irradiation-induced injury. Furthermore, we provide evidence that MMP17 affects intestinal epithelial reprogramming indirectly by cleaving the matricellular protein PERIOSTIN, which itself is able to activate YAP. Together, we identify an important signaling axis that firmly establishes a role for smooth muscle as a modulator of intestinal epithelial regeneration and the intestinal stem cell niche.

### Sample Protocol
in solution digestion with trypsin, LC-MS/MS, orbitrap

### Data Protocol
Max quant with LFQ ratios with uniprot-proteome_UP000000589+reviewed_yes.fasta

### Publication Abstract
Smooth muscle is an essential component of the intestine, both to maintain its structure and produce peristaltic and segmentation movements. However, very little is known about other putative roles that smooth muscle cells may have. Here, we show that smooth muscle cells may be the dominant suppliers of BMP antagonists, which are niche factors essential for intestinal stem cell maintenance. Furthermore, muscle-derived factors render epithelium reparative and fetal-like, which includes heightened YAP activity. Mechanistically, we find that the membrane-bound matrix metalloproteinase MMP17, which is exclusively expressed by smooth muscle cells, is required for intestinal epithelial repair after inflammation- or irradiation-induced injury. Furthermore, we propose that MMP17 affects intestinal epithelial reprogramming after damage indirectly by cleaving diffusible factor(s) such as the matricellular protein PERIOSTIN. Together, we identify an important signaling axis that establishes a role for smooth muscle cells as modulators of intestinal epithelial regeneration and the intestinal stem cell niche.

### Keywords
Mmp17, Smooth muscle

### Affiliations
Utrecht Univeristy
Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR, www.ntnu.edu/cemir) Dept. of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) Trondheim

### Submitter
Mirjam Damen

### Lab Head
Dr Menno Oudhoff
Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR, www.ntnu.edu/cemir) Dept. of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) Trondheim


