### Accession
PXD032352

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the IPF Mesenchymal Progenitor Cell Nuclear Proteome Identifies Abnormalities in Key Nodal Proteins That Underlie Their Fibrogenic Phenotype

### Description
IPF is a progressive fibrotic lung disease whose pathogenesis remains incompletely understood. We have previously discovered pathologic mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs) in the lungs of IPF patients. IPF MPCs display a distinct transcriptome and create sustained interstitial fibrosis in immune deficient mice. However, the precise pathologic alterations responsible for this fibrotic phenotype remain to be uncovered. Quantitative mass spectrometry and interactomics is a powerful tool that can define protein alterations in specific subcellular compartments that can be implemented to understand disease pathogenesis. We employed quantitative mass spectrometry and interactomics to define protein alterations in the nuclear compartment of IPF MPCs. We identified increased nuclear levels of PARP1, CDK1, and BACH1. Interactomics implicated PARP1, CDK1, and BACH1 as key hub proteins in the DNA damage/repair, differentiation, and apoptosis signaling pathways respectively. Loss of function and inhibitor studies demonstrated important roles for PARP1 in DNA damage/repair, CDK1 in regulating IPF MPC stemness and self-renewal, and BACH1 in regulating IPF MPC viability. Quantitative mass spectrometry combined with interactomics is a powerful tool for defining alterations in key proteins important in uncovering disease mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were determined in desalted samples with Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and then samples containing equal amounts of protein (20 µg) were labeled with MTM reagent (Thermal Scientific, USA) as directed by the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide/protein isolation and identification were conducted as described previously.(Sandri et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2016b). TMT-based MS was used to obtain proteomes from 6 samples (3 IPF and 3 control cell lines). LC-MS data was acquired for each concatenated fraction using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) in tandem with a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). Peptides were loaded directly onto a 75 cm x 100-µm internal diameter fused silica PicoTip Emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µm particle, 120 Å pore; Dr. Maish GmbH Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was heated to 55 °C and a flow rate of 300 µL/minute was applied during the gradient. The gradient is as follows: 5-22% Buffer B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 45 minutes, 22-35% B for 25 minutes, and 35-95% B over 10 minutes. The column was mounted in a nanospray source directly in line with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Spray voltage was 2.1 kV in positive mode, and the heated capillary was maintained at 275 °C. The orbital trap was set to acquire survey mass spectra (380–1580 m/z) with a resolution of 60,000 at 100 m/z with automatic gain control (AGC) 1.0E6, 250-ms min injection. EASY-IC was selected for internal mass calibration. The 12 most intense ions (2-7 charged state) from the full scan were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy 35%, and detector settings of 60k resolution, AGC 5E4 ions, 250 ms maximum injection time and FT first mass mode fixed at 110 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40s with a 10 ppm high and low mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching for Protein Detection. The tandem mass spectra were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). We used the Uniprot human Universal Proteome (UP000005640) sequence database from July 12, 2019 merged with the common lab contaminant protein database from, with a total of 174234 entries, for the database searching. The Sequest search parameters included: trypsin enzyme, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification; pyroglutamic acid from glutamine, deamidation of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and TMT 10plex for lysine and peptide N-termini as variable modifications.   Relative Protein Quantification. Scaffold Q+ (v4.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for relative quantification of proteins. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm(Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Channels were corrected for incomplete isotope incorporation in all samples according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker (Shadforth et al., 2005).   Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA(Oberg et al., 2008). Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 46922 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 36422 (78%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying Permutation Test with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The nuclear protein list from the proteomic analysis was imported to the IPA (http:// www.ingenuity.com, 2021). Functional analyses were performed to: i) identify biological functions and/or diseases that were most significant to the dataset; ii) identify conical pathways that were most significant to the dataset; and iii) the proteins associated with the altered biological functions and/or diseases. Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate a P-value determining the probability that each biological function and/or disease assigned to that dataset is due to chance alone (Kramer et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) contribute to tumor pathogenesis and elicit antitumor immune responses in tumor microenvironments. Nuclear proteins might be the main players in these processes. In the current study, combining spatial proteomics with ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) in lung non-small cell (NSC) cancer MSCs, we identify a key nuclear protein regulator, SFPQ (Splicing Factor Proline and Glutamine Rich), which is overexpressed in lung cancer MSCs and functions to promote MSCs proliferation, chemical resistance, and invasion. Mechanistically, the knockdown of SFPQ reduces CD44v6 expression to inhibit lung cancer MSCs stemness, proliferation <i>in vitro</i>, and metastasis <i>in vivo</i>. The data indicates that SFPQ may be a potential therapeutic target for limiting growth, chemotherapy resistance, and metastasis of lung cancer.

### Keywords
Ingenuity pathway analysis, Dna damage, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (ipf), Differentiation, Mesenchymal progenitor cells (mpcs), Nuclear fraction, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
1Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street, SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA

### Submitter
Adam Gilbertsen

### Lab Head
Dr Craig Henke
1Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street, SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA


