### Accession
PXD006554

### Title
Human HepG2 ITRAQ LC-MS/MS -  Integrated proteomic and transcriptomic analysis revealslong noncoding RNA HOTAIR promotes hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation by regulating opioid growth factor receptor (OGFr)

### Description
Long non-coding RNA HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) is involved in human tumorigenesis and dysregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying HOTAIR functions in HCC are not well understood. Here, an integrated RNA sequencing transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic analysis were employed to systematically explore the regulatory role of HOTAIR in HCC. A total of 673 transcripts and 298 proteins were identified to be dysregulated after HOTAIR inhibition. Bioinformatics studies indicated that the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) are involved in many biological processes, especially cancer-related signalling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (ITRAQ) labeling Two sets of control and treatment group samples (0.5-0.6 mg each) were reconstituted in 1 × SDS loading buffer to 5 mg/ml. The samples were reduced by addition of 20 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubation at 90 °C for 10 min. After cooling to room temperature, 100 μg of each sample was run into 10% SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) for 1 cm. Then the samples were in-gel tryptic digest after reduction with 10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min and alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 1 hr to block free cysteine. Trypsin was added to the samples at 1:50 (w : w) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were extracted from gel with 60% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and speed vac dried and washed with 50% acetonitrile to pH neutral. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ according manufacturer’s instructions and combined after labeling and speed vac to dryness. First dimensional separation of iTRAQ labeled peptides High-pH Reverse phase HPLC were used for peptide fractionation using the Alliance 2695 HPLC system (Waters). The iTRAQ labeled and combined samples were solubilized in 200 µl of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH10), and injected onto an Xbridge column (Waters, C18 3.5 µm, 2.1 × 150 mm) using a linear gradient of 1% buffer B increase/min from 2-45% of buffer B (buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate, pH10, B: 20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH10). 1 min fractions were collected and combined into 18 fractions and vacuum-dried and speed vac dried. Nano LC-MSMS Peptides from each fraction were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a UltiMate 3000 RSLC System (Dionex) interfaced with a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto a self-packed 100 µm × 2 cm trap packed with Magic C18AQ, 5 µm, 200 Å (Michrom Bioresources, Aubum, CA) and washed with Buffer A (0.2% formic acid) for 5 min with flow rate of 10 μl/min. The trap was brought in-line with the homemade analytical column (Magic C18AQ, 3 µm, 200 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm) and peptides fractionated at 300 nL/min with a multi-stepped gradient (4 to 15% Buffer B (0.16% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) in 35 min, 15-25% B in 65 min and 25-50% B in 55 min). Mass spectrometry data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition procedure with a cyclic series of a full scan acquired in Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by MSMS scans (30% of collision energy in the HCD cell) of 20 most intense ions with a repeat count of one and the dynamic exclusion duration of 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis The MS/MS data were searched by three search engines (MyriMatch v2.2.8634, X!Tandem v2015.04.01.1 and MS-GF+ v2016.06.29) through IPeak (Wen et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2014a) against the Uniprot human protein database (70615 sequences) with decoy sequences. The following parameters were set for database searching: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4plex (N-term) and iTRAQ4plex (K) were specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), iTRAQ4plex (Y) and Deamidated (NQ) were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for protein identification on MS was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance for MS/MS was 0.05 Da. Full cleavage by trypsin was used, with one missed cleavages permitted. The results from the three search engines were then integrated by IPeak (Wen et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2014a) which is a tool that combines multiple search engine results. Only the identifications satisfying the following criterions were considered: 1) the peptide length ≥ 7; 2) the FDR ≤ 1% at both PSM and protein level. The protein quantification was performed using IQuant (Wen et al., 2014b) with VSN normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Long noncoding RNA HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) is involved in human tumorigenesis and is dysregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying HOTAIR functions in HCC are largely unknown. Here, we employed an integrated transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic analysis to systematically explore the regulatory role of HOTAIR in HCC. A total of 673 transcripts and 293 proteins were found to be dysregulated after HOTAIR inhibition. Bioinformatics studies indicated that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) are involved in many biological processes, especially cancer-related signaling pathways. A set of DEGs and DEPs were validated by quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis, respectively. Further functional studies of the opioid growth factor receptor (OGFr), a negative biological regulator of cell proliferation in HCC, revealed that HOTAIR exerts its effects on cell proliferation, at least in part, through the regulation of OGFr expression. By correlating the omics data with functional studies, the current results provide novel insights into the functional mechanisms of HOTAIR in HCC cells.

### Keywords
Hotair hcc lc-ms/ms itraq

### Affiliations
Institution of  hydrobiology，CAS
Institution of Hydrobiology，CAS

### Submitter
Qian Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Ge Feng
Institution of  hydrobiology，CAS


