### Accession
PXD004293

### Title
Sequence basis of Barnacle Cement Nanostructure is Defined by Proteins with Silk Homology

### Description
Study to identify proteins present at the barnacle substrate interface. These proteins are candidates for adhesion proteins.

### Sample Protocol
We disassembled barnacle adhesive interface using three strategies: i) milligram-scale collection of cement attached by barnacles onto glass microspheres and collection of a thick and opaque cement, ii) non-covalent breakdown of collected materials through the use of organic solvents and iii) protein sequencing of individual bands from SDS PAGE gels as well as proteins collected from the entire gel lane.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were acquired on high resolution mass spectrometers:Q Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap(ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA), LTQ Orbitrap Velos H/ETD(ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA), or on API 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA), mgf files were generated using the appropriate vendor software or Mascot Distiller and searched by Mascot. Dat files were exported from mascot server and protein identifications were validated using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) where XTandem! was used to search a subset of the in house database created from translated RNAseq sequences and previously published data sets - BarnAll_001.

### Publication Abstract
Barnacles adhere by producing a mixture of cement proteins (CPs) that organize into a permanently bonded layer displayed as nanoscale fibers. These cement proteins share no homology with any other marine adhesives, and a common sequence-basis that defines how nanostructures function as adhesives remains undiscovered. Here we demonstrate that a significant unidentified portion of acorn barnacle cement is comprised of low complexity proteins; they are organized into repetitive sequence blocks and found to maintain homology to silk motifs. Proteomic analysis of aggregate bands from PAGE gels reveal an abundance of Gly/Ala/Ser/Thr repeats exemplified by a prominent, previously unidentified, 43&#x2009;kDa protein in the solubilized adhesive. Low complexity regions found throughout the cement proteome, as well as multiple lysyl oxidases and peroxidases, establish homology with silk-associated materials such as fibroin, silk gum sericin, and pyriform spidroins from spider silk. Distinct primary structures defined by homologous domains shed light on how barnacles use low complexity in nanofibers to enable adhesion, and serves as a starting point for unraveling the molecular architecture of a robust and unique class of adhesive nanostructures.

### Keywords
Silk, Proteomics, Cement, Barnacle, Cement proteins, Adhesion

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Dasha Leary

### Lab Head
Dr Kathy Wahl
Naval Research Laboratory


