### Accession
PXD030424

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of breast cancer-derived extracellular vesicles reveals disease-specific phosphorylated enzymes

### Description
Small membrane-derived extracellular vesicles have been proposed to participate in several cancer diseases, including breast cancer. We performed phosphoproteomic analysis of breast cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) to provide insight into the molecular and cellular regulatory mechanisms important for breast cancer tumor progression and metastasis. We examined 3 cell lines as models for breast cancer: MCF10A (non-metastatic), MCF7 (estrogen and progesterone receptor positive, metastatic) and MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative, highly metastatic). To obtain a comprehensive overview of the sEV phosphoproteme derived from each cell line, an effective enrichment phosphopeptide techniques with IMAC and TiO2, followed by LC-MS/MS was achieved. In total, 2003 phosphopeptides on which 207, 854 and 1335 have been identified in MCF10A, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231cell lines, respectively. These phosphorylation sites were mapped to 855 distinct proteins, covering a wide range of functions. These proteins are associated with larger number of diseases and the most common diseases are related to cancer. Among the phosphoproteins identified, we validated four enzymes associated to cancer and present only in sEVs isolated from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines: ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), phosphofructokinase-M (PFKM), Sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) and Sirtuin-6 (SIRT6). With the exception of PFKM, the specific activity of these enzymes was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231 when compared with MCF10A-derived sEVs. This study demonstrates that sEVs contain functional metabolic enzymes that could be further explored for their potential in early BC diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culturing and sEV Isolation  MDA-MB-231 epithelial breast cancer cells (ATCC HTB-26) and MCF10A non-tumorigenic epithelial breast cell line (ATCC CRL-10317) were used in this study. MDA-MB-231 and MCF10A cells were grown and sEVs were isolated from the cell culture media as described in previous work. MCF7 cells were cultured in DMEM/ Ham’s F12 (GIBCO-Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma Life Science). The three cell lines were plated in increased attachment cell culture dishes (VWR) at the density about of 1.7 x 108 cells/mL and grown for 7 days.   Differential Ultracentrifugation (UC)  Cell culture media was harvested after 7 days of incubation and subject to UC to obtain isolated sEVs. 240 mL of cell culture supernatant was collected and immediately centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min. This was followed by a 2,000 g spin on a Sigma13190 rotor (MBI) for 20 min, then a 10,000 g centrifugation for 1 h (SW28 Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter). The supernatant was further centrifuged at 100,000 g for 3 h (SW28 Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter). sEVs were pelleted and collected after the 100,000 g spin. The collected sEVs were washed with PBS and centrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 h (SW28 Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter) and finally resuspended with PBS and stored at -80 °C until further use.  Sample preparation for phosphoproteomics  Isolated sEVs were re-suspended in lysis buffer with a volume ratio of 4:1 (fraction/buffer) consisted of final concentration of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 5% glycerol, 0.1 % n-Dodecyl-D-Maltoside, 0.2 mM DTT, 1.6 M urea, 1/250 (v:v) phosphatase inhibitors (phosphatase inhibitor 2 and 3; Sigma: Cat No. P0044 and P5726), and gently vortexed for 3 min. The suspension was centrifuged for 1 min at 10 000 g and the supernatant was then collected. The protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat No. 23236).   Phosphopeptide Enrichment by IMAC and TiO2  Protein samples obtained from isolated sEVs were reduced, alkylated, digested and desalted as described previously. Phosphopeptide enrichment by IMAC was performed according to the protocol of Pierce Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat No. 88300,). TiO2-phosphopeptide enticement was carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and clean-up kit, Cat No. 88301). All enriched phosphopeptides samples were acidified by adding TFA (1% final concentration), subsequently desalted (TopTip C-18 columns; Glygen Corp.) and dried in vacuum evaporator.   Nano-LC-MS/MS  Samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON, Canada) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Protein digests were reconstituted in 20 μL of water containing 1% of formic acid (v/v) and was separated on an in-house packed column (Polymicro Technology), 15 cm × 70 μm ID, Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å (Phenomenex) employing a water/ACN/0.1% formic acid gradient. Samples were loaded onto the column for 65 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min (0-10 min, 2-2% ACN; 10-40 min, 2-38% ACN; 40-45 min, 38-98% ACN; 45-50 min, 98-98% ACN; 50-55 min, 98-2% ACN; 55-65 min, 2-2% ACN). Three μL of sample were injected. The Orbitrap parameters in ESI+ were as follows: ion source temperature 250°C, ion spray voltage 2.1 kV, top speed mode, full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2,000) acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+2 to +7), and dynamic exclusion (30 s with a ± 10 ppm window). The automatic gain control settings were 5x105 for full scan and 1x104 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%. For the HCD method the AGC (automatic gain control) target for MS1 was set as 5 × 105 and ion filling time set 150 milliseconds. The most intense ions with charge state ≥2 were isolated and fragmented using HCD (higher collision dissociation) fragmentation with 32% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 15,000. The AGC target for MS/MS was set as 5 × 104 and ion filling time set 150 milliseconds and dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) and the Andromeda search engine. Peptides were searched against a human UniProt FASTA file containing 20,396 entries (21.04.2021) and a default contaminants database. Default parameters were used if not mentioned otherwise. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was required and false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both the protein and peptide level, determined by searching against a reverse sequence database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.5 Da. The ‘Match between runs’ algorithm in MaxQuant was performed between all samples to increase peptide identification rate. Proteins and peptides matching to the reverse database were discarded. For label-free protein quantitation (LFQ), a minimum ratio count of 2 was required.

### Publication Abstract
Small membrane-derived extracellular vesicles have been proposed as participating in several cancer diseases, including breast cancer (BC). We performed a phosphoproteomic analysis of breast cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) to provide insight into the molecular and cellular regulatory mechanisms important for breast cancer tumor progression and metastasis. We examined three cell line models for breast cancer: MCF10A (non-malignant), MCF7 (estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive, metastatic), and MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative, highly metastatic). To obtain a comprehensive overview of the sEV phosphoproteome derived from each cell line, effective phosphopeptide enrichment techniques IMAC and TiO<sub>2</sub>, followed by LC-MS/MS, were performed. The phosphoproteome was profiled to a depth of 2003 phosphopeptides, of which 207, 854, and 1335 were identified in MCF10A, MCF7, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, respectively. Furthermore, 2450 phosphorylation sites were mapped to 855 distinct proteins, covering a wide range of functions. The identified proteins are associated with several diseases, mostly related to cancer. Among the phosphoproteins, we validated four enzymes associated with cancer and present only in sEVs isolated from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines: ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), phosphofructokinase-M (PFKM), sirtuin-1 (SIRT1), and sirtuin-6 (SIRT6). With the exception of PFKM, the specific activity of these enzymes was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231 when compared with MCF10A-derived sEVs. This study demonstrates that sEVs contain functional metabolic enzymes that could be further explored for their potential use in early BC diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

### Keywords
  small extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer,  phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
John L. Holmes Mass Spectrometry Facility, Faculty of Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Nico Hüttmann

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Valentinovich Berezovski
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada


