### Accession
PXD040414

### Title
Nicotine administration augments abdominal aortic aneurysm progression in rats

### Description
Inflammation and elastin degradation are key hallmarks in the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA). It has been acknowledged that activation of alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (α7nAChRs) attenuates inflammation, termed the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP). Thus, we hypothesized that low-dose nicotine, an α7nAChR agonist, impairs the progression of AAAs in rats by activating the CAP.  Male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent surgical AAA induction with intraluminal elastase infusion. We compared vehicle rats with rats treated with nicotine (1.25 mg/kg/day) and the aneurysm progression was monitored by weekly ultrasound images for 28 days.  Nicotine significantly promoted AAA progression after 28 days of treatment (p=0.031). Additionally, gelatin zymography demonstrated that nicotine significantly reduced pro-matrix metalloprotease (pro-MMP) 2(p=0.029) and MMP9(p=0.030) activity in aneurysmal tissue. No significant difference was found in elastin content or the score of elastin degradation between the groups. Neither infiltrating neutrophils nor macrophages, nor aneurysmal messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines differed between the vehicle and nicotine group. Finally, no difference in mRNA levels of markers for antioxidative stress or vascular smooth muscle cells contractile phenotype was observed. However, proteomics analyses of non-aneurysmal abdominal aortas revealed that nicotine decreased proteins in the ontology terms inflammation and reactive oxygen species and in contradiction to augmented AAAs. In conclusion, treatment with the given nicotine dose augmented AAA progression in this rat model.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of non-aneurysmal abdominal aortic tissue for mass spectrometry was performed as previously described (PMID: 34145342). In brief, formalin fixed tissue was homogenized in a lysis buffer, then denatured, alkylated, and digested with trypsin overnight. Tryptic peptides were purified on custom-made Poros R2/R3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Slangerup, Denmark) columns, and peptide concentration was normalized across samples. Samples (4 μg tryptic peptides per sample) were randomly labelled with 16-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA); mass tag 126 was a pool of all samples and served as internal control.

### Data Protocol
All Eclipse raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)using the sequest search engine resticted. Database search was restricted to rat, TMTpro and carbamidomethylated cystein was set as fixed modifications wereas deamidation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation and elastin degradation are key hallmarks in the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs). It has been acknowledged that activation of alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (&#x3b1;7nAChRs) attenuates inflammation, termed the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP). Thus, we hypothesize that low-dose nicotine impairs the progression of elastase-induced AAAs in rats by exerting anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress properties. Male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent surgical AAA induction with intraluminal elastase infusion. We compared vehicle rats with rats treated with nicotine (1.25 mg/kg/day), and aneurysm progression was monitored by weekly ultrasound images for 28 days. Nicotine treatment significantly promoted AAA progression (<i>p</i> = 0.031). Additionally, gelatin zymography demonstrated that nicotine significantly reduced pro-matrix metalloproteinase (pro-MMP) 2 (<i>p</i> = 0.029) and MMP9 (<i>p</i> = 0.030) activity in aneurysmal tissue. No significant difference was found in the elastin content or the score of elastin degradation between the groups. Neither infiltrating neutrophils nor macrophages, nor aneurysmal messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines, differed between the vehicle and nicotine groups. Finally, no difference in mRNA levels of markers for anti-oxidative stress or the vascular smooth muscle cells' contractile phenotype was observed. However, proteomics analyses of non-aneurysmal abdominal aortas revealed that nicotine decreased myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate and proteins, in ontology terms, inflammatory response and reactive oxygen species, and in contradiction to augmented AAAs. In conclusion, nicotine at a dose of 1.25 mg/kg/day augments AAA expansion in this elastase AAA model. These results do not support the use of low-dose nicotine administration for the prevention of AAA progression.

### Keywords
Vascular remodeling, Animal model, Alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, Proteomics, Inflammation, Aortic aneurysm, Therapeutic strategy, Nicotine

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab, Dept. Clinical Biochemistry, Odense University Hospital
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Proteomics Lab, Dept. Clinical Biochemistry, Odense University Hospital


