### Accession
PXD011837

### Title
Prkar1a_SILAC_Proteomics

### Description
Evading immune destruction is a hallmark of cancer and a key feature for the resistance to cancer immunotherapy. Genetic alterations can directly influence the nature of cancer cells in the native tumor microenvironment to mediate immune escape. Our genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screens robustly identified multiple regulators of tumor-intrinsic factors that alter the ability of cells to grow as tumors across different levels of immunocompetence. As a convergent hit from these screens, Prkar1a mutant cells are able to robustly outgrow as tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts. Functional interrogation showed that Prkar1a loss greatly altered the transcriptome and proteome involved in inflammatory and immune responses as well as extracellular protein production. Single cell transcriptomic profiling and flow cytometry analysis mapped the tumor microenvironment of Prkar1a mutant tumors, and revealed the transcriptomic alterations in host myeloid cells. Taken together, tumor-intrinsic mutations in Prkar1a led to drastic alterations in the genetic program of cancer cells, thereby remodeling the tumor microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Please see Codina and Renauer et al., Cell Systems (in press)

### Data Protocol
Please see Codina and Renauer et al., Cell Systems (in press)

### Publication Abstract
The genetic makeup of cancer cells directs oncogenesis and influences the tumor microenvironment. In this study, we massively profiled genes that functionally drive tumorigenesis using genome-scale in&#xa0;vivo CRISPR screens in hosts with different levels of immunocompetence. As a convergent hit from these screens, Prkar1a mutant cells are able to robustly outgrow as tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts. Functional interrogation showed that Prkar1a loss greatly altered the transcriptome and proteome involved in inflammatory and immune responses as well as extracellular protein production. Single-cell transcriptomic profiling and flow cytometry analysis mapped the tumor microenvironment of Prkar1a mutant tumors and revealed the transcriptomic alterations in host myeloid cells. Taken together, our data suggest that tumor-intrinsic mutations in Prkar1a lead to drastic alterations in the genetic program of cancer cells, thereby remodeling the tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Mouse prkar1a silac phosphoproteomics proteomics

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale System Biology Institute, Yale Department of Genetics, Yale Center for Cancer Systems Biology

### Submitter
Paul Renauer

### Lab Head
Dr Sidi Chen
Yale System Biology Institute, Yale Department of Genetics, Yale Center for Cancer Systems Biology


