### Accession
PXD030752

### Title
Signaling mechanisms of the prototypical psychedelic LSD

### Description
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) 5-HT2-family receptors are the key targets of the prototypical psychedelic LSD. Although the canonical signaling pathway for 5-HT2 receptors is mediated by Gq protein, recent studies suggest that G-protein independent signaling, namely β-arrestin signaling pathway, may be also essential for actions of LSD in vitro and in vivo. To gain comprehensive molecular insights into the signaling mechanisms of LSD, we determined the cryoEM structures of LSD-bound 5-HT2BR in transducer-free state, G protein-coupled state and β-arrestin-1-coupled state, respectively. Besides, we use mass spectrometry to determine the phosphorylation sites of LSD-bound 5-HT2BR.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion. 100 µg protein was denatured in 2M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), followed by reduction in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37oC for 30min and alkylation in 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. The protein mixture was digested with 2 µg Trypsin at 37oC for 6 hrs and additional 1 µg Asp-N for overnight digestion at 37oC. The digestion reaction was quenched by a final 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA).  Phosphopeptide enrichment. 100 µL (20 µL per sample) of Ni-NTA magnetics beads (QIAGEN) was washed with 3 x 100 µL H2O, incubated with 100 µL of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) for 30 min, washed with 3 x 100 µL H2O, incubated with 100 µL of 50 mM FeCl3 for 30 min, and washed with 3 x 100 µL 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Beads were resuspended in 150 µL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. 100 µg protein digests were resuspended in 150 µL 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and incubated with equilibrated beads for 30 min. Beads were washed with 3 x 150 µL 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 µL of 50% ACN/0.75% ammonium hydroxide and acidified with 30 µL of 75% ACN/10% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digested peptide samples were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase column (15 cm x 75 µm packed with BEH 1.7 µm particles).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification were searched using the default setting in MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0) with variable modification of methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. All peptide and protein identification were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) 5-HT2-family receptors represent essential targets for lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and all other psychedelic drugs. Although the primary psychedelic drug effects are mediated by the 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> serotonin receptor (HTR2A), the 5-HT<sub>2B</sub> serotonin receptor (HTR2B) has been used as a model receptor to study the activation mechanisms of psychedelic drugs due to its high expression and similarity to HTR2A. In this study, we determined the cryo-EM structures of LSD-bound HTR2B in the transducer-free, Gq-protein-coupled, and &#x3b2;-arrestin-1-coupled states. These structures provide distinct signaling snapshots of LSD's action, ranging from the transducer-free, partially active state to the transducer-coupled, fully active states. Insights from this study will both provide comprehensive molecular insights into the signaling mechanisms of the prototypical psychedelic LSD and accelerate the discovery of novel psychedelic drugs.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of California-San Francisco

### Submitter
Xiaofang Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Huttenhain
University of California-San Francisco


