### Accession
PXD000510

### Title
Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 proteome's cyclic rhythm by LC-MSMS

### Description
To uncover the variation in protein abundances during 48 hours under light and dark cycles (12:12-hours), we used quantitative proteomics, with TMT 6-plex isobaric labeling. We queried the S. elongatus proteome at ten different time points spanning a single 24 hour period, leading to 20 time points over the full 48 hour period.

### Sample Protocol
The S. elongatus cells were lysed and the extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and Lys-C. After TMT labeling and desalting of the samples a Strong Cation Exchange was performed to reduce sample complexity. The fractions were then analyzed by LC-MSMS using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of each SCX experiment was converted to four .mgf files with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo). Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix science) was used to search the MS/MS data against the S. elongatus PCC7942 Uniprot database (version 4-2010) including a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences (5,826 sequences). Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. The variable modifications used were oxidation (M), TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term). The searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da (HCD). A .dat file of each of the four experiments was exported from Mascot and filtered with Rocker box to an FDR of 1% using the concatenated database decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian rhythms are self-sustained and adjustable cycles, typically entrained with light/dark and/or temperature cycles. These rhythms are present in animals, plants, fungi, and several bacteria. The central mechanism behind these "pacemakers" and the connection to the circadian regulated pathways are still poorly understood. The circadian rhythm of the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 (S. elongatus) is highly robust and controlled by only three proteins, KaiA, KaiB, and KaiC. This central clock system has been extensively studied functionally and structurally and can be reconstituted in vitro. These characteristics, together with a relatively small genome (2.7 Mbp), make S. elongatus an ideal model system for the study of circadian rhythms. Different approaches have been used to reveal the influence of the central S. elongatus clock on rhythmic gene expression, rhythmic mRNA abundance, rhythmic DNA topology changes, and cell division. However, a global analysis of its proteome dynamics has not been reported yet. To uncover the variation in protein abundances during 48 h under light and dark cycles (12:12 h), we used quantitative proteomics, with TMT 6-plex isobaric labeling. We queried the S. elongatus proteome at 10 different time points spanning a single 24-h period, leading to 20 time points over the full 48-h period. Employing multidimensional separation and high-resolution mass spectrometry, we were able to find evidence for a total of 82% of the S. elongatus proteome. Of the 1537 proteins quantified over the time course of the experiment, only 77 underwent significant cyclic variations. Interestingly, our data provide evidence for in- and out-of-phase correlation between mRNA and protein levels for a set of specific genes and proteins. As a range of cyclic proteins are functionally not well annotated, this work provides a resource for further studies to explore the role of these proteins in the cyanobacterial circadian rhythm.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Lc-msms, Synechococcus elongatus pcc7942, Tmt 6-plex

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Laboratory, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences and Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Ana C. Guerreiro

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences and Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


