### Accession
PXD020165

### Title
Using BioID2 to map domain specific Ku70 protein interactors

### Description
To determine if the proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID2) technique could identify and map domain and region specific protein interactors, we conducted BioID2 with various segments of the Ku70 protein in the HEK293 cell line and compared the different datasets. To our knowledge, this is the first study aimed at using BioID2 to directly identify domain and region specific protein interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Using the established stable HEK293 cell lines, biotin incubation occurred for 24 hours prior to harvesting and lysing cells. Protein extracts were bound to streptavidin-conjugated beads and washed before conducting a sequential on-bead digest (Lys-C, Trypsin/Lys-C mix, Trypsin) to release peptides. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 ZipTips and samples were submitted for liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using an FT/IT/CID Top 20 scheme with lock mass. Data was processed using PEAKS Studio version 8.5 using the Human Uniprot database and set to 3 missed cleavages and semi-specific cleavage. Parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Protein and peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while oxidation (M) and N-terminal deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications (maximum number of modifications per peptide = 5).

### Publication Abstract
Since its inception, proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID), an in vivo biochemical screening method to identify proximal protein interactors, has seen extensive developments. Improvements and variants of the original BioID technique are being reported regularly, each expanding upon the existing potential of the original technique. While this is advancing our capabilities to study protein interactions under different contexts, we have yet to explore the full potential of the existing BioID variants already at our disposal. Here, we used BioID2 in an innovative manner to identify and map domain-specific protein interactions for the human Ku70 protein. Four HEK293 cell lines were created, each stably expressing various BioID2-tagged Ku70 segments designed to collectively identify factors that interact with different regions of Ku70. Historically, although many interactions have been mapped to the C-terminus of the Ku70 protein, few have been mapped to the N-terminal von Willebrand A-like domain, a canonical protein-binding domain ideally situated as a site for protein interaction. Using this segmented approach, we were able to identify domain-specific interactors as well as evaluate advantages and drawbacks of the BioID2 technique. Our study identifies several potential new Ku70 interactors and validates RNF113A and Spindly as proteins that contact or co-localize with Ku in a Ku70 vWA domain-specific manner.

### Keywords
Ku70, Hek293, Bioid2, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Sanna Abbasi

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada


