### Accession
PXD013232

### Title
Cellular concentrations of Protein Kinase D1 in HEK293T and INS-1 cells

### Description
Protein kinase D1 (PRKD1, also referred to as PKD1), has been proposed to undergo concentration dependent dimerization in vitro. To test whether the cellular concentration of PKD1 is in the range of the dissociation constant obtained, the expression level of PKD1 was investigated by PRM. To this end, an equimolar mixture of pure, recombinant protein comprising the PKD N-terminus (residues 48-198) and C-terminus (residues 395-892) was used to spike the cell lysates of human HEK293T cells or the rat cell line INS-1. In the latter case, only peptides that are identical between the human and rat PKD1 protein were used to estimate the cellular expression level of PKD1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM high glucose, supplemented with Streptomycin-Penicillin, 2 mM L-Glutamine and 10 % FBS at 37°C with 5% CO2. Cells were washed with PBS, trypsinized and resuspendend in growth medium and counted. Cells were aliquoted to 1.5 - 2.0 *10^6 cells, spun down by centrifugation and resuspended in 100 µl of RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 225 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM TCEP) and frozen in liquid nitrogen.  INS-1 cells were grown in RPMI-1640 medium, supplemented with Streptomycin-Penicillin, 2 mM L-Glutamine, 10 % FBS, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, at 37°C with 5% CO2. Cells were washed with PBS, trypsinized and resuspendend in growth medium and counted. Cells were aliquoted to 3.1 – 3.3 *10^6 cells, spun down by centrifugation and resuspended in 100 µl of RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 225 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM TCEP) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell lysates were thawed on ice for 60 min and vortexed several times. Cell lysates were then spun down in an Eppendorf table top centrifuge with maximum speed, at 4°C for 30 min.  The supernatant was transferred to another tube and proteins precipitated with 500 µl of ice cold acetone. At this point, samples were spiked with different amounts (5, 50, 500 ng) of an equimolar mixture of two recombinant PKD1 proteins comprising residues 48-198 and residues 395-892. The samples were incubated for at least 15 min at -20°C. Precipitated protein was spun down (500g, 4°C, 30 min) and washed with ice cold 80% acetone (500 µl) and spun down again (500g, 4°C, 30 min). Acetone was removed completely and protein pellet was air-dried. The protein pellet was denatured in 8 M urea 50 mM ABC to a protein concentration of 2 µg/µL, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, quenched with 5 mM DTT, diluted to 4 M urea with 50 mM ABC, digested with LysC protease for 3 hours, diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM ABC and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with 1% TFA and the peptides were desalted using custom-made C18 stagetips. The parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assay was set-up based on shotgun measurements of the recombinant PKD1 spike-in, selecting initially eight high intensity proteotypic peptides in a single charge state, with no missed cleavages, no methionine, and an even distribution over the chromatographic gradient. PRM assay generation was performed using Skyline (3), resulting in a scheduled assay with 6-8 min windows. For data acquisition we operated the same liquid-chromatography system under the same conditions as for the peptide mapping but coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument via a customised EASY-spray source (both Thermo Fisher) with coated silica emitters (New Objective). MS parameters: survey scan with 15k resolution, AGC 2E5, 50 ms IT, over a range of 380 to 1400 m/z; PRM scan with 60k resolution, AGC 2E5, 700 ms IT, isolation window of 0.7 m/z with 0.2 m/z offset, and NCE of 32%.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library for PRM data analysis in Skyline was generated as follows: peptides from one replicate with the highest spike-in concentration were identified using X!Tandem version Vengeance (2015.12.15.2). The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.3.5 against the PKD1 target sequence alone, as a target/decoy approach is not applicable to PRM data. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 20.0 ppm as MS2 tolerances; Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed and acetylation of protein N-term and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.31. Given the small database size, FDR validation was omitted and instead the PKD1 spectra manually inspected in PeptideShaker, exported as mzident.ml files and imported to Skyline using a score cut-off of 0.95. The spectra matching transitions at the peak apex were further manually validated in Skyline, with all peptides showing plausible fragmentation spectra, consistent with the shotgun measurements and concentration-dependent behaviour in the dilution series. Data analysis, including manual validation of all peptides and their transitions (based on retention time, relative ion intensities, and mass accuracy), and relative quantification was performed in Skyline. Three of the eight target peptides were removed from the analysis due to strong interfering signals from the background matrix at lower concentrations, or in case there were less than three transitions detectable over the whole concentration range. Up to ten of the most intense non-interfering transitions of the five target peptides were selected and their peak areas were summed for peptide quantification (total peak area). Peptide intensities were summed to protein intensities. To correct for minor variations in sample injection amounts and instrument stability, the total ion current of all MS1 scans between 10 and 60 min of the gradient was summed for each run and used as a global normalization factor. The signals of un-spiked samples were subtracted from those of the dilution series of spiked samples and scaled for easier interpretation before performing regression analysis.  As a rough assessment of the cellular concentration range of PKD1 in INS-1 cells the PRM assay was repeated in two biological replicates based upon the three peptide sequences shared between rat and human. Of these three peptides two could be used for quantification according to the same criteria as described above, although only one peptide could be detected in all spiked and un-spiked samples in both biological replicates. Therefore, peptide intensities were not summed but analysed individually and the data was not globally normalized. The un-spiked peptide signals were subtracted from the spiked samples before performing linear regression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase D (PKD) is an essential Ser/Thr kinase in animals and controls a variety of diverse cellular functions, including vesicle trafficking and mitogenesis. PKD is activated by recruitment to membranes containing the lipid second messenger diacylglycerol (DAG) and subsequent phosphorylation of its activation loop. Here, we report the crystal structure of the PKD N terminus at 2.2 &#xc5; resolution containing a previously unannotated ubiquitin-like domain (ULD), which serves as a dimerization domain. A single point mutation in the dimerization interface of the ULD not only abrogated dimerization in cells but also prevented PKD activation loop phosphorylation upon DAG production. We further show that the kinase domain of PKD dimerizes in a concentration-dependent manner and autophosphorylates on a single residue in its activation loop. We also provide evidence that PKD is expressed at concentrations 2 orders of magnitude below the ULD dissociation constant in mammalian cells. We therefore propose a new model for PKD activation in which the production of DAG leads to the local accumulation of PKD at the membrane, which drives ULD-mediated dimerization and subsequent trans-autophosphorylation of the kinase domain.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Protein kinase d, Ins-1, Pkd1

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A. Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria


