### Accession
PXD003424

### Title
Sulfolobus islandicus LC-MSMS -  aKMT catalyzes extensive protein lysine methylation in the hyperthermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus islandicus but is dispensable for the growth of the organism

### Description
Analysis of the methylation of total cellular protein by mass spectrometry revealed that methylated proteins accounted for ~2/3 (1,158/1,750) and ~1/3 (591/1,766) of the identified proteins in the wild type and the mutant strains, respectively, indicating that there is extensive protein methylation in S. islandicus and that aKMT is a major protein methyltransferase in this organism.

### Sample Protocol
The protein-containing portion of the gel was horizontally cut into slices, and each slice was then cut into small pieces. Proteins in gel pieces were subjected to in-gel digestion as described previously . Briefly, the gel pieces were distained, treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, and vacuum-dried. The proteins in gel pieces were digested with of trypsin (12.5 ng/μl; Roche) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, at 37 oC for overnight. The peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and vacuum-dried. The peptides were first separated on an EASY-nLCII integrated nano-HPLC system (Proxeon) and then analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptide separation was performed for 105 min on a home-made fused silica capillary C18 column (3 μm, 75 μm x 150 mm; Upchurch) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradients successively: 2 to 6% B in 10 min, 6% to 25% B in 65 min, 25% B to 45% B in 20 min, and 45% to 100% B in 10 min. MS and MS/MS data aquisition was performed using Xcalibur in the data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 against a S. islandicus Rey15A database downloaded from NCBI . Search parameters were set to allow 20 ppm for ms tolerance and 0.8 Da for ms/ms tolerance. Mono-, di-, and tri-methylations of lysine were set as variable modification on Lys, oxidation as variable modification on Met, and Cys carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the peptide was set to 0.01. The searched results were filtered by high confidence, and at least one matched peptide was required for each identified protein. For the identified methylated peptides, a manual check was carried out to ensure a high quality of spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Protein methylation is believed to occur extensively in creanarchaea. Recently, aKMT, a highly conserved crenarchaeal protein lysine methyltransferase, was identified and shown to exhibit broad substrate specificity in vitro Here, we have constructed an aKMT deletion mutant of the hyperthermophilic crenarchaeon Sulfolobus islandicus The mutant was viable but showed a moderately slower growth rate than the parental strain under non-optimal growth conditions. Consistent with the moderate effect of the lack of aKMT on the growth of the cell, expression of a small number of genes, which encode putative functions in substrate transportation, energy metabolism, transcriptional regulation, stress response proteins, etc, was differentially regulated by more than twofold in the mutant strain, as compared with that in the parental strain. Analysis of the methylation of total cellular protein by mass spectrometry revealed that methylated proteins accounted for &#x223c;2/3 (1,158/1,751) and &#x223c;1/3 (591/1,757) of the identified proteins in the parental and the mutant strains, respectively, indicating that there is extensive protein methylation in S. islandicus and that aKMT is a major protein methyltransferase in this organism. No significant sequence preference was detected at the sites of methylation by aKMT. Methylated lysine residues, when visible in the structure, are all located on the surface of the proteins. The crystal structure of aKMT in complex with S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) or S-adenosyl homocysteine (SAH) reveals that the protein consists of four &#x3b1; helices and seven &#x3b2; sheets, lacking a substrate recognition domain found in PrmA, a bacterial homolog of aKMT, in agreement with the broad substrate specificity of aKMT. Our results suggest that aKMT may serve a role in maintaining the methylation status of cellular proteins required for the efficient growth of the organism under certain non-optimal conditions.

### Keywords
Sulfolobus islandicus, Lc-msms, Methylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources Institute of Microbiology Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Microbiology
Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
yindi chu

### Lab Head
Dr Li Huang
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources Institute of Microbiology Chinese Academy of Sciences


