### Accession
PXD022368

### Title
Milking it? Assessing the degradation of ancient milk proteomes

### Description
The origins, prevalence and nature of dairying have been long debated by archaeologists. Within the last decade, new advances in high-resolution mass spectrometry have allowed for the direct detection of milk proteins from archaeological remains, including ceramics, dental calculus, and preserved dairy products. Proteins recovered from archaeological remains are susceptible to post-excavation and laboratory contamination, a particular concern for ancient dairying studies as milk proteins are potential laboratory contaminants. Here, we examine how site-specific rates of deamidation can be used to elucidate patterns of peptide degradation, and authenticate ancient milk proteins. First, we characterize site-specific deamidation patterns in modern milk products and experimental samples, confirming that deamidation occurs primarily at low half-time sites. We then compare this to previously published ancient proteomic data from six studies reporting ancient milk peptides. We confirm that site-specific deamidation rates, on average, are more advanced in beta-lactoglobulin recovered from ancient dental calculus and pottery residues. Nevertheless, deamidation rates displayed a high degree of variability, making it challenging to authenticate samples with relatively few milk peptides. We demonstrate that site-specific deamidation is a useful tool for identifying modern contamination but highlight the need for multiple lines of evidence to authenticate ancient protein data.

### Sample Protocol
Skim Milk Powder: We extracted and analyzed proteins from Sigma Aldrich skim milk powder [Cat. no. 70166]. The protein extraction was based on the protocol published by Jersie-Christensen et al. for ancient dental calculus analysis, without the demineralisation step. Approximately 500 µg of skim milk powder was suspended in guanidine buffer (2 M guanidine hydrochloride solution, 20 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) with 100mM Tris) and ammonium hydroxide was used to adjust the pH to 7.5–8.5. The sample was heated at 10 min at 99°C  to denature the proteins, and then subsequently cooled for 10 minutes. The sample was then digested at 37°C for 1 h with 0.2 μg of rLysC (Promega) under agitation. The sample was then diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 M guanidine hydrochloride using 25 mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN). The sample was then digested overnight with 0.8 μg of trypsin (Promega). To inactivate the trypsin 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added until the pH was <2. The peptides were washed and collected on in-house made C18 StageTips and stored in the freezer until mass spectrometry analysis. The sample was eluted with 20 μL of 40% ACN followed by 10 μL of 60% ACN directly into a 96 well plate, and subsequently evaporated in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) until ~3 μL was left and 5 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was added. The sample was then analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system connected to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer at the Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, according to previously published parameters.  Contamination Experiment: The samples were weighed out as whole pieces and were crushed into powder in a 2.0 ml Eppendorf tube using a sterile micropestle for each sample. 1800 μl of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) 0.5 M pH 8.0 was added to each sample. The samples were then parafilmed and incubated at room temperature on a rotator for 5 days. Protein extraction was undertaken at the Discovery Proteomics Facility at the Target Discovery Institute (TDI) in Oxford, within their protein extraction laboratory. The laboratory follows standard procedures for molecular biology laboratories: protective equipment was worn (i.e., gloves, lab coats) but other contamination controls recommended for degraded samples were omitted (i.e.,  aerosol resistant pipette tips, or extraction hoods were not used). Samples were vortexed for 30 seconds and then centrifuged for 5 minutes; proteins were extracted from the pellet and from 100 μl of supernatant using a gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) method 32. To each sample, 100 μl of Pierce IP Lysis Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue Number 87787) was added, before the addition of 100 μl of acrylamide (30%). The samples were vortexed for 30 seconds and left for 5-10 minutes. 2 μl of TEMED (tetramethylethylenediamine) followed by 2 μl of 10% APS (ammonium persulfate) was added to samples, and left for 10-20 minutes until a gel had formed. Once set, the gel was shredded through a filter membrane and fixed through rotation with 10% acetic acid, 50% methanol, 40% water. The solution was centrifuged, and the supernatant discarded. 1 mL of ACN was added to dehydrate the gel pieces. A series of washing and drying steps using ACN were then performed to exchange buffers, following the method outlined in Hendy et al. 8. Finally, the samples were digested overnight at 37°C in 250 μL of ammonium bicarbonate (0.05M) and 1 μg trypsin. The next morning, samples were centrifuged for 1 minute. 250 μl of ACN was added and the samples were placed on a shaker for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed and retained in a new tube, and 250 μl of 5% formic acid was added to the gel pieces for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed and added to the first fraction, and 100 μl of ACN was added to the gel pieces, and shaken for 5 minutes. The supernatant was taken off and combined with the first and second fractions before being desalted using Millipore Zip-Tips prior to MS/MS analysis. All samples were analysed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific n-LC Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer at the Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, Oxford according to previously published specifications.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis followed the same bioinformatic methods for all datasets. Raw files from all datasets were searched using MaxQuant 1.6.2.6a against a database of caseins (including alpha-S1-, alpha-S2-, beta-, and kappa-casein) and beta-lactoglobulin (BLG) from horse, goat, sheep, and cow, using a semi-tryptic search strategy. The minimum score for modified and unmodified peptides was set to 60. For previously published archaeological datasets extracted using a filter-aided sample preparation method (FASP), the fixed modification was set to Carbamidomethyl (C), and the variable modifications Hydroxyproline, Glu and Gln to pyro-Glu, Deamidation (NQ), Acetyl (N-term) and Oxidation (M). For the published datasets, and archaeological samples extracted with the GASP method, the fixed modification was Propionamide (C), and the variable modifications included all those in the FASP setup, plus propionamide N-term and propionamide (K). As there is considerable overlap between the database used and MaxQuant’s contaminant database, the search for contaminants was turned off. All other parameters were set to MaxQuant’s defaults, including a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The origins, prevalence and nature of dairying have been long debated by archaeologists. Within the last decade, new advances in high-resolution mass spectrometry have allowed for the direct detection of milk proteins from archaeological remains, including ceramic residues, dental calculus, and preserved dairy products. Proteins recovered from archaeological remains are susceptible to post-excavation and laboratory contamination, a particular concern for ancient dairying studies as milk proteins such as beta-lactoglobulin&#xa0;(BLG) and caseins are potential laboratory contaminants. Here, we examine how site-specific rates of deamidation (i.e., deamidation occurring in specific positions in the protein chain) can be used to elucidate patterns of peptide degradation, and authenticate ancient milk proteins. First, we characterize site-specific deamidation patterns in modern milk products and experimental samples, confirming that deamidation occurs primarily at low half-time sites. We then compare this to previously published palaeoproteomic data from six studies reporting ancient milk peptides. We confirm that site-specific deamidation rates, on average, are more advanced in BLG&#xa0; recovered from ancient dental calculus and pottery residues. Nevertheless, deamidation rates displayed a high degree of variability, making it challenging to authenticate samples with relatively few milk peptides. We demonstrate that site-specific deamidation is a useful tool for identifying modern contamination but highlight the need for multiple lines of evidence to authenticate ancient protein data.

### Keywords
Authentication, Palaeoproteomics, Deamidation, Milk

### Affiliations
The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Geogenetics, UCPH

### Submitter
Abigail Ramsøe

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


