### Accession
PXD002217

### Title
Variations of secretome profiles according to conditioned medium preparation: the example of human mesenchymal stem cell derived adipocytes

### Description
One challenging point in analysing cellular secretome collected as conditioned medium is cross contamination by cell culture media components, especially bovine serum proteins. A common approach for serum removal is to wash the cells, an alternative is to grow cells using serum-free conditions. Given that the sample processing may influence the phenotype of cells and thus the secretome, it is important to establish the optimal protocol for each cell type. In this study, we compared two methods for preparing conditioned medium from human adipocytes derived from mesenchymal stem cells. Cells were either washed twice with PBS or cultured the last four days of differentiation in serum free adipogenic medium. Gene expression of the cells was evaluated by using real time PCR and one dimensional LC-MS/MS was used to compare secreted proteins present in the culture supernatants. Surprisingly, results showed significant differences in gene expression patterns of the cells and in protein content of the conditioned media and suggested that PBS washes induced severe modifications of the phenotype of cells and thus changes in protein secretion profiles. These data emphasize the significant variations in protein species related to cell manipulations and underline the importance of procedure optimization prior to any proteomic investigation.

### Sample Protocol
*2 conditions: SFA (adipogenic medium), W (PBS) *Cell culture and induction of adipogenic differentiation Human MSCs (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) from a 22 year old female donor were plated in 6-well plates in expansion medium composed of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Dutscher, Brumath, France) containing 10% foetal calf serum (FCS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% glutamine (Dutscher). Cell cultures were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2, and media were changed twice weekly. When MSCs had reached confluence (day 0), DMEM with 10% FCS was supplemented with adipogenic medium (0.5 µM dexamethasone, 0.5 µM isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 50 µM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, St Quentin Fallavier, France)) for 10 or 14 days.  *Preparation of conditioned media Two different strategies were used to prepare the conditioned media. In the first one, at day 10 of differentiation, MSC-derived adipocytes were incubated in serum-free DMEM supplemented with adipogenic medium. At day 14, the cells were placed in serum-free DMEM and supernatants were collected at day 16. In the washing strategy, at day 14 of differentiation, MSC-derived adipocytes were washed twice with 4 ml of PBS (Dutscher) before serum-free DMEM was added. Supernatants were collected at day 16. For each evaluated method, the supernatants were centrifuged at 2000g for 20 min then filtered through a 0.45 µm filter before concentrated using Amicon Ultra 15 centrifugal filter devices (Millipore, Dutscher) with a cut-off mass of 3 kDa. The proteins were precipitated using trichloracetic acid 10%, resolubilized into buffer containing 8M urea, 4% CHAPS and 97 mM DTT. The protein content in each sample was determined using BioRad Protein Assay Reagent (BioRad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France). Integrity and purity of proteins were checked by SDS-PAGE and silver staining. Three independent replicates were made for each evaluated method.  * Protein separation and identification  Samples of 30 µg of proteins prepared from cells in the various conditions investigated were run on a NUPAGE 4-12% acrylamide gel (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Saint Aubain, France) and stained in Coomassie blue (Simply-blue Safestain, Invitrogen). In the first initially performed experiment, five gel plugs were cut for each condition. For the two other experiments performed subsequently, three gel plugs were cut for each condition. Plugs were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated with 20 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 12.5 µg/ml sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Charbonniere, France) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were sequentially extracted with 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile. Peptide analysis were performed by a LTQ VelosOrbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an Easy-nLCProxeon 1000 chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed with the following parameters : Acclaim Pepmap100 pre-column (5mm, 300 μmi.d., C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and Acclaim PepMap-RSLC Proxeon column (50 cm, 75 μmi.d., C18, 2 μm, 100 Å), 300nl/min flow, gradient rising from 90 % solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 100 minutes then rising to 80% B in 5 minutes. The peptides were analysed in the Orbitrap in full ion scan mode at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 400), a mass range of m/z 400 to 1.800, and with a MS full scan maximum ion time of 100 ms. Fragments were obtained with collision-induced dissociation activation with a collisional energy of 35%, an activation Q of 0.250 for 10 ms, and analysed in the LTQ in a second scan event. The ion-trap MS/MS maximum ion time was 50 ms. MS/MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode in which the 20 most intense precursor ions were isolated, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s and an exclusion mass width of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science; version 2.4). The mass tolerance of fragment ions was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The following modifications were used in variable parameters: oxidation (Met) phosphorylation (Ser/Thr/Tyr), carbamidomethylation (Cys), acetylation (Lys/N-term) and deamidation (Asp/Asn). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for trypsin digestion. MS/MS data were searched against SwissProt database with the Homo sapiens taxonomy. Q-values of peptides were calculated using the percolator algorithm and a 5% filter was applied as False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold. Label-free quantification in between subject analysis was performed on raw data with Progenesis-QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) using the following procedure for each gel plugs in low, medium and high molecular weight:  chromatograms alignment, peptide abundances normalization, statistical analyses of features, and peptides identification using the Mascot server. The resulting files were imported into Progenesis-QI software. Peptides with an ion score less than 15 were rejected. Conflicts for the identification of some peptides were resolved manually. Quantification results obtained from the different gel plugs were assembled to form a unique result file. Proteins with an anova p-value under 0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
One challenging point in analyzing cellular secretome collected as conditioned medium is cross-contamination by cell culture media components, especially bovine serum proteins. A common approach for serum removal is to wash the cells, an alternative is to grow cells using serum-free conditions. Given that the sample processing may influence the phenotype of cells and thus the secretome, it is important to establish the optimal protocol for each cell type. In this study, we compared two methods for preparing conditioned medium from human adipocytes derived from mesenchymal stem cells. Cells were either washed twice with PBS or cultured the last four days of differentiation in serum-free adipogenic medium. Gene expression of the cells was evaluated by using real-time PCR and 1D LC-MS/MS was used to compare secreted proteins present in the culture supernatants. Surprisingly, results showed significant differences in gene expression patterns of the cells and in protein content of the conditioned media and suggested that PBS washes induced severe modifications of the phenotype of cells and thus changes in protein secretion profiles. These data emphasize the significant variations in protein species related to cell manipulations and underline the importance of procedure optimization prior to any proteomic investigation.

### Keywords
Adipocyte/conditioned medium/mesenchymal stem cell /secretome

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod
PMOI, ULCO, Bassin Napoléon, BP 120, F-62327 Boulogne-sur-Mer, France Phone: +33(0)321994521. Fax: +33(0)321994524.

### Submitter
Thibaut Léger

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Broux
PMOI, ULCO, Bassin Napoléon, BP 120, F-62327 Boulogne-sur-Mer, France Phone: +33(0)321994521. Fax: +33(0)321994524.


