### Accession
PXD009597

### Title
DDA files of human cancer cells for the NCI-60 SWATH project PXD003539

### Description
This is the raw files for the DDA library used for intepreting the NCI-60 SWATH project PXD003539

### Sample Protocol
Most cells pellets was a generous gift from National Cancer Instutite, USA. Each cell line was lyzed and digested using pressure cycling technology (PCT) (Pubmed ID: 25730263). Each digest was analyzed in a tripleTOF 5600 under DDA mode using a 2-hr gradient. Some samples are from HeLa and U2OS cell pellets.

### Data Protocol
All raw instrument data were centroided using Proteowizard msconvert (version 2.0). The assay library was generated using an established protocol 67. In short, the shotgun data sets were searched individually using X!Tandem 68 (2011.12.01.1) with k-score plugin 69, Myrimatch 70 (2.1.138), OMSSA 71 (2.1.8) and Comet 72 (2013.02r2) against the reviewed  UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2014_02) protein sequence database containing 20,270 proteins appended with 11 iRT peptides and decoy sequences. Carbamidomethyl was used as a fixed modification and oxidation as the variable modification. Maximally two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm, fragment mass error to 0.1 Da. The search identifications were combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet 73 and iProphet 74 available within the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) toolset (version 4.7.0) 75. MAYU 76 (v. 1.07) was used to determine the iProphet cutoff (0.999354) corresponding to a protein FDR of 1.03%. SpectraST was used in library generation mode with CID-QTOF settings and iRT normal-isation at import against the iRT Kit 77 peptide sequences (-c_IRTirt.txt -c_IRR) and a consensus library was consecutively generated. An in-house python script, spec-trast2tsv.py31 (msproteomicstools 0.2.2) was then used to generate the assay library with the following settings: -l 350,2000 -s b,y -x 1,2 -o 6 -n 6 -p 0.05 -d -e -w swath32.txt -k openswath (fragment ions between 350 and 2000 m/z, b and y ions authorized, fragment charges 1+ and 2+, 6 most intense transitions, precision of fragment ion retrieved 0.05 Da, exact fragment ion mass calculated, exclude fragments in the swath window). The OpenSWATH tool, ConvertTSVToTraML converted the TSV file to TraML format; Open-SwathDecoyGenerator generated the decoy assays in shuffle mode and appended them to the TraML assay library.

### Publication Abstract
Here we describe a proteomic data resource for the NCI-60 cell lines generated by pressure cycling technology and SWATH mass spectrometry. We developed the DIA-expert software to curate and visualize the SWATH data, leading to reproducible detection of over 3,100 SwissProt proteotypic proteins and systematic quantification of pathway activities. Stoichiometric relationships of interacting proteins for DNA replication, repair, the chromatin remodeling NuRD complex, &#x3b2;-catenin, RNA metabolism, and prefoldins are more evident than that at the mRNA level. The data are available in CellMiner (discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminercdb and discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer), allowing casual users to test hypotheses and perform integrative, cross-database analyses of multi-omic drug response correlations for over 20,000 drugs. We demonstrate the value of proteome data in predicting drug response for over 240 clinically relevant chemotherapeutic and targeted therapies. In summary, we present a novel proteome resource for the NCI-60, together with relevant software tools, and demonstrate the benefit of proteome analyses.

### Keywords
Cancer; shotgun; swath library; nci-60

### Affiliations
Westlake University
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich


