### Accession
PXD002090

### Title
Development of a Mass Spectrometry-Based Quantitation Assay for Human Body Fluid Proteins using a Wheat Germ Cell-Free Synthesis System

### Description
In this study, we have developed a large-scale SRM assay targeting human body fluid proteins based on publicly available proteomics data. We first aimed to produce, in a high throughput manner, a peptide reference library. For this purpose, we selected 2,201 targeted peptides representing 1,215 proteins from previous published studies, and in vitro synthesized them as peptide concatamers (QconCATs) using a wheat germ cell-free system.

### Sample Protocol
Cell-free protein synthesis and purification Artificial genes encoding self-designed QconCAT sequences were synthesized by commercial gene synthesis services (Biomatik USA, Wilmington, DE, USA). A split-primer PCR was performed to produce DNA templates for in vitro transcription. Cell-free synthesis of His-tagged QconCAT proteins were performed by the bilayer reaction method using a wheat germ extract WEPRO8240H (CellFree Sciences, Matsuyama, Japan) as described previously [Takemori, et al, Mol. BioSystems 2015]. After in vitro translation, QconCAT proteins were purified using Ni-Sepharose High Performance resin (GE Healthcare). In gel tryptic digestion of synthesized QconCAT proteins Protein bands were excised from the gel, and each gel piece was destained with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.9). Synthesized proteins in the gel pieces were reduced by soaking with 10 μL of 40 mM DTT solution for 1.5 h at 37oC and were subsequently alkylated by soaking with 10 μL of 250 mM acrylamide solution for 30 min at room temperature. Individual gel pieces were dehydrated with 1 mL of acetonitrile and then rehydrated with 2 μL of 0.1 μg/μL sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), followed by incubation in 50 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 37oC for 16 h. Each peptide was extracted from the gel piece three times with 50 μL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide samples were concentrated using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and then reconstituted with 10 μL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA solution. All MS analyses were carried out using a QTRAP 5500 hybrid triple quadrupole/linear ion trap MS (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled with an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra system via a cHiPLC-nanoflex module (AB SCIEX). The peptides were ionized by nano-ESI source using PicoTip emitter with an internal diameter of 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Ion spray voltage was maintained at 2,300 V, and the temperature of the interface heater was held at 150°C.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis and protein identification were performed using the Analyst ver.1.5 and the ProteinPilot ver.4.0 software (AB SCIEX), respectively. The database search was performed against the IPI human database version 20100624 using the following parameters: sample type, SILAC (Lys +8, Arg +10); cys alkylation, acrylamide; digestion, trypsin; and search effort, rapid ID.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomic approaches using selected reaction monitoring (SRM) are currently limited by the difficulty in the preparation of reference standards. In this study, we demonstrat the high-throughput production of a reference peptide library using a wheat germ cell-free synthesis system to develop a large-scale SRM assay for targeted proteomics.

### Keywords
Human body fluid proteins, Targeted proteomics, Wheat germ cell-free system, Reference peptide library

### Affiliations
Ehime University, JAPAN

### Submitter
Nobuaki  Takemori

### Lab Head
Dr Nobuaki Takemori
Ehime University, JAPAN


