### Accession
PXD012188

### Title
The Expanding Landscape of Human Protein Phosphorylation C4PR_LIV

### Description
Investigation of protein phosphorylation in humans has largely focussed on serine (Ser), threonine (Thr) and tyrosine (Tyr), with proven roles for these modifications in all aspects of life. However, mounting evidence suggests that phosphorylation of non-canonical amino acids, including histidine and lysine, may also regulate vertebrate biology.  Phosphoproteomics workflows used for high throughput characterisation of canonical phosphorylation events are typically incompatible with analysis of non-canonical phosphorylation due to instability under acidic conditions. Consequently, non-canonical phosphorylation remains unexplored. Here, we report an Unbiased Phosphopeptide enrichment strategy based on Strong Anion Exchange (SAX) chromatography (UPAX), for enrichment of acid-labile phosphopeptides for characterisation by mass spectrometry.  Using this approach, we identify extensive phosphorylation of histidine, arginine, lysine, aspartate and glutamate on human proteins.  Remarkably, the numbers of phosphoaspartate and phosphoglutamate residues combined approach that observed for phosphothreonine, while phosphorylation of the other non-canonical residues are of the order of that observed for phosphotyrosine. We have used a method for assessing and calibrating False Localisation Rate (FLR), demonstrating that using commonly applied score thresholds results in non-negligible estimates of FLR. Our results show that while it is highly challenging to eliminate false localisation fully, due to the wide search space for non-canonical phosphorylation, many hundreds of sites can still be discovered with confidence.  Our study reveals the previously unappreciated diversity of protein phosphorylation in human cells, and opens up avenues for exploring non-canonical phosphorylation in any proteome.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were maintained in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich, Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium-high glucose, 4500 mg/L glucose with sodium bicarbonate, without L-glutamine and sodium pyruvate) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL) and streptomycin (100 U/mL) at 37 °C, 5% CO2. To passage cells, cells were washed with warm PBS (Sigma-Aldrich, Phosphate Buffered Saline) prior to incubation with 1 mL trypsin (0.05% (v/v)) for 1 minute at 37 °C. Reaction was quenched with 1 mL supplemented DMEM. For siRNA knockdown T75 flasks at ~50% confluency were exchanged to antibiotic-free media (DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum). siRNA for PHPT1 (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus), Lamin A/C (siGENOME control) and a non-targeting pool (ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Pool) were purchased from Dharmacon. For each flask 1 nM siRNA (1.1 μL of a 20 μM stock prepared in RNAse free water (Thermo Fisher)) and 40 μL INTERFERin (Polyplus transfection) was prepared in 4 mL Opti-mem reduced serum media (Thermo Fisher). After 10 minutes incubation at room temperature siRNA mixtures were added to flasks. Cells were incubated for 48 hours at 37 °C, 5% CO2. For cell lysis, trypsinized cells were centrifuged at 220 g for 5 minutes, washed with PBS and lysed with 100 μL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM AmBic, 1 protease inhibitor tablet (cOmplete Mini EDTA free, Roche) per 10 mL). Lysate was sonicated at low amplitude for 3 x 10 seconds with a 1 minute gap. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer, as previously described. Proteins were reduced with 3 mM DTT (in 50 mM AmBic) for 20 minutes at 30 °C, and, after cooling, free Cys residues were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (in 50 mM AmBic) for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT to final concentration of 7 mM. The urea concentration in cell lysates was reduced to 2 M by addition of 50 mM AmBic. Proteins were digested using 2% (w/w) sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 30 °C overnight. SAX was performed using a Dionex U3000 HPLC instrument equipped with a fraction collector. Digested cell lysate (2 mg) were chromatographed using a PolySAX LP column (PolyLC; 4.6 mm inner diameter (i.d.) × 200 mm, 5 μm particle size, 300 Å) with a binary solvent system of solvent A (20 mM ammonium acetate, 10% ACN) and solvent B (300 mM triethylammonium phosphate, 10% ACN) at pH 6.0, pH 6.8 or pH 8.0. Solvent was delivered at 1 mL/min according to the following gradient: 5 minutes at 100%solvent A, then 43 minutes to 100% solvent B, and then 5 minutes at 100% solvent B before equilibration to start conditions. Fractions were collected every minute for 48 minutes, with every 3 pooled and the volume reduced by drying under vacuum to give 16 fractions in total.  StageTips were prepared with 3 discs of C18 material (manufacturer) in a 200 μL pipette tip. Tips were conditioned by sequential addition of 100 μL methanol, 100 μL H2O:ACN (50:50) and 100 μL H2O, with centrifugation for 2 minutes at 2000 rpm to pass the liquid through the tip each time. A portion of each SAX fraction (100 μL) was loaded onto the tip, centrifuged, then the flow through added to the tip and centrifuged again. The tip was washed with 100 μL H2O and peptides were then eluted by addition of 50 μL H2O:ACN (50:50). Eluents were dried to completion by vacuum centrifugation then resolubilised in H2O:ACN (97:3) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Orbitrap Fusion nLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis of cell lysate fractions was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) attached to an UltiMate 3000 nano system (Dionex). Peptides were loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 9 μL/min with 2% ACN 0.1% (v/v) TFA and then resolved on an analytical column (Easy-Spray C18, 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm bead diameter) using a gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) 3.8% B (0.1% formic acid in 80:20 ACN:H2O) to 50% B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.. A full scan mass spectrum was acquired over m/z 350-2000 in the Orbitrap (120K resolution at m/z 200) and data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed using a top speed approach (cycle time of 3 s), with HCD (collision energy 32%, max injection time 35 ms) and neutral loss triggered (Δ98) EThcD (ETD reaction time 50 ms, max ETD reagent injection time 200 ms, supplemental activation energy 25%, max injection time 50 ms) for fragmentation. All product ions were detected in the ion trap (rapid mode).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer Raw files acquired on the Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer (HCD-neutral loss triggered EThcD method) were converted to .mzML using ProteoWizard’s msconvert tool in order to perform MS2-level deisotoping. The resulting files were then processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v1.4. Data were initially searched by merging all runs into a single search using Mascot (v 2.6) against the reviewed entries of the UniProt reference human proteome (2015.12.02; 20,187 sequences). Parameters were set as follows: MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; enzyme specificity set to trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (C);  variable modifications: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY). The results were filtered to a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. Sequences from the resulting protein matches (both true and decoy) were merged into a .fasta file (7,254 entries) which served as the database for the subsequent ‘all-pX’ searches.  The ‘all-pX’ searches were performed using PDv1.4 and Mascot v2.6 against the identified human protein database created as described above, using the following parameters; MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; enzyme specificity set to trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation (C), phosphorylation (STYCHKRDE). Within PDv1.4, the data was separated according to fragmentation type: HCD or EThcD. HCD and EThcD events were defined using a collision energy (CE) filter (HCD: min CE 0, max CE 34; EThcD: min CE 35, max CE 1000) to generate 2 separate .mgf files which were submitted to Mascot defining the instrument type as either ESI-Quad-TOF for HCD files, CID+ETD for EThcD files. The resulting Thermo Mass Spec Format files were imported into Proteome Discoverer v2.2.  In PDv2.2, scans were selected where the PSM was defined as phosphate containing (‘phospho’ listed in the modifications column), the ‘Protein groups’ column contained ‘select’ or ‘unambiguous’, and the search engine rank was ‘1’.  Scans were exported to a new peak information file (.mgf) which was re-searched using the previously described ‘all-pX’ pipeline but with an additional ptmRS phosphosite localisation node. The ptmRS node was set to ignore neutral loss ions and the ‘treat all spectra as EThcD’ option was selected for EThcD data. A PSM FDR filter of 5% was applied and all data files (both HCD and EThcD for each pool of SAX fractions) were exported to .csv for further processing. MS2 spectra corresponding to phosphopeptides were assessed for the presence of 3 neutral loss peaks (Δ80, Δ98 and Δ116 amu) with a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and an intensity cut-off of 2%, 5%, or 10% compared to the base peak ion and given a ‘Triplet’ score of 0, 1, 2 or 3 depending on the number of neutral loss peaks identified.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a key regulator of protein function under (patho)physiological conditions, and defining site-specific phosphorylation is essential to understand basic and disease biology. In vertebrates, the investigative focus has primarily been on serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, but mounting evidence suggests that phosphorylation of other "non-canonical" amino acids also regulates critical aspects of cell biology. However, standard methods of phosphoprotein characterisation are largely unsuitable for the analysis of non-canonical phosphorylation due to their relative instability under acidic conditions and/or elevated temperature. Consequently, the complete landscape of phosphorylation remains unexplored. Here, we report an unbiased phosphopeptide enrichment strategy based on strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography (UPAX), which permits identification of histidine (His), arginine (Arg), lysine (Lys), aspartate (Asp), glutamate (Glu) and cysteine (Cys) phosphorylation sites on human proteins by mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics. Remarkably, under basal conditions, and having accounted for false site localisation probabilities, the number of unique non-canonical phosphosites is approximately one-third of the number of observed canonical phosphosites. Our resource reveals the previously unappreciated diversity of protein phosphorylation in human cells, and opens up avenues for high-throughput exploration of non-canonical phosphorylation in all organisms.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Strong anion exchange, Phosphoaspartate, Non-canonical phosphorylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Biosciences Building Crown Street Liverpool L69 7ZB UK

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Claire E Eyers
Centre for Proteome Research Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Biosciences Building Crown Street Liverpool L69 7ZB UK


