### Accession
PXD008460

### Title
A selective photoaffinity probe enables assessment of cannabinoid CB2 receptor expression and ligand engagement in human cells

### Description
Chemical tools and methods that report on G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expression levels and receptor occupancy by small molecules are highly desirable. We report the development of LEI121 as a photoreactive probe to study the type 2 cannabinoid receptor (CB2R), a promising GPCR to treat tissue injury and inflammatory diseases. LEI121 is the first CB2R-selective bifunctional probe that covalently captures CB2R upon photoactivation. An incorporated alkyne serves as ligation handle for the introduction of reporter groups. LEI121 enables target engagement studies and visualization of endogenously expressed CB2R in HL-60 as well as primary human immune cells using flow cytometry. Our findings show that strategically functionalized probes allow monitoring of endogenous GPCR expression and engagement in human cells using tandem photo-click chemistry and hold promise as biomarkers in translational drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Two-step photo-affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based proteomics of CB2R Live wild type or CB2R-overexpressing CHO cells were pretreated with DMSO or CP55940 and incubated with LEI121. The incubation solution was removed and replaced by 1.5 mL fresh buffer, then the plates were immediately irradiated (except the No UV control) for 5 min with CaproboxTM (λ=350 nm), and the cells were harvested. The cells were lysed and the membrane and cytosol fractions were separated. Ligation reaction was performed with biotin-N3. Protein was precipitated and washed to remove all click mix components, then denatured, reduced and alkylated. The protein was added to avidin beads and incubated. The avidin beads were washed 4x, then digested overnight with trypsin containing buffer. Samples were quenched with formic acid (FA) and beads were removed using a biospin column. Peptides were added to C18 stagetips, washed, and then eluted. Peptides were concentrated using an Eppendorf SpeedVac and dissolved in LC/MS solution. Samples were measured using a NanoACQUITY UPLC System coupled to a SYNAPT G2-Si high definition mass spectrometer (Waters)

### Data Protocol
raw files were recorded with MassLynx and can be processed in Progenesis or PLGS (Waters) or with the mascot search engine

### Publication Abstract
Chemical tools and methods that report on G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expression levels and receptor occupancy by small molecules are highly desirable. We report the development of LEI121 as a photoreactive probe to study the type 2 cannabinoid receptor (CB<sub>2</sub>R), a promising GPCR to treat tissue injury and inflammatory diseases. LEI121 is the first CB<sub>2</sub>R-selective bifunctional probe that covalently captures CB<sub>2</sub>R upon photoactivation. An incorporated alkyne serves as ligation handle for the introduction of reporter groups. LEI121 enables target engagement studies and visualization of endogenously expressed CB<sub>2</sub>R in HL-60 as well as primary human immune cells using flow cytometry. Our findings show that strategically functionalized probes allow monitoring of endogenous GPCR expression and engagement in human cells using tandem photoclick chemistry and hold promise as biomarkers in translational drug discovery.

### Keywords
Bio-orthogonal chemistry, Cb2 receptor, Gpcrs, Target engagement, Photo-affinity labeling

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


