### Accession
PXD011295

### Title
ASSESSING AUTOMATED SAMPLE PREPARATION TECHNOLOGIES FOR HIGH-THROUGHPUT PROTEOMICS OF FROZEN WELL CHARACTERIZED TISSUES FROM SWEDISH BIOBANKS

### Description
Large cohorts of carefully collected and stored clinical tissue materials play a central role in acquiring sufficient depth and statistical power to discover disease-related mechanisms and biomarkers of clinical significance. Manual preparation of such heterogeneous samples is labor intensive and requires experienced laboratory personnel. This carries other possible downsides such as low throughput, high risk of errors and low reproducibility, which limits the chances of making new Biomarker discoveries. In this work, three automated technologies for high-throughput proteomics of frozen sectioned tissues from our biobank were assessed. The instruments evaluated included the Bioruptor for tissue disruption and protein extraction; the Barocycler, which is able to disrupt tissues and digest the proteins; and the Bravo AssayMAP, a micro-chromatography platform for protein denaturation, digestion, peptide desalting and fractionation. A wide variety of tissue samples from 1) rat spleen, 2) human melanoma tumor, 3) human pancreatic tumor and 4) pancreatic tumor xenografts were assessed. The three instruments displayed reproducible and consistent results, as was proven by the high correlation between the measurements and by low coefficients of variation for the protein intensities for the different tissue types. Furthermore, we found that there is a good correlation between the obtained protein amount from the respective tumor tissues and the surface area of the analyzed tissue. This is of particular importance as the applicability is favored even in heterogeneous tumors originating form malignant melanoma patients. The results from this study has allowed us to integrate these technologies into an automated sample preparation workflow for large-scale proteomic studies that are currently ongoing.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction using automated ultrasound technology Protein extraction was performed using the Bioruptor plus (model UCD-300) (Diagenode). The lysis buffer consisted of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 M urea. Tissue samples comprised of three and five sections were extracted with 30 µL and 50 µL lysis buffer, respectively. For samples of 10 and 20 sections, 100 µL lysis buffer was used. After a brief vortex and agitation for 5 min, the samples were placed into the tube holder of the Bioruptor. The sonication was performed as follows: 40 cycles, each consisting of 15 s at high power (on) with 15 s rest (off), at 4°C. Following centrifugation at 10,000×g for 10 min at 4°C, the solubilized protein content of each sample was determined using the colorimetric micro BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Protein extraction and digestion using pressure cycling technology (PCT) In addition to ultrasound technology, tissue disruption and protein extraction were also performed using pressure cycling technology 15,19. Tissue samples were homogenized and the proteins were extracted using PCT-MicroPestles in the Barocycler (model 2320EXT) (Pressure BioScience, Inc., South Easton, MA). About 30 µL lysis buffer was added to each microtube containing either 3, 5 or 10 sections. The tissue disruption and protein extraction were performed as follows: 60 cycles, each consisting of 20 s at 45 kpsi (on) and 10 s at atmospheric pressure (off) at 20˚C. The lysate was transferred into Eppendorf tubes by upside-down centrifugation and the protein content of each sample was determined with a colorimetric micro BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, lL). For digestion, 20 µg of pooled malignant melanoma lysate and 50 µg of rat spleen lysate were used. Prior to digestion, the proteins were simultaneously reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (10 mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (40 mM) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Next, the samples were diluted to 50 µL with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and endoproteinase Lys-C was added in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein). The digestion was performed in the Barocycler using the PCT-MicroCap (50 µL) at a urea concentration of 2.4 M as follows: 60 cycles, each consisting of 50 s at 45 kpsi (on) and 10 s at atmospheric pressure (off) at 30˚C. To further reduce the urea concentration, the samples were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 150 µL. Trypsin was added in a 1:25 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) and the digestion was performed using the PCT-MicroCap (150 µL) at a urea concentration of 0.8 M as follows: 90 cycles, each consisting of 50 s at 45 kpsi (on) and 10 s at atmospheric pressure (off) at RT. The peptides were acidified by adding 4 µL 50% formic acid. Following digestion, the peptides were desalted with the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) and stored at -20˚C until required. Automated in-Solution Digestion The AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent Technologies) was used to perform in-solution digestion. Fifty micrograms of rat spleen lysate, extracted in the Bioruptor, was prepared as six replicates and processed using the solution digestion application in VWorks. Four additional rat spleen samples consisting of 100 µg of lysate were digested separately during a course of 3 weeks. Briefly, the samples were first reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37ºC and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at RT. Next, the samples were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) in 1 M urea and incubated at RT for 7 h. The samples were then diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 150 µL and concentration of 0.6 M urea. Subsequently, trypsin was added in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein). The samples were incubated overnight at RT. The peptides were then acidified by adding 4 µL 50% formic acid. Peptide desalting Desalting of the peptides was performed in the AssayMAP Bravo using the Peptide Clean-up v2.0 protocol. Briefly, C18 cartridges (Agilent, 5 µL bead volume, 150 µg capacity) were primed with 100 µL 90% acetonitrile and equilibrated with 70 µL 0.1% TFA at 10 µL/min. The samples were loaded at 5 µL/min, followed by internal cartridge wash and cup wash with 0.1% TFA at 10 µL/min. The peptides were eluted with 30 µL 80% ACN with 0.1% TFA at 5 µL/min. Approximately 50 µL pre-existing buffer containing 50% ACN with 0.1% TFA was present in the collection plate upon elution. The elution buffers were introduced on the deck of the instrument just prior to elution.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 using the Andromeda Search engine. The raw files were searched against the UniProtKB human database (released 20160709, 20,129 sequences excluding isoforms). The default contaminant protein database and the decoy database were used, and matches from these databases were excluded. The search implemented carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation as dynamic modifications. Two missed cleavage sites were permitted. The default settings were used for protein identification and quantitation and the ‘match-between-runs’ option was enabled to match identifications between different experimental analyses for the unfractionated samples. The statistical analyses were performed in R, Perseus v1.5.6.0, Graphpad Prism v7 and GRAVY calculator (http://www.gravy-calculator.de/index.php). To look at the physiochemical properties GRAVY indexes for all quantified proteins were obtained using the GRAVY calculator. The GRAVY-index is a measure of hydrophobicity where proteins with GRAVY-index ≥ 0 are considered hydrophobic.

### Publication Abstract
Large cohorts of carefully collected clinical tissue materials play a central role in acquiring sufficient depth and statistical power to discover disease-related mechanisms and biomarkers of clinical significance. Manual preparation of such large sample cohorts requires experienced laboratory personnel. This carries other possible downsides such as low throughput, high risk of errors, and low reproducibility. In this work, three automated technologies for high-throughput proteomics of frozen sectioned tissues were compared. The instruments evaluated included the Bioruptor for tissue disruption and protein extraction; the Barocycler, which is able to disrupt tissues and digest the proteins; and the AssayMAP Bravo, a microchromatography platform for protein digestion, peptide desalting, and fractionation. Wide varieties of tissue samples from rat spleen, malignant melanoma, and pancreatic tumors were used for the assessment. The three instruments displayed reproducible and consistent results, as was proven by high correlations and low coefficients of variation between technical replicates and even more importantly, between replicates that were processed in different batches or at different time points. The results from this study allowed us to integrate these technologies into an automated sample preparation workflow for large-scale proteomic studies that are currently ongoing. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD010296 and PXD011295.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry clinical peoteomics

### Affiliations
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Magdalena Kuras

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


