### Accession
PXD010520

### Title
The Human RNA-Binding Proteome and Its Dynamics during Translational Arrest

### Description
The data presented here was produced using XRNAX - a novel extraction method for protein-crosslinked RNA from UV-crosslinked cells. We apply XRNAX for three proteomic downstream applications. First, we purify ribonucleotide-crosslinked peptides from XRNAX extracts and use their identification as direct evidence for protein-RNA interfaces. Second, we use SILAC, XRNAX and silica enrichment in order to derive high-confidence RNA-binding proteomes from the three human cell lines MCF7, HEK293 and HeLa. Third, using SILAC we quantify total proteomes and RNA-binding proteomes differentially during a time course experiment of arsenite stress in MCF7 cells.

### Sample Protocol
In order to make XRNAX and its applications accessible to a wide audience and to promote the development of second party applications we created a website accessible under www.xrnax.com, where detailed protocols are presented with schemes and illustrations.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were searched using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2), except for data of nucleotide-crosslinked peptides. The database searched was the reviewed UniProt human proteome (search term: ‘reviewed:yes AND proteome:up000005640’, 20216 entries, retrieved 11 September 2017) and the default Andromeda list of contaminants. All settings were used at their default value, except for specifying SILAC configurations and indicating the appropriate number of fractions per sample. For the differential quantification of RNA-binding during arsenite stress the match-between-runs option was activated, for all other searches this was explicitly not the case. MS data of nucleotide-crosslinked peptides was searched with MSFragger using the same UniProt database as mentioned above. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 1000 Da and the export format set to tsv, otherwise all settings were used at their default value.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins and RNA functionally and physically intersect in multiple biological processes, however, currently no universal method is available to purify protein-RNA complexes. Here, we introduce XRNAX, a method for the generic purification of protein-crosslinked RNA, and demonstrate its versatility to study the composition and dynamics of protein-RNA interactions by various transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. We show that XRNAX captures all RNA biotypes and use this to characterize the sub-proteomes that interact with coding and non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) and to identify hundreds of protein-RNA interfaces. Exploiting the quantitative nature of XRNAX, we observe drastic remodeling of the RNA-bound proteome during arsenite-induced stress, distinct from autophagy-related changes in the total proteome. In addition, we combine XRNAX with crosslinking immunoprecipitation sequencing (CLIP-seq) to validate the interaction of ncRNA with lamin B1 and EXOSC2. Thus, XRNAX is a resourceful approach to study structural and compositional aspects of protein-RNA interactions to address fundamental questions in RNA-biology.

### Keywords
Arsenite stress, Translational arrest, Rna-binding proteins, Nucleotide-crosslinked peptides, Protein-crosslinked rna extraction, Xrnax, Human rna-binding proteome, Uv-crosslinking, Ribophagy

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


