### Accession
PXD035759

### Title
wetland four-member synthetic community

### Description
The synthetic microbial community used in this study was composed of the major functional guilds (cellulolytic fermenter, sulfate reducer, hydrogenotrophic methanogen and acetoclastic methanogen) that mediate the anaerobic conversion of cellulosic biomass to CH4 and CO2 in wetland soils. The choice of a facultative sulfate-reducing bacterium (Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough) introduced metabolic versatility and enabled investigations into the community response to sulfate intrusion.  The growth status of these multi-species cultures was measured over a week by daily analysis of substrate consumption and product accumulation. The quad-cultures were analyzed with metaproteomics at the end of experiment to characterize the community structure and metabolic activities.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from quad-cultures were selected for full metaproteomic analysis. Protein extraction was carried out by a previously reported method. Briefly, harvested cell pellets were washed twice with nanopure water, cells were suspended in lysis buffer (containing 10 mM tris-HCl, 1% SDS, 0.1M DTT), and incubated at 60 °С for 1 h, and then the supernatant was collected after centrifugation. Proteins were then precipitated by trichloroacetic acid overnight at 4 Cand pelleted by centrifugation. Protein pellets were washed by ice-cold acetone three times and resuspended in guanidine buffer. Protein concentrations were quantified by Bicinchoninic Acid Assay. 20 mg samples of proteins were processed using filter-aided sample preparation and digested using Trypsin/LysC mixture. Each sample was analyzed using two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with normalized collision energy of 28 – 31% depending on charge state and precursor selection range. Mass spectrometry spectra were searched using Sipros Ensemble against a matched protein database constructed from the genomes of the four microorganisms making up the synthetic community. Raw search results were filtered to achieve 1% FDR (False discovery rate) at the peptide level, estimated by the target-decoy approach. A minimum of one unique peptide was required for each identified protein. FDR at the protein level of each sample was below 3%. The protein abundances were quantified by normalized peak heights of peptides by ProRata.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methane, Sulfate intrusion, Cellulose, Wetland, Microbes

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology School of Computer Science University of Oklahoma
University of Oklahoma

### Submitter
Dongyu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chongle Pan
Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology School of Computer Science University of Oklahoma


