### Accession
PXD001061

### Title
Uncovering Global SUMOylation Signaling Networks in a Site-Specific Manner

### Description
SUMOylation is a reversible post-translational modification essential for genome stability. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we have studied global SUMOylation in mammalian cells and in a site-specific manner, identifying a total of over 4,300 SUMOylation sites in over 1,600 proteins. Moreover, for the first time in excess of 1,000 SUMOylation sites were identified under standard growth conditions. SUMOylation dynamics were quantitatively studied in response to SUMO protease inhibition, proteasome inhibition and heat shock.

### Sample Protocol
Stable expression of His10-tagged SUMO-2-K0-Q87R in HeLa cells, purification by His pulldown to enrich SUMOylated proteins, concentration and removal of unconjugated SUMO, Lys-C digest to free SUMO-modified peptides, re-purification by His pulldown to enrich SUMOylated peptides, concentration and removal of remaining contaminant peptides, trypsin digestion, LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 was used to process all data. Search parameters were essentially left at default. QQTGG and pyro-QQTGG were searched as variable modifications, including a list of diagnostic peaks corresponding to unique mass fragments resulting from fragmention of the QQTGG or pyro-QQTGG tryptic remnant.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation is a reversible post-translational modification essential for genome stability. Using high-resolution MS, we have studied global SUMOylation in human cells in a site-specific manner, identifying a total of &gt;4,300 SUMOylation sites in &gt;1,600 proteins. To our knowledge, this is the first time that &gt;1,000 SUMOylation sites have been identified under standard growth conditions. We quantitatively studied SUMOylation dynamics in response to SUMO protease inhibition, proteasome inhibition and heat shock. Many SUMOylated lysines have previously been reported to be ubiquitinated, acetylated or methylated, thus indicating cross-talk between SUMO and other post-translational modifications. We identified 70 phosphorylation and four acetylation events in proximity to SUMOylation sites, and we provide evidence for acetylation-dependent SUMOylation of endogenous histone H3. SUMOylation regulates target proteins involved in all nuclear processes including transcription, DNA repair, chromatin remodeling, precursor-mRNA splicing and ribosome assembly.

### Keywords
Sumo, Sumo2, Q87r, Qqtgg, Sumo-2

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands


