### Accession
PXD021943

### Title
Complex-dependent histone acetyltransferase activity of KAT8 determines its role in transcriptional regulation and cellular homeostasis [histone dataset]

### Description
Histone acetylation is associated with open chromatin and transcriptionally active genes. Specifically, acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) has been shown to prevent the assembly of nucleosomal arrays in vitro. This modification is catalyzed by the MYST-family histone acetyltransferase KAT8 (also known as MOF and MYST1), which is part of two distinct chromatin-associated complexes: NSL and MSL. While extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and the two KAT8-containing complexes in mammalian cells are not well understood. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8. We found that KAT8 catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16 acetylation as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that the core proteins of the MSL complex and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and global chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it is enriched at the promoters of housekeeping genes and is required for their transcription initiation. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins, and that, as part of the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation required for the expression of genes essential for cell survival

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted from 4 mln cells essentially as described by Sidoli et al [PMID: 27286567] However, nuclei sedimentation step was performed at 2000g, since 1000g did not result in good nuclei recovery. TCA precipitation was substituted with desalting using disposable SEC PD-10 columns from GE healthcare (17085101) and the samples were subsequently concentrated by speed vac to 100ul. Histones were quantified by BCA assay (each sample produced 20-30ug) and 10ugs were digested and derivatised in 30uls of buffer, as described in [PMID: 25680960]. Histones were desalted using 3mg of HLB material (waters), as recommended by the manufacturer. The samples were analysed using DIA strategy with high resolution orbitrap MS1 and low resolution ion trap MS2 scans[ PMID: 26505526] on Orbitrap Velos coupled to nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides (600ng per injection) were directly loaded on 30 cm long with 150 uM inner diameter packed with intertsil 2um sorbent using flashPack method [PMID: 30373789]. The flow rate was kept at 1 ul/min and column temperature was 30 C during analysis. The aqueous mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid. The organic mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was 4-25% B in 49 min, 25-40% in 13 minutes, 40-80% in 4 minutes. Peptides were electrosprayed through etched emitters [PMCID: PMC1769309]. MS1 scans were performed at 15K resolution in Orbitrap analyser. For MS2 peptides were isolated in ten 80Da windows and fragmented using CID with 35NCE. To improve data quality all scans were performed as 2 microscans which were averaged on the flight.

### Data Protocol
The results were analysed by epiProfile [PMID: 25805797], the code was modified to specify phenyl isocyanate (119.037114) as N-terminal modification

### Publication Abstract
Acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) is catalyzed by histone acetyltransferase KAT8 and can prevent chromatin compaction in&#xa0;vitro. Although extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and two KAT8-containing protein complexes (NSL and MSL) are not well understood in mammals. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8: it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16ac as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that MSL complex proteins and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it stimulates transcription initiation at the promoters of housekeeping genes. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins and that, when in the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac required for the expression of essential genes.

### Keywords
Nsl, Msl, Kat8, Histone

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N Jensen
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)


