### Accession
PXD030342

### Title
Pancreatic cell lines MS2/MS3 TMT labeled Rescored with Prosit

### Description
We Have a pancreas MS2/MS3 dataset in this project. We predict all spectra in the datasets via Prosit then rescore. We have 100% FDR maxquant search results, and using percolator we get 1%FDR filtered results with andromeda Scores and another with features extracted from Prosit predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Human specimen used in this study were obtained following informed consent and observing the appropriate ethics approval process of the Technical University of Munich. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the faculty of medicine of the Technical University of Munich. In total 1 mL plasma samples collected from five healthy donors were centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 g. In total 50 µl supernatant were taken out and diluted by 5 volumes of 8 M urea buffer containing 80 mM Tris–HCl, pH = 7.6, and then stored at −80 °C until further use. Second-morning mid-stream urine was collected from a healthy donor, cooled immediately to 4 °C, and centrifuged at 4000 × g at 4 °C for 30 min to remove cell debris. The supernatant was vacuum concentrated 5-fold using a SpeedVac and proteins were precipitated using five volumes of ice-cold ethanol, incubated at −20 °C overnight, and followed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g, 4 °C for 30 min. The pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea buffer containing 80 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 7.6, and stored at −80 °C until further use. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from five individuals with relapsing/remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and five healthy individuals were pooled to obtain sufficient sample for this technical study. The pooled CSF was stored at −80 °C until further use. Because the protein concentration in the CSF sample was very low, no urea buffer was used. About 1 g fresh frozen human placenta tissue was washed five times with ice-cold PBS buffer containing protease inhibitors, followed by addition of 3 mL lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea, 80 mM Tris–HCl (pH = 7.6), 1 × EDTA-free protease inhibitors (complete mini, Roche). The lysate was transferred to precellys tubes containing ceramic beads and incubated on ice for 5 min. Then, the precellys tubes were mounted on a Precellys 24 bead-milling device (Bertin Instruments). Tissue homogenization was performed at 5500 rpm for 2 × 25 s with 5 s pause for five cycles. Between each cycle, the lysate was put on ice for 10 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 g, 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatant was stored at −80 °C until further use. Human epithelial cervix carcinoma HeLa cells (ATCC, CCL-2) were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin (Invitrogen), 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen), at 37 °C, in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were harvested at ∼80% confluence by washing twice with PBS buffer and subsequently adding lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea, 80 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 7.6), 1 × EDTA free protease inhibitors (complete mini, Roche), and 1 × Phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich) directly to the cell culture plate. The plate was incubated on ice for 5 min. The cell lysate was collected by scraping the plate. After that, the lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 × g, 4 °C for 30 min. The resulting supernatant was stored at −80 °C until further use. The 10 pancreatic cell lines (BxPC-3 (ATCC, CRL-1687), Dan-G (DSMZ, ACC 249), HPAC (ATCC, CRL-2119), HuPt-4 (DSMZ, ACC 223), IMIM-PC-1 (PRID, CVCL_4061), MiaPaCa2 (ATCC, CRM-CRL-1420), Panc-10.05 (ATCC, CRL-2547), Pa-Tu-8998-S (DSMZ, ACC 204), Pa-Tu-8998-T (DSMZ, ACC 162) and PSN-1 (ATCC, CRL-3211)) were provided by Günter Schneider. The cell lines were cultured according to the cell line provider’s recommendations to 60–80% confluency47. The cells were lysed with 8 M urea, 40 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 1 × EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture (Complete Mini, Roche), and 1 × phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich). The cell lysate was clarified by centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 min. The

### Data Protocol
A Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System was coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The results reported in this study were all obtained on a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 um particle size, 1 mm ID x 150 mm; catalog number 164711). The final LC conditions we recommend for the high-flow LC system described in this study are: for unlabeled protein digests: solvent A: 0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in water; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN; direct sample injection using solvent A, linear gradient of 3%-28% B for all gradient lengths. A linear gradient of 3%-28% B in 15 min was used for all the pulldown samples, including kinobeads, AP and BioID pulldowns. A linear gradient of 1%-25% B in 60 min was used for enriched phosphopeptides. The linear gradients of 7%-32% B in 15 min, 6%-33% B in 25 min were used for the fractionated TMT labeled peptides. With this setup we generated > 2300 raw files by analyzing label free HeLa, urine, CSF, plasma, placenta, phoshopeptides, kinobeads pulldown, affinity purification and BioID pulldown samples, and TMT11 labeled peptides. For the full proteome analysis, HeLa cells, human pancreatic cell lines and placenta tissues samples were lysed with urea buffer, urine and plasma samples were denatured in urea buffer, urea buffer was not used for the CSF sample, two-step trypsin digestion were performed overnight. Kinobeads, BioID and (affinity purification) AP pulldown samples were prepared with standard protocol as described in the manuscript. TMT11 plex labelling, off-line basic pH reversed phase peptide fractionation, phosphopeptide enrichment were described in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Iontrap, Tmt11plex, Ot, It, Orbitrap, Ms3, Ms2

### Affiliations
Technical University in Munich
Technichal University in Munich

### Submitter
Wassim Gabriel

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Wilhelm
Technichal University in Munich


