### Accession
PXD035305

### Title
MX2 Viral Substrate Breadth and Inhibitory Activity Are Regulated by Protein Phosphorylation

### Description
Productive infection by human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) requires the import of viral replication complexes into the nuclei of infected cells. Myxovirus resistance 2 (MX2/MxB) blocks this step, halting nuclear accumulation of viral DNA and virus replication. Here, we identify positions in MX2 whose phosphorylation status reduces or enhances antiviral function (hypomorphic and hypermorphic variants, respectively). Importantly, hypermorphic mutant proteins not only increased inhibitory activity against wild-type HIV-1 but can also exhibit antiviral capabilities against HIV-1 capsid mutant viruses that are resistant to wild-type MX2. Furthermore, some of these proteins were also able to inhibit retroviruses that are insensi- tive to MX2. Therefore, we propose that phosphorylation comprises a major element of MX2 regulation and substrate determination.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells stably expressing MX2-Flag were lysed in PBS containing 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with 1 PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 1 complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The lysate was then centrifuged at 16,000  g for 10 min and the resulting supernatant incubated with anti-Flag magnetic beads (Sigma) for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, and MX2-Flag was eluted by resuspending the beads in sample buffer and boiled for 10 min. Immunoprecipitated MX2 was resolved on a 12% SDS–polyacrylamide gel (Thermo Fisher), stained with SimplyBlue (Thermo Fisher), and the band corresponding to MX2 was excised and subjected to in- gel reduction (dithiothreitol; Sigma), alkylation (Iodoacetamide; Sigma), and trypsin (bovine; Sigma) digestion. Peptides were extracted from the gel by a series of washes of acetonitrile and water and subsequently lyophi- lized. Resulting samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and analyzed by LC–MS/MS. Chromatographic separation was performed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK). Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75m C18 Pepmap column (50cm length) using a three-step linear gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 60 min starting at 5% B (0-5 minutes) and increasing solvent to 40% B (5-40 minutes) prior to a wash step at 99% B (40-45 minutes) followed by an equilibration step at 5% B (45-60 minutes). electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.3. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using an Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation by collision induced dissociation. Orbitrap spectra (FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 375-1800 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4.0e5 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Monoisotopic precursor ions were filtered using charge state (+2 to +7) with an intensity threshold set between 5.0e3 to 1.0e20 and a dynamic exclusion window of 35s ± 10 ppm. MS2 precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole set to a mass width filter of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap fragmentation spectra (ITMS2) were collected with an AGC target setting of 1.0e4 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms with CID collision energy set at 35%. MS/MS fragmentation spectra collected by higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD)(FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 350-1600 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4.0e5 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 70 ms with HCD collision energy set at 28%.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained were processed in Proteome Discoverer (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific) v2.4 and interrogated using Mascot (v2.3) with an in-house curated database including the sequence of the MX2 protein (P20592). Variable modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met) and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr & Tyr) at 5% FDR for protein and peptide tolerance of 20 ppm. MSF files generated by PD were uploaded into Scaffold software (Proteome Software Inc., v5.1.2) for alignment, visualization, and manual phospho-PTM verification.

### Publication Abstract
Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) infection is potently inhibited by human myxovirus resistance 2 (MX2/MxB), which binds to the viral capsid and blocks the nuclear import of viral DNA. We have recently shown that phosphorylation is a key regulator of MX2 antiviral activity, with phosphorylation of serine residues at positions 14, 17, and 18 repressing MX2 function. Here, we extend the study of MX2 posttranslational modifications and identify serine and threonine phosphorylation in all domains of MX2. By substituting these residues with aspartic acid or alanine, hence mimicking the presence or absence of a phosphate group, respectively, we identified key positions that control MX2 antiviral activity. Aspartic acid substitutions of residues Ser306 or Thr334 and alanine substitutions of Thr343 yielded proteins with substantially reduced antiviral activity, whereas the presence of aspartic acid at positions Ser28, Thr151, or Thr343 resulted in enhanced activity: referred to as hypermorphic mutants. In some cases, these hypermorphic mutations, particularly when paired with other MX2 mutations (e.g., S28D/T151D or T151D/T343A) acquired the capacity to inhibit HIV-1 capsid mutants known to be insensitive to wild-type MX2, such as P90A or T210K, as well as MX2-resistant retroviruses such as equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) and murine leukemia virus (MLV). This work highlights the complexity and importance of MX2 phosphorylation in the regulation of antiviral activity and in the selection of susceptible viral substrates. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Productive infection by human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) requires the import of viral replication complexes into the nuclei of infected cells. Myxovirus resistance 2 (MX2/MxB) blocks this step, halting nuclear accumulation of viral DNA and virus replication. We recently demonstrated how phosphorylation of a stretch of three serines in the amino-terminal domain of MX2 inhibits the antiviral activity. Here, we identify additional positions in MX2 whose phosphorylation status reduces or enhances antiviral function (hypomorphic and hypermorphic variants, respectively). Importantly, hypermorphic mutant proteins not only increased inhibitory activity against wild-type HIV-1 but can also exhibit antiviral capabilities against HIV-1 capsid mutant viruses that are resistant to wild-type MX2. Furthermore, some of these proteins were also able to inhibit retroviruses that are insensitive to MX2. Therefore, we propose that phosphorylation comprises a major element of MX2 regulation and substrate determination.

### Keywords
Infection, Retroviruses, Mx2, Innate immunity, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Professor of Infectious Diseases, Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology & Microbial Diseases, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Michael Malim
Professor of Infectious Diseases, Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology & Microbial Diseases, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's College London


