### Accession
PXD031487

### Title
Global proteome of Atg5flox:CAG-CreTmx WT and KO neurons

### Description
The experiment was performed to identify autophagy targets in wildtype and autophagy-deficient primary neurons. Therefore, cortico-hippocampal neurons were isolated from Atg5flox:CAG-CreTmx mice and treated with Tamoxifen (Tmx) to induce the knockout (KO) or EtOH for wildtype (WT) in-vitro. WT and KO Neurons were harvested at day in-vitro (DIV) 15-16, and global proteome analysis was measured by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. For total proteome analysis Atg5flox:CAG-CreTmx were harvested at DIV15-16 in RIPA buffer. Supernatants were sonicated, and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined for each lysate and 50µg protein of each sample taken for the experiment. Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using an in-gel digestion protocol. In brief, samples were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and run for 1-2 cm. The whole running line was chopped into small pieces and transferred in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT) and alkylated (55 mM CAA). Digestion of proteins were done overnight using Trypsin (10 ng/µL 90% Trypsin) and LysC (50 mM). Peptides were purified using StageTips. Eluted peptides were dried in vacuo, resuspended in 1% formic acid/4% acetonitrile and stored at -20°C prior MS measurement.   LCMS data acquisition. All samples were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 4-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-28% solvent B within 200.0 min, 28-50% solvent B within 28.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.0 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalised collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 40.0 sec. Each sample was injected twice.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Double injections from each sample were combined in MaxQuant by naming them identically. MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome containing isoforms (UP000000589, downloaded at 26.08.2020), including a list of common contaminants. The target-decoy approach estimated false discovery rates on protein and PSM levels to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurons, Atg5 ko, Autophagy

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931 Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr N.L. Kononenko
CECAD Excellence Center, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931 Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, D-50931


