### Accession
PXD017990

### Title
Global proteome analysis of conditional sth1 mutant in Candida albicans

### Description
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. Here we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. We addressed the global functions of RSC in C. albicans by analyzing the changes in the proteome of cells lacking the catalytic subunit Sth1 using DIA-MS (Data Independent Acquisition-Mass Spectrometry). For this purpose, we generated a conditional mutant harboring a doxycycline (dox)-repressible allele of STH1 (sth1∆/pTetO-STH1-MYC) and treated this mutant with dox for Sth1 depletion. To assess the effect of dox alone on gene expression, a near-isogenic sth1∆/STH1-MYC strain was also analysed.

### Sample Protocol
DIA-MS: Overnight cultures of ∆sth1/pTetO-STH1-MYC and ∆sth1/STH1-MYC were adjusted to an initial OD of 0.05 in YPD and grown for 2 hours before adding 20 µg/ml doxycycline. A no dox control was also included for both the strains. Depletion was performed for 7 hours to ensure Sth1 depletion without compromising cell viability. Three biological replicates per condition were analyzed. Cells were lysed with Tris (pH 8.1) containing 1% (w/v) SDC (sodium deoxycholate) and the lysate was boiled, sonicated and clarified by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 5 minutes. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested, and SDC was removed by phase separation with 100% water-saturated ethyl acetate. Desalting and sample processing for mass spectrometric analysis was done as mentioned for AP-MS.  Spectral library: To generate a comprehensive spectral library of C. albicans proteins, 700 µg of protein extract was trypsin-digested and the peptides were separated using off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionation method described previously (Huang et al., 2018). Forty fractions were collected and equidistantly pooled into 6 samples. Mass spectra were acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected in-line to the UHPLC system described above. For DIA analysis, each sample was injected twice (represented by 375-675 and 675-975 in raw file IDs) with MS1 scan parameters as follows: 120000 resolution, scan range 375-1575 m/z, maximum injection time 54 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) 107. Parameters for orbitrap MS2 scan were set to quadrupole isolation of width 12 m/z, 30000 resolution, scan range 200-2000 m/z, maximum injection time 54 ms and AGC 107. All samples to create the spectral library were acquired in the data-dependent mode with identical MS1 scan settings. MS2 scans were acquired with quadrupole isolation of width 1.4 m/z, resolution 30000, maximum injection time 118 ms, AGC 400000 and, dynamically excluded for 15 s. Raw files of the 6 fractions used for spectral library generation are deposited.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was generated in Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys) after all DDA files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD result file deposited). The DIA raw files were converted to the HTRMS format and analyzed with Spectronaut using the BGS factory default settings (Spectronaut output files (.sne) deposited). A q-value threshold of 1% was assigned for precursor and protein identifications and, quantification was performed at the MS2 level based on area under the XIC peaks. Differential abundance of proteins between conditions were evaluated using Student’s t-tests and candidates passing a q-value threshold of 0.05 were exported for further analysis.  An excel file (Sample annotation.xls) has been included with annotation details of raw files used for DIA-MS and spectral library generation.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. Here we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Biochemical analysis showed that CaRSC comprises 13 subunits and contains two novel non-essential members, which we named Nri1 and Nri2 (Novel RSC Interactors) that are exclusive to the CTG clade of Saccharomycotina. Genetic analysis showed distinct essentiality of C. albicans RSC subunits compared to model fungal species suggesting functional and structural divergence of RSC functions in this fungal pathogen. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of a conditional mutant of the essential catalytic subunit gene STH1 demonstrated global roles of RSC in C. albicans biology, with the majority of growth-related processes affected, as well as mis-regulation of genes involved in morphotype switching, host-pathogen interaction and adaptive fitness. We further assessed the functions of non-essential CaRSC subunits, showing that the novel subunit Nri1 and the bromodomain subunit Rsc4 play roles in filamentation and stress responses; and also interacted at the genetic level to regulate cell viability. Consistent with these roles, Rsc4 is required for full virulence of C. albicans in the murine model of systemic infection. Taken together, our data builds the first comprehensive study of the composition and roles of RSC in C. albicans, showing both conserved and distinct features compared to model fungal systems. The study illuminates how C. albicans uses RSC-dependent transcriptional regulation to respond to environmental signals and drive survival fitness and virulence in mammals.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Rsc, Dia-ms, Sth1

### Affiliations
IIT Bombay and Monash University
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay Mumbai, India

### Submitter
Vinutha K B

### Lab Head
Dr Santanu Kumar Ghosh
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay Mumbai, India


