### Accession
PXD010526

### Title
Soil metaproteome and pH effects

### Description
Soil microorganisms act as gatekeepers for soil-atmosphere carbon exchange by balancing the accumulation and release of soil organic matter. However, poor understanding of the mechanisms responsible hinders the development of effective land management strategies to enhance soil carbon storage. Here we empirically test the link between microbial ecophysiological traits and topsoil carbon content across geographically distributed soils and land use contrasts. We discovered distinct pH-controls on microbial mechanisms of carbon accumulation. Land use intensification in low-pH soils that increased pH above a threshold (~ 6.2) lead to carbon loss through increased decomposition following alleviation of acid-retardation of microbial growth. However, loss of carbon with intensification in near neutral-pH soils was linked to decreased microbial biomass and reduced growth efficiency that was, in turn, related to tradeoffs with stress alleviation and resource acquisition. Thus, less intensive management practices in near neutral-pH soils have more potential for carbon storage through increased microbial growth efficiency; whereas, in acidic soils microbial growth is a bigger constraint on decomposition rates.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling regime Soil samples were collected from 56 geographically distributed sites that differed in their edaphic properties (Fig. 1). From these sites, 21 local contrasts of land-use intensity with relevant historical knowledge of land management scenarios were chosen to study the effect of land use intensity on microbial functionality (Table 1). Research experiments, working farms, or farms under management by local wildlife trusts were targeted to provide two nearby fields of differing long-term management intensity. The low intensity sites were generally permanent unimproved grasslands, often with low density grazing. The high intensity sites were mostly arable fertilised croplands or intensive grasslands. The subset of 21 local contrasts were selected based on the criteria that the higher intensity treatment had a significant reduction in organic matter and an increase in pH reflecting nationwide trends of intensification effects (Table 1, Supplementary Table 1). From each of the identified sites at a single time point, 3 spatially dispersed soil cores (5 cm diameter, 15 cm deep) were sampled to capture the natural spatial variability at each site. After all visible roots were removed, aliquots of the homogenized soil were frozen at -20 C until the following functional analyses. Metaproteomics For proteomic analysis of microbial communities, 3 replicated samples were used from both high and low intensity land use consisting of 6 sites, each contrast representing one of the three types of hypothesized land use intensification effects (Table 1). 5 g soil was used for protein extraction (with two technical replicates) according to a previously described method46. Proteolytically cleaved peptides were separated prior to mass spectrometric analyses by reverse phase nano HPLC on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled online for analysis with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source (Advion Triversa Nanomate, Ithaca, NY, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the MS instrument were searched using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a FASTA-formatted database (protein-coding sequences of bacteria, fungi and archaea, Uniprot 05/2016) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Database searches were performed with carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerances. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% estimated by Percolator51, and only rank 1 peptides were accepted as identified. Unipept v3.252 was applied to assign proteins to their phylogenetic origin. GhostKoala53 and KEGG classifier were used for functional annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soil metaproteome, Lc-ms/ms, Ph effects, Land use

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Department Molekulare Systembiologie Permoserstraße 15  04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Department Molekulare Systembiologie Permoserstraße 15  04318 Leipzig, Germany


