### Accession
PXD030049

### Title
Proteomic analysis on the protective effect of eriodictyol on benzo(a)pyrene-induced Caco-2 cytotoxicity

### Description
The present study was aimed to evaluate the protective effects of six different polyphenols against benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)-induced cytotoxicity in Caco-2 cells. The results shows that treatment of quinic acid, ferulic acid, homovanillic acid and BaP decreased the cell viability, whereas only co-treatment of 20 µM eriodictyol and naringenin reduced BaP-induced cytotoxicity, including cell apoptosis, cell cycle change and oxidative stress. Moreover, all results show that the inhibitory effect of eriodictyol was better than that of naringenin. Further, the potential protective mechanism of eriodictyol against BaP-induced toxicity was investigated by proteomics. We found that the genetic information processing pathway involves in 80 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) showed the highest proportion and number of total proteins. Finally, eriodictyol inhibited BaP-induced cytotoxicity by regulating the expression of key proteins such as RPA2, SNRPA, RAD23B, NUP155 and AARS in transcription and translation. Overall, our results provide a new perspective for polyphenols inhibiting BaP-induced carcinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
A Nano-LC tandem with a linear trap quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was applied to analyze the protein profiles. The resulting peptides (1.5 μg) were acidified with 0.1% formic acid and subsequently loaded into the C18 column (75μm×2cm, 3μm, 100Å; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 μL/min in a loading buffer, containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Chromatographic separation was carried out using an analytical RSLC C18 column (75μm×15cm, 3μm, 100Å; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient of 3-55% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min over 112 min. Due to loading and washing steps, the total time for an LC-MS/MS run was approximately 160 min. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was applied in positive mode with the following parameters: MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically exclusion to screen the most abundant precursor ions from survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
A label-free method was applied to determine protein quantification. The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against with the corresponding uniprot Homo sapiens database. The precursor mass and MS/MS tolerance of peptide was set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. The maximum number of missed cleavages was two. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, with protein N-terminal oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were characterized proteins with a fold change in intensity > 1.5 or < 0.67 and p <0.05. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and protein-protein interaction analysis were performed using Omicsbean (http://www.omicsbean.cn). The strengths of the PPI network relationships were visualized by assigning line weights to the compiled scores. PPI analysis was done with minimum required interaction score set to medium confidence 0.400.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caco-2 cells, Proteomics, Cytotoxicity, Benzo(a)pyrene, Eriodictyol

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Chong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chong Wang
University of Copenhagen


