### Accession
PXD025827

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics identifies unique proteomes of clinical isolates of the Liverpool Epidemic Strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and laboratory strain PAO1

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a predominant pathogen in chronic lung infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). Epidemic strains of P. aeruginosa, such as the Liverpool Epidemic Strain (LES), are capable of transferring between CF patients and have been associated with increased hospital visits and antibiotic treatments. Comparative genomics and phenotypic assays have shown that antibiotic resistance profiles differ among LES isolates and that genotype–phenotype associations are difficult to establish for resistance phenotypes in clinical isolates of P. aeruginosa based on these comparisons alone. We compared two LES isolates, LESlike1 and LESB58, and the common laboratory strain P. aeruginosa PAO1 using label-free quantitative proteomics to more accurately predict functional differences between strains. The proteomes of the LES isolates were found to be more similar to each other than to PAO1. However, we also observed a number of differences in the abundance of proteins involved in quorum sensing, virulence, and antibiotic resistance, including in the comparison of LESlike1 and LESB58. Specifically, the proteomic data revealed a higher abundance of proteins involved in polymyxin and aminoglycoside resistance in LESlike1. Minimum inhibitory concentration assays confirmed that LESlike1 has higher resistance to antibiotics from these classes. These findings provide an example of the ability of proteomic data to complement genotypic and phenotypic studies to understand resistance in clinical isolates.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates were processed for each of PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58. A total proteome extraction was performed for each sample following previously described protocols. Cell pellets were washed twice with PBS, pH 7.4, flash frozen in liquid N2, and stored at -20 °C until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Cell pellets were lysed on ice by three rounds of sonication, 30 s on, 30 s off, 10% power. SDS and DTT were added to each sample at final concentrations of 2% and 0.01 M respectively, and samples were incubated for 10 min at 95 °C and 800 rpm. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 0.055 M and samples were incubated for 20 min at room temperature protected from light. Ice cold acetone was added to a final concentration of 80% and samples were stored overnight at -20 °C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 13500 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Pellets were washed twice with 80% ice cold acetone and air dried. Pellets were dissolved in 8 M Urea/40 mM HEPES by 5-15 rounds (1 min on, 1 min on ice) of sonication in a 4 °C ultrasonic water bath. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring the final concentration of urea to 2 M and proteins (100 µg per sample) were digested overnight with LysC/Trypsin (Promega). Trifluoracetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.6% to stop digestion and then peptides (50 µg per sample) were purified on STAGE-tips containing three layers of C18. Samples were eluted in 50 µL of 80% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid and then dried using a speed-vacuum concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 12 µl buffer A (0.1% FA). Six µl of each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray flex-ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted over 90 min at a constant rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient from 4% to 27% ACN in 0.1% formic acid and introduced into the mass spectrometer by electrospray ionization. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one fill scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the most abundance peaks with a cycle time of 3 s. Data was acquired using an FT-IT method to take advantage of the speed of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.7.0) with the following group specific and global parameters: digestion was set to Trypsin/P, modifications were left as the defaults (variable modifications: methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation and fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine), label-free quantification (LFQ) was selected and the LFQ minimum ratio count set to one, the minimum number of peptides for identification was set to two and ‘match between runs’ and ‘iBAQ’ were selected. The proteome FASTA files were retrieved from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/, retrieved 13 January 2020) and had the following number of sequences: PAO1, 5536; LESlike1, 5916, and LESB58, 5908. FASTA files used for protein identification included the entire P. aeruginosa PAO1 proteome and protein sequences from LESlike1 and LESB58 proteomes that had no BLAST hit when searched against the PAO1 proteome. For LES proteins that had no BLAST hit when searched against PAO1, there were 159 protein sequences (identified by Uniparc number) found in both LES isolates, 155 unique to LESlike1, and 142 unique to LESB58.   Further data processing and statistical analysis was completed using Perseus software (v1.6.7.0). The “proteingroups.txt” output file from MaxQuant was uploaded into Perseus and the LFQ intensities for each sample were used for the remaining analysis. The RAW files for the four biological replicates of PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 described here were processed in MaxQuant with an additional 72 samples as part of a larger experiment. The LFQ intensities for the other samples have therefore been removed from the “proteingroups.txt” output file submitted to PRIDE, as the larger analysis is ongoing. The PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 samples described here were analyzed in Perseus separately from the other 72 samples. The data was first filtered to remove potential contaminants, proteins identified only by site, and reverse hits. LFQ intensities for the remaining proteins were log2 transformed. A column correlation was completed using a Pearson correlation and visualized by hierarchical clustering using Euclidian distance. A filtering step was completed to retain for statistical analysis only proteins that had valid values in a minimum of three biological replicates in at least one group (PAO1, LESlike1, or LESB58). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width=0.3, downshift=1.8) to allow for statistical analysis of the data. A principal component analysis was completed at the experiment level to reveal clustering of the biological replicates for each strain. Two-sided Student’s t-tests (p≤0.05, permutation-based FDR=0.01, S0=1) were used to identify proteins with significantly different abundances in three comparisons: LESlike1 vs PAO1, LESB58 vs PAO1, and LESB58 vs LESlike1. The results of the Student’s t-tests were visualized using volcano plots. Functional analysis was completed using 1D annotation enrichments (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR=0.05) based on the t-test differences for each comparison. The 1D annotation enrichment identified GO terms (biological process, cellular component, and molecular function) and pathway terms (KEGG and PseudoCyc) that were enriched for proteins that were either increased or decreased in abundance in one of the t-test comparisons. All GO, KEGG, and PseudoCyc terms were retrieved from the Pseudomonas Genome Database. The results of the 1D annotation enrichment were visualized using heat plots made using GraphPad Prism software (v8.3). The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (v11.0b) was used to map protein-protein interaction networks using all interaction sources except text-mining.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Liverpool epidemic strain, Antibiotic resistance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Cezar Khursigara

### Lab Head
Dr Cezar M. Khursigara
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph


