### Accession
PXD014200

### Title
Exploring the HeLa Dark Mitochondrial proteome

### Description
In the framework of the Human Proteome Project initiative, we aim to improve mapping and characterization of mitochondrial proteome. In this work we implemented an experimental workflow, combining classical biochemical enrichments and mass spectrometry, to pursue a much deeper definition of mitochondrial proteome and possibly mine mitochondrial uncharacterized
dark proteins. We fractionated in two compartments mitochondria enriched from HeLa cells in order to annotate 4230 proteins in both fraction by means of a multiple-enzyme digestion (trypsin, chymotrypsin and Glu-C) followed by mass spectrometry analysis using a combination of Data Dependent Acquisition and Data Independent Acquisition. We detected 22 mitochondrial dark proteins not annotated for their function and we provide their relative abundance inside the mitochondrial organelle. Considering this work as a pilot study we expect that the same approach, in different biological system, could represent an advancement in the characterization of the human mitochondrial proteome providing uncharted ground to explore the mitonuclear phenotypic
relationships.
All spectra have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with PXD014201 and PXD014200 identifier.


### Sample Protocol
We have implemented a combined biochemistry and MS based experimental workflow to extensively characterize the mt-proteome.
Briefly, after isolating the mitochondria from HeLa cells, we performed a sub fractionation aiming to solubilise as much as possible the mitochondrial membrane, treating samples with two mild non ionic detergents.
To begin with, we treated mitochondria with digitonin detergent, and we were able to separate a fraction of soluble proteins, that we named Fraction1 (F1), from a denser pellet, containing presumably more hydrophobic mt-inner membrane. We then treated this pellet with n-dodecil-β-(D)-maltoside to solubilise the remaining mt-membrane, and we called this protein extract Fraction2 (F2). A bottom up approach was then used for MS analysis, which involves analysis of proteolytic peptides released upon enzymatic digestion. To further increase the proteome coverage, each sample was subject to three different proteolytic digestions and mass spectra have been acquired applying two different acquisition methods: Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) and Data Independent Acquisition (DIA).
In particular, we used trypsin, chymotrypsin and Glu-C enzymes for both protein fractions F1 and F2. Digested peptides have been analyzed by LC-MS DDA on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo) and HDMSE, a DIA procedure, on a Synapt G2Si Q-TOF mass spectrometer, with T Wave cell for ion mobility separation (Waters Corp.). DDA and DIA MS data have been processed using Peaks studio 7.5 and PLGS 3.0.3 software respectively, and protein identification has been obtained by searching the human database neXtProt (2019-01-11).

### Data Protocol
We processed the DIA data by using PLGS 3.0.3 software (Waters&CO) while the DDA data were analysed by PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatic Solution).

### Publication Abstract
In the framework of the Human Proteome Project initiative, we aim to improve mapping and characterization of mitochondrial proteome. In this work we implemented an experimental workflow, combining classical biochemical enrichments and mass spectrometry, to pursue a much deeper definition of mitochondrial proteome and possibly mine mitochondrial uncharacterized <i>dark proteins</i>. We fractionated in two compartments mitochondria enriched from HeLa cells in order to annotate 4230 proteins in both fraction by means of a multiple-enzyme digestion (trypsin, chymotrypsin and Glu-C) followed by mass spectrometry analysis using a combination of Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) and Data Independent Acquisition (DIA). We detected 22 mitochondrial dark proteins not annotated for their function and we provide their relative abundance inside the mitochondrial organelle. Considering this work as a pilot study we expect that the same approach, in different biological system, could represent an advancement in the characterization of the human mitochondrial proteome providing uncharted ground to explore the mitonuclear phenotypic relationships. All spectra have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with PXD014201 and PXD014200 identifier.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Drug targets, Subproteome, Dark proteome, Personalised medicine, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabonomics Unit Fondazione Santa Lucia-IRCCS Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64, 00145  Rome, Italy
Catholic University of Sacred Heart (Rome)

### Submitter
Federica Marini

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Pieroni
Proteomics and Metabonomics Unit Fondazione Santa Lucia-IRCCS Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64, 00145  Rome, Italy


