### Accession
PXD015574

### Title
Regulated local synthesis of ribosomal proteins maintains  ribosome function in axons

### Description
Ribosome assembly occurs mainly in the nucleolus yet recent studies have revealed robust enrichment and translation of mRNAs encoding many ribosomal proteins (RPs) in axons, far away from neuronal cell bodies. Here, we report a physical and functional interaction between locally synthesized RPs and ribosomes in the axon. We show that axonal RP translation is regulated through a novel sequence motif, CUIC, that forms an RNA-loop structure in the region immediately upstream of the initiation codon. Using imaging and subcellular proteomics techniques, we show that RPs synthesized in axons join axonal ribosomes in a nucleolus-independent fashion. Inhibition of axonal CUIC-regulated RP translation causes a significant decline in local translation activity and markedly reduces axon branching in the brain, revealing the physiological relevance of axonal RP synthesis in vivo. These results suggest that axonal translation supplies cytoplasmic RPs to maintain/modify local ribosomal function far from the nucleolus in neurons.

### Sample Protocol
For the puromycin/RNaseA/T1 treated sample, Xenopus laevis brains were treated with 200μM puromycin for 15min before lysis and lysates were treated with 10μg/μl RNase A (Ambion) and 250U RNase T1 (Ambion) for 15 min at 25°C.  For density gradient fractionation, the lysate was layered on a sucrose gradient (10-50%) and ultracentrifugation was performed using a Beckman SW-40Ti rotor and Beckman Optima L-100 XP ultracentrifuge, with a speed of 35,000 rpm at 4°C for 160 min. Fractionations and UV absorbance profiling were carried out using Density Gradient Fractionation System (Teledyne ISCO). For sucrose cushioning, the lysate was layered on a 20% sucrose solution (20% sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 300 mM KCl,10 mM MgCl2), which contains a high concentration of KCl to avoid the aspecific binding of proteins to ribosomes. Then, ultracentrifugation was performed using a Beckman SW-55Ti rotor and Beckman Optima L-100 XP ultracentrifuge, with a speed of 41,000rpm at 4°C for 120 min. Proteins were precipitated from each fraction using methanol-chloroform precipitation and pellets were resuspended in 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer and used for Western blotting as described below. RNA from each fraction was isolated as described below. AF1: Axon ribosome free fraction rep1, AR1: Axon ribosomal fraction rep1, HF1: Brain ribosome free fraction rep1, HR1: Brain ribosomal fraction rep1, 1: Axon ribosome free fraction rep2, 2: Axon ribosomal fraction rep2, 4: Brain ribosome free fraction rep2, 5: Brain ribosomal fraction rep2, 6:RNase+ brain ribosomal fraction rep1, 7: RNase- brain ribosomal fraction rep1, 8:RNase+ brain ribosomal fraction rep2,  9:RNase- brain ribosomal fraction rep2

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and relative quantification was carried out in Proteome Discoverer version 2.3. A standard label free quantification workflow was utilized with the Mascot search algorithm, against a Xenopus laevis proteins downloaded from Xenbase. The search parameters included: trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, with maximum of two missed cleavages; variable oxidation modification of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; fixed carbamidomethylation modification of cysteine; precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at <1% with two peptide matches to proteins considered as reliable.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sucrose density gradient fractionation, Ribosomes, Axon

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.

### Submitter
Toshiaki Shigeoka

### Lab Head
Dr Christine E Holt
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.


