### Accession
PXD040418

### Title
Proteomic evaluation of urine of the female of domestic dog (Canis familiaris), during different stages of ovarian cycle

### Description
Chemical signals are essential for communication between living organisms. Dogs possess two sensory organs enabling chemical communication; the main olfactory system  and the vomeronasal organ (VNO). Besides, contact chemoreception is also pertinent, by which non-volatile molecules, including but not limited to proteins, are recognized as chemical signals. However, non-volatile chemical signals have been sparsely studied in dogs. Therefore, we aimed to examine the urinary proteins of female domestic dogs during estrus and anestrus phases to detect and identify such non-volatile chemical signals.

### Sample Protocol
FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) was used to prepare samples for mass spectrometric analysis. In FASP, a mass weight cut-off of 3 kDa was used. The urine samples containing 80 µg of protein were treated with 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol, Sigma-Aldrich) (prepared in 100 mM Trimethylammonium bicarbonate ((TEAB)) for 1 hour at 55 °C. Subsequently, the samples were alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific) in 100 mM TEAB at room temperature for 30 minutes. After incubation, the samples were transferred to cut-off membrane-fitted tubes and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 minutes. The resulting flow-through was collected from the lower portion of the tube, and digested with trypsin (sample: trypsin at a ratio of 40:1) in 50 mM TEAB (Promega) at 37 °C for 18 hours. The peptides were labeled with the TMTsixplex (Tandem Mass Tags) Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting samples were stored at -80°C until further processing. All the samples were prepared in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4, and Sequest HT search engine was used to extract and annotate MS/MS spectra. To assign spectra to canine proteome, we have conducted a Sequst HT search against a custom database, which comprises SwissProt and TrEMBL protein sequences of Canis lupus familiars and its subspecies, extracted from UniProtKB 2021_5. Trypsin was selected as an enzyme, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximum precursor and fragment tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, to permit for higher sensitivity of the experiment Modifications were set as follows: quantification – TMT 6plex, static modification – carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications – acetyl (protein N-term), oxidation (M). Reporter ion quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Spectra were normalized to the total amount of peptides in the sample and scaled to the reference sample channel (TMT 126 in urine samples). Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification, with at least two peptide matches per protein. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed).

### Publication Abstract
The presence and identity of non-volatile chemical signals remain elusive in canines. In this study, we aim to evaluate the urinary proteins of female domestic dogs in the estrus and anestrus phases to evidence the presence of non-volatile chemical signals and to elucidate their identities. We collected urine samples from eight female dogs in the estrus and anestrus phases. A total of 240 proteins were identified in the urine samples using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS analysis). The comparison of the proteins revealed a significant difference between the estrus and anestrus urine. We identified proteins belonging to the lipocalin family of canines (beta-lactoglobulin-1 and beta-lactoglobulin-2, P33685 and P33686, respectively), one of whose function was the transport of pheromones and which was present only in the estrus urine samples. Moreover, proteins such as Clusterin (CLU), Liver-expressed antimicrobial peptide 2 (LEAP2), and Proenkephalin (PENK) were more abundant in the estrus urine when compared to the anestrus urine. LEAP2 was recently described as a ghrelin receptor antagonist and implicated in regulating food intake and body weight in humans and mice. Proenkephalin, a polypeptide hormone cleaved into opioid peptides, was also recognized as a candidate to determine kidney function. As of yet, none of these have played a role in chemical communication. Clusterin, an extracellular chaperone protecting from protein aggregation implicated in stress-induced cell apoptosis, is a plausible candidate in chemical communication, which is a claim that needs to be ascertained further. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD040418.

### Keywords
Urine, Estrus, Dog, Cycle

### Affiliations
Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Department of Reproduction, 50-366 Wrocław, Plac  Grunwaldzki 49, Poland
InstaDeep Ltd.

### Submitter
Marcin Skwark

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dzięcioł
Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Department of Reproduction, 50-366 Wrocław, Plac  Grunwaldzki 49, Poland


