### Accession
PXD038619

### Title
A multi-parameter optimization in middle-down analysis of monoclonal antibodies by LC-MS/MS

### Description
In antibody-based drug research, regulatory agencies request a complete characterization of antibody proteoforms covering both the amino acid sequence and all post-translational modifications. The usual mass spectrometry-based approach to achieve this goal is bottom-up proteomics, which relies on the digestion of antibodies, but does not allow the diversity of proteoforms to be assessed. Middle-down and top-down approaches have recently emerged as attractive alternatives but are not yet mastered and thus used in routine by many analytical chemistry laboratories. The work described here aims at providing guidelines to achieve the best sequence coverage for the fragmentation of intact light and heavy chains generated from a simple reduction of intact antibodies using Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Three parameters were found crucial to this aim: the use of an electron-based activation technique, the multiplex selection of precursor ions of different charge states and the combination of replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Two commercially available mAbs (immunoglobulin or IgG, type 1) were used for the fragmentation experiments: Sigma mAb standard (SiLuLite, IgG1 lambda, CHO, Sigma) and NIST mAb standard (HzIgG1 kappa, NS0, NIST). These mAbs were chosen based on the strong sequence differences between their light chains (only 46% identity based on sequence alignment). Each mAb was diluted to a final concentration of 0.32 µg/µL with guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma, 5 M final concentration) and reduced into Lc and Hc with DTT (Sigma, 100 mM final concentration) during 45 min at 45°C under 800 rpm. Samples were acidified with TFA (Sigma, 1% final concentration) before LC-MS/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Vanquish Horizon UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap EclipseTM Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) fitted with a H-ESI source. 1 µg of Lc and Hc were separated on a MAbPacTM RP column (2.1 mm i.d. x 50 mm, 4 µm particle size, 1500 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) heated at 80°C with a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) at 250 µL/min, from 25 to 41% in 2.8 min. For all experiments spray voltage was set to 3.8 kV, sheath gas settings was 35, auxiliary gas settings was 4, sweep gas settings was 1, vaporizer temperature was 150°C, ion transfer tube temperature was 350°C, RF value was 30% and source fragmentation energy was 10 V. A first LC-MS experiment was acquired at 7,500 resolving power (at m/z 400) with a scan range set to m/z 350-2,500, 5 microscans (μscans) per MS scan, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation data were recorded using targeted LC-MS/MS experiments between 2.5 and 3.2 min for the NIST mAb Lc and 3.2 and 4.2 min for the NIST mAb Hc; between 2.6 and 3.25 min for the Sigma mAb Lc and 3.2 and 4.0 min for the Sigma mAb Hc. Four precursor charge states were chosen for each subunit across their respective charge state distribution, isolated by the quadrupole and subjected to individual or multiplexed fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolving power (at m/z 400) with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, 5 μscans, an AGC target value of 5e5 and maximum injection time of 246 ms. HCD with normalized collision energies (NCE) of 15, 20 and 25%, EThcD with 2, 5 and 10 ms of reaction time and a supplemental HCD activation with NCE of 5, 10 or 15%, CID with collision energies (CE) of respectively 25, 30, 35% and 30, 35, 40% were used for the fragmentation of the Lc and Hc. For EThcD experiments, the anionic fluoranthene reagent AGC target was set to 7e5 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms. All experiments were conducted using the Intact Protein mode with a pressure set to 1 mTorr in the ion-routing multipole (IRM).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were deconvoluted with Genedata Expressionist® software using a time-resolved deconvolution and the Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) algorithm. MS/MS spectra were averaged across the appropriate subunit elution windows and then deconvoluted using the embedded Xtract algorithm in FreeStyleTM (v. 1.6.75.20) with a signal-to-noise ratio threshold of 3, a fit factor of 80%, a remainder threshold of 25% and maximum charge set to the precursor charge state. Lists of decharged and deisotoped monoisotopic masses were imported into ProSight Lite (v. 1.4) and used for fragment assignments with a 5 ppm mass tolerance. Only b- and y-ions were considered for CID and HCD fragmentations while b-, c-, y- and z-ions were searched for EThcD. TDFragMapper was used for further visualization and comparison of fragmentation results. Lists of assigned fragments were exported from ProSight Lite and used with deconvoluted data and the protein sequence as input for TDFragMapper. Venn diagrams and pairwise comparisons were generated using the Intervene Shiny app. Combinations of fragmentation results from diverse MS/MS experiments were processed using an in-house developed R script.

### Publication Abstract
In antibody-based drug research, a complete characterization of antibody proteoforms covering both the amino acid sequence and all posttranslational modifications remains a major concern. The usual mass spectrometry-based approach to achieve this goal is bottom-up proteomics, which relies on the digestion of antibodies but does not allow the diversity of proteoforms to be assessed. Middle-down and top-down approaches have recently emerged as attractive alternatives but are not yet mastered and thus used in routine by many analytical chemistry laboratories. The work described here aims at providing guidelines to achieve the best sequence coverage for the fragmentation of intact light and heavy chains generated from a simple reduction of intact antibodies using Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Three parameters were found crucial to this aim: the use of an electron-based activation technique, the multiplex selection of precursor ions of different charge states, and the combination of replicates.

### Keywords
Orbitrap ms, Intact proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Monoclonal antibody, Middle-down proteomics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Université Paris Cité, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UAR2024, Paris, France
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit
Institut Pasteur
Paris

### Submitter
Jonathan Dhenin

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Université Paris Cité, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UAR2024, Paris, France


