### Accession
PXD028509

### Title
H. pylori utilizes membrane vesicles as a novel tool to extrude bismuth drug

### Description
Antibiotic resistance is one of the major threats to human health. Combination of antibiotics with metals is among the proposed alternative treatments. However, so far only one such combination with the metal bismuth successfully used in clinics against Helicobacter pylori. This bacterial pathogen colonizes the human stomach potentially resulting in gastric cancer that causes 800,000 deaths every year. The effect of bismuth on H. pylori is not understood, for sub-lethal doses, such as those present in the plasma of treated patients. We addressed this question and observed that bismuth induces the formation of homogeneous membrane vesicles (MVs) with unique protein cargo content enriched in bismuth-binding proteins. To our surprise, MVs concentrate bismuth, unlike bacterial cells from which they originate. Our results revealed a novel function of MVs in metal detoxification where bismuth is accumulated to discard it from bacteria. Polyphosphate granules (poly-P) formed upon bismuth exposure are associated with changes in nucleoid structure and cell segregation. Thus, even low doses of bismuth induce profound changes in H. pylori physiology and highlight novel defense mechanisms employed by bacteria against bismuth toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described previously. Briefly, gel slices were destained in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1). Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 minutes at 56°C) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were digested by 2 µg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted with formic acid to 5 % final concentration and desalted on Stage Tip prepared with Empore 3M C18 material (Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Peptide digests (1 µg) were loaded and separated at 250 nL.min-1 on a in house packed 30 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) equilibrated in 97 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 3 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 29 % buffer B in 70 min, followed by a stepwise increase of buffer B to 56 % B in 30 min and finally to 100 % in 5 min. Mass spectra were acquired with a Top10 data-dependent acquisition mode, with a scan range set to 300 – 1,700 m/z and an AGC target value of 3x106. The fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by HCD (NCE 28) at 17.5 K resolving power (at m/z 200) with an AGC target value of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 version against Helicobacter pylori G27 Uniprot reference proteome database (1,501 entries) concatenated with usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of 4 missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable), Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The maximum peptide mass was increase to 8,000 Da. The “match between runs” feature was applied between replicats with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 minutes. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification, algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples. iBAQ feature was selected for further quantitative analysis. The statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed as described previously.

### Publication Abstract
Severe influenza is a risk factor for fatal invasive pulmonary aspergillosis; however, the mechanistic basis for the lethality is unclear. Utilizing an influenza-associated pulmonary aspergillosis (IAPA) model, we found that mice infected with influenza A virus followed by <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> had 100% mortality when superinfected during the early stages of influenza but survived at later stages. While superinfected mice had dysregulated pulmonary inflammatory responses compared to controls, they had neither increased inflammation nor extensive fungal growth. Although influenza-infected mice had dampened neutrophil recruitment to the lungs following subsequent challenge with <i>A. fumigatus</i>, influenza did not affect the ability of neutrophils to clear the fungi. Our data suggest that the lethality seen in our model of IAPA is multifactorial with dysregulated inflammation being a greater contributor than uncontrollable microbial growth. If confirmed in humans, our findings provide a rationale for clinical studies of adjuvant anti-inflammatory agents in the treatment of IAPA.

### Keywords
Helicobater pylori, Antibiotic resistance, Membrane vesicle, Bismuth

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Unité "Pathogenèse de Helicobacter" Department of Microbiology CNRS UMR2001 Institut Pasteur 28 rue du Dr. Roux 75724 Paris cedex 15

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Hilde DE REUSE
Unité "Pathogenèse de Helicobacter" Department of Microbiology CNRS UMR2001 Institut Pasteur 28 rue du Dr. Roux 75724 Paris cedex 15


