### Accession
PXD033221

### Title
Combinatorial screening of biological degrader modules to destroy intractable proteins – nonkinetic data

### Description
Abstract – nonkinetic data Targeted protein degradation is a potent strategy against intracellular proteins impervious to traditional drugs. We describe a platform reliant on high-throughput cloning and mRNA-based delivery to quickly screen 100s-1000s modular biological degraders which we challenge against the intractable and high-turnover c-Myc oncoprotein. We uncover critical principles to drive the discovery of degraders against any target, capable of operating without prior cell line engineering, with direct applications in research and potentially therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation and data acquisition – nonkinetic data For  non-kinetic  analyses,  HCT116  cells  were seeded  in  6-well  plates  and  reverse transfected  with 6 mRNA encoding  VHHHuR, T21RBCC-VHHHuR,  VHHHuR-T21RBCC,  VHHGFP,  T21RBCC-VHHGFPand  VHHGFP-7T21RBCC. Cell lysates from 9 different conditions (VH151KR-L1-ICP01KR, VHCtrl-L1-ICP01KR, VH151KR-L1, DP207KR-L1-SPOP, DPCtrl-L1-SPOP, DP207KR-L1, TRIM21-L2-H1S6A/F8A, TRIM21-L2-PepCtrl, and L2-H1S6A/F8A) each with 3 biological replicates were prepared in S-Trap lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 7.55). 50 µg of protein lysates were digested using micro S-Trap method (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.. The digested peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB buffer, followed by 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water, and 50/50 acetonitrile/water with 0.2% FA.  36 DIA-MS files for analysis of non-kinetic data were generated: LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) coupled with a nanoElute LC-system and nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray Source, Bruker). Samples were loaded onto a 15 cm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm ReproSil, C18 column (PepSep) using an oven temperature of 50°C. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 500 nL/min over a total 51 min gradient, from 4 to 24% solvent B (36 min), 24 to 36% solvent B (7 min), 36 to 64 % solvent B (5 min), and 64 to 98 % solvent B (3 min). Solvent A was composed of 0.15% FA in water, and solvent B was composed of 0.15% FA in acetonitrile. Data-independent acquisition (DIA)-PASEF mode was performed with a scheme that consists of 2 rows of 32 windows (8 PASEF scans per row and 4 steps per PASEF scan) with a 25 m/z isolation width43. The mass scan range was from 100 to 1700 m/z and ion mobility was scanned from 0.57-1.47 Vs/cm2 over a ramp time of 100 ms. The collision energy was ramped linearly from 20 to 52 as a function of mobility.

### Data Protocol
36 DIA-MS files for analysis of non-kinetic data were processed via Spectronaut using the default settings with precursor and protein FDR cut-off set to 0.01, quantification data filtering set to Q-value 0.5 percentile with global imputing, and cross run normalisation strategy set to local normalisation.The Uniprot human proteome database was used (UP000005640, 96,797 entries) and the search parameters were set as default but included an additional deamidation (NQ) in variable modifications. DIA files were processed via Spectronaut using the default settings with precursor and protein FDR cut-off set to 0.01, data filtering set to 0.5 percentile Q-value with global imputing, and normalization strategy set to global normalization on a median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protac, Dia-ms, Nonkinetic data, Timstof, Spectronaut, Trim21

### Affiliations
Dynamic Omics, CGR, Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca
Senior Director, Dynamic Omics, CGR, One Medimmune Way Gaithersburg, MD 20878

### Submitter
Sonja Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Sonja Hess
Senior Director, Dynamic Omics, CGR, One Medimmune Way Gaithersburg, MD 20878


