### Accession
PXD047009

### Title
Exosomes define a local and systemic communication network in healthy pancreas and in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease. Understanding its biology is crucial for finding effective therapies. Exosomes have been implicated in cancer, but their behavior in living systems remains poorly understood. We aimed to map the spatiotemporal distribution of exosomes from both healthy pancreas and PDAC to determine their biological significance. To achieve this, we developed a genetically engineered mouse model (ExoBow) to trace spontaneous exosomes communication. Within the PDAC microenvironment, cancer cells establish preferential communication routes with cancer associated fibroblasts and endothelial cells. The latter is a conserved event in the healthy pancreas. Inhibiting exosomes secretion in both scenarios significantly enhanced angiogenesis, underscoring the contribution of exosomes to the vascularization of the organ and to cancer. Inter-organ communication is significantly increased in PDAC, and the thymus is a sustained target in both contexts. PDAC cells also communicate with the kidneys and lungs, and the healthy pancreas with bone-marrow, brain, and intestines. In sum, we found that exosomes mediate an organized communication network in vivo that controls angiogenesis locally, both in the healthy pancreas and PDAC, and that targets the thymus also in both conditions, unravelling their potential role in central immune surveillance and anti-tumor immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were used for WT pancreas small EVs and for KPC small EVs. Each sample was processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol and enzymatically digested with Trypsin/LysC as previously described. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS equipped with a Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry - FAIMS interface. This equipment is composed of a Vanquish Neo liquid chromatography system coupled to an Eclipse Tribrid Quadrupole, Orbitrap, Ion Trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  250 nanograms of peptides of each sample were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (PepMap Neo C18, 300 μm x 5 mm i.d., 174500, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Next, the trap column was switched in-line to a μPAC Neo 50 cm column (COL-nano050NeoB) coupled to an EASY-Spray nano flow emitter with 10 μm i.d. (ES993, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A 130 min separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA with the following gradient at a flow of 750 μL/min: 0.1 min (1% B to 4% B) and 1.9 min (4% B to 7% B). Next, the flow was reduced to 250 μL/min with the following gradient: 0.1 min (7.0 to 7.1% B), 80 min (7.1% B to 22.5% B), 30 min (22.5% B to 40% B), 8 min (40%B to 99% B) and 9.9 min at 99% B. Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 1% B. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.6 and Tune 4.0.4091 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS results were obtained following a Data Dependent Acquisition - DDA procedure. MS acquisition was performed with the Orbitrap detector at 120 000 resolution in positive mode, quadrupole isolation, scan range (m/z) 375-1500, RF Lens 30%, standard AGC target, maximum injection time was set to auto, 1 microscan, data type profile and without source fragmentation.  FAIMS mode: standard resolution, total carrier gas flow: static 4L/min, FAIMS CV: -45, -60 and -75 (cycle time, 1 s).  Internal Mass calibration: Run-Start Easy-IC. Filters: MIPS, monoisotopic peak determination: peptide, charge state: 2-7, dynamic exclusion 30s, intensity threshold, 5.0e3.  MS/MS data acquisition parameters: quadrupole isolation window 1.8 (m/z), activation type: HCD (30% CE), detector: ion trap, IT scan rate: rapid, mass range: normal, scan range mode: auto, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time: 35 ms, data type centroid.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer 3.0.1.27 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the Mus musculus reviewed Proteome (2023_03 with 17,162 entries). A common protein contaminant list from MaxQuant was also included in the analysis. The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set to two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, peptide terminus glutamine to pyroglutamate, and protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss, and Met-loss+acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; target FDR (strict) was set to 0.01 and target FDR (relaxed) was set to 0.05, validation based on q-value. Protein label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed at the consensus step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were considered, precursor abundance based on intensity, and normalization based on total peptide amount. For hypothesis testing, protein ratio calculation was pairwise ratio-based and an t-test (background based) hypothesis test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Pancreatic cancer, Exosomes, Intercellular communication

### Affiliations
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal. Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Portugal. P.CCC Porto Comprehensive Cancer Center Raquel Seruca, Portugal.
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Sonia A. Melo
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal. Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Portugal. P.CCC Porto Comprehensive Cancer Center Raquel Seruca, Portugal.


