### Accession
PXD019876

### Title
Polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor regulate T cells and T cell dependent inflammatory diseases

### Description
Complex autoimmune diseases have proven difficult to dissect down to their causative genetic mechanisms. As a result, epidemiological data from different human association studies are often merged to arrive at a working hypothesis. In one of such examples, lack of sun exposure and consequent lower serum vitamin D3 levels has been proposed to increase risk of autoimmunity, attributing vitamin D3 an immune regulatory role. However, conclusive evidence demonstrating its efficacy in treating autoimmune diseases is missing. In this study, we have used a forward genetics approach to positionally identify polymorphic nucleotides controlling T cell-dependent inflammatory diseases using congenic mouse strains. Here, we identify the vitamin D3 receptor (Vdr) as a driver of inflammation. Congenic mice carrying a polymorphic Vdr allele overexpressed the receptor selectively in activated T cells, thereby escaping systemic calcaemic side effects that often constitute a confounding factor in the study of immunomodulation by vitamin D3. Mice overexpressing Vdr in T cells developed more severe collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and exhibited an enhanced antigen-specific CD4+ T cell response. Deficiency of vitamin D3 completely protected mice from CIA by limiting the activation of antigen-specific T cell responses, and arthritis susceptibility was restored by re-administration of vitamin D3. We demonstrate that vitamin D3 signalling specifically through Vdr predominantly acts to enhance T cell proliferation, thereby contributing to inflammation. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that genetically determined expression of VDR codetermines the pro-inflammatory behaviour of activated T cells. Furthermore, our data suggest that the anti-inflammatory properties of vitamin D3 might be limited by high expression of VDR at the site of inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in a buffer consisting of 1% SDS, 8M urea and 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and sonicated using a Branson probe sonicator (3 s on, 3 s off pulses, 45 s, 30% amplitude). Protein concentration was measured using BCA assay and subsequently 50 µg of protein from each samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at RT for 45 min followed by alkylation with 15 mM IAA in the dark at RT for 45 min. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT and the samples were precipitated using methanol chloroform. Dried protein pellets were dissolved into 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 were added to lower the urea concentration to 4M and LysC digestion was done at a 1:100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. Then urea concentration was lowered to 1M and trypsin digestion was conducted at a 1:100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w) at RT for 5 h. TMT10plex (Thermo Fischer Scientific) reagents were disolved into dry ACN to a concentration of 20 µg/µl and 200 µg were added to each sample. The ACN concentration in the samples was adjusted to 20% and the labeling was conducted at RT for 2 h and quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (ThermoFischer Scientific) for 15 min at RT. The samples were then combined and dried using Speedvac to eliminate the ACN. Then samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA and desalted using SepPack (Waters). Lastly, peptide samples were disolved into 20 mM NH4OH and 150 µg of each sample were used for off-line fractionation.  Samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24 fractions. Samples were then dried using Speedvac and resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-spray column, with a 75 µm internal diameter, packed with 2 µm PepMap C18 beads, having 100 Å pores (Thermo Fischer Scientific). An Easy-nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used programmed to a 90 min optimized LC gradient. The two mobile phases consisted of buffer A (98% milliQ water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA) and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% milliQ water and 0.1% FA). The gradient started with 5% B for and increased to 10% B in 5 min, 26% B in 90 min, 95% B in 5 min, stayed at 95% B for 8 min and finally decreased to 5% B in two min and stayed at 5% B for 5 more min. The injection was set to 5 µL corresponding to approximately 1 µg of peptides.  Mass spectra were acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The Q Exactive acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using a top-15 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a target value of 1.106 or maximum integration time of 120 ms. The m/z range was from 375 to 1500. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the energy was set at 32%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with the target value of 2.105 ions and a maximum integration time of 120 ms. The isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.2 m/z units and m/z 100, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with TMT10 as the modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the UP000000589_Mus musculus database (22129 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument settings. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was selected with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
It has proven difficult to identify the underlying genes in complex autoimmune diseases. Here, we use forward genetics to identify polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor gene (<i>Vdr</i>) promoter, controlling <i>Vdr</i> expression and T cell activation. We isolated these polymorphisms in a congenic mouse line, allowing us to study the immunomodulatory properties of VDR in a physiological context. Congenic mice overexpressed VDR selectively in T cells, and thus did not suffer from calcemic effects. VDR overexpression resulted in an enhanced antigen-specific T cell response and more severe autoimmune phenotypes. In contrast, vitamin D3-deficiency inhibited T cell responses and protected mice from developing autoimmune arthritis. Our observations are likely translatable to humans, as <i>Vdr</i> is overexpressed in rheumatic joints. Genetic control of VDR availability codetermines the proinflammatory behavior of T cells, suggesting that increased presence of VDR at the site of inflammation might limit the antiinflammatory properties of its ligand.

### Keywords
Vitamin d3, T cell, Inflammatory disease

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


