### Accession
PXD006054

### Title
Mitochondrial respiratory chain is essential for hematopoietic stem cell function

### Description
Adult and fetal hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) display a glycolytic phenotype, which is required for maintenance of stemness; however, whether mitochondrial respiration is required to maintain HSC function is not known. Here we report that loss of the mitochondrial complex III subunit Rieske iron sulfur protein (RISP) in fetal mouse HSCs allows them to proliferate but impairs their differentiation, resulting in anemia and prenatal death. RISP null fetal HSCs displayed impaired respiration resulting in a decreased NAD+/NADH ratio.  RISP null fetal HSCs and progenitors exhibited an increase in both DNA and histone methylation concomitant with increases in 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), a metabolite known to inhibit DNA and histone demethylases. RISP inactivation in adult HSCs also impaired respiration resulting in loss of quiescence resulting in severe pancytopenia and lethality. Thus, respiration is dispensable for adult or fetal HSC proliferation, but essential for fetal HSC differentiation and maintenance of adult HSC quiescence.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei were isolated using gentle detergent treatment (0.3% NP-40 in NIB-250 buffer) of cells and centrifugation at 0.6g. Detergent were removed by 2x washing of obtained pellets with NIB-250, no NP-40 buffer. Histones from isolated nuclei were acid-extracted and derivatized with propionic anhydride both prior to and following trypsin digestion as previously described (Garcia, B. A. et al. Nat. Protocols, 2007). Propionylated histone peptides were resuspended in 50µL water with 0.1% TFA and 3µL were injected in 3 technical replicates on nanoLC/triple quadrupole MS which consisted of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 coupled to a ThermoFisher Scientific TSQ Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. Buffer A was 100% LC-MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid and buffer B was 100% ACN. The propionylated peptides were loaded onto an in house packed C18 trapping column (4 cm × 150 µm; Magic AQ C18, 3µm, 200 Å -Michrom) for 10 min at a flow-rate of 2.5 µL/min in 0.1% TFA loading buffer. The peptides were separated by a gradient from 1 to 35% buffer B from 5 to 45 min. The analytical column was 10 cm × 75 µm PicoChip (1PCH7515-105H253-NV New Objective) consisted of the same C18 material as the trapping column. The triple quadrupole settings were as follows: collision gas pressure of 1.5 m Torr; Q1 peak width of 0.7 (FWHM); cycle time of 3 s; skimmer offset of 10 V; electrospray voltage of 2.5kV. SRM mass spectrometer transitions were developed as described previously7, 8.  Data were analyzed using Skyline software (v3.5; MacCoss Lab, University of Washington) with Savitzky–Golay smoothing of peaks9. Automatic peak assignment and retention times were checked manually. Final results shown as relative percentage of given modification in total pool of given peptide which was quantified.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Skyline software (v3.5; MacCoss Lab, University of Washington) with Savitzky–Golay smoothing of peaks9. Automatic peak assignment and retention times were checked manually. Final results shown as relative percentage of given modification in total pool of given peptide which was quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Adult and fetal haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) display a glycolytic phenotype, which is required for maintenance of stemness; however, whether mitochondrial respiration is required to maintain HSC function is not known. Here we report that loss of the mitochondrial complex III subunit Rieske iron-sulfur protein (RISP) in fetal mouse HSCs allows them to proliferate but impairs their differentiation, resulting in anaemia and prenatal death. RISP-null fetal HSCs displayed impaired respiration resulting in a decreased NAD<sup>+</sup>/NADH ratio. RISP-null fetal HSCs and progenitors exhibited an increase in both DNA and histone methylation associated with increases in 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), a metabolite known to inhibit DNA and histone demethylases. RISP inactivation in adult HSCs also impaired respiration resulting in loss of quiescence concomitant with severe pancytopenia and lethality. Thus, respiration is dispensable for adult or fetal HSC proliferation, but essential for fetal HSC differentiation and maintenance of adult HSC quiescence.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Stem cell, Hsc, Histone modifications, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Proteomic Center of Excelence, Northwestern University, USA
National Resource for Translational and Developmental Proteomics,
Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern University

### Submitter
Jacek Sikora

### Lab Head
Dr Neil L. Kelleher
Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Proteomic Center of Excelence, Northwestern University, USA


