### Accession
PXD000978

### Title
Proteomic profiling of MDC1A muscle using TMT quantitation, Bruno Oliveira

### Description
SUMMARY Congenital muscular dystrophy with laminin á2 chain-deficiency (MDC1A) is one of the most severe forms of muscular disease and is characterized by decreased muscle tone at birth, reduced movements and contractures. The genetic basis of MDC1A is well-known, yet the secondary mechanisms ultimately leading to muscle degeneration and subsequent connective tissue infiltration are not fully understood. In order to obtain new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying MDC1A, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of affected muscles (diaphragm and gastrocnemius) from laminin á2 chain-deficient dy3K/dy3K mice, using the multidimensional protein identification technology combined with tandem mass tags. Out of the around 700 identified proteins, 113 and 101 proteins, respectively, were differentially expressed in the diseased gastrocnemius and diaphragm muscles compared to normal muscles. A large portion of these proteins are involved in different metabolic processes, bind calcium or are expressed in the extracellular matrix. Our findings suggest that metabolic alterations and calcium dysregulation could be novel mechanisms that underlie MDC1A and might be targets that should be explored for therapy. Also, detailed knowledge of the composition of fibrotic tissue, rich in extracellular matrix proteins, in laminin á2 chain-deficient muscle may help to design future anti-fibrotic treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Four-week-old laminin α2 chain-deficient dy3K/dy3K mice and wild-type littermates (n=15 each) were used. Protein extraction, digestion, TMT-labelling and SCX fractionation.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files from all 8 SCX fractions per one TMT set and 3 MS runs were merged for relative quantification and identification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. Database search was performed by Mascot search engine using the following criteria: Mus musculus in Swissprot protein database from April 2012 (535,698 entries), MS peptide tolerance as 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance as 0.5 Da, 9 trypsin digestion allowing 1 missed cleavages with variable modifications; methionine oxidation, cysteine methylthiol and fixed modifications; N-terminal TMT6-plex label, lysine TMT6-plex label. The detected protein threshold in the software was set to a confidence using the FDR 1% method and identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. For quantification, the ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra (m/z 126.12, 127.13, 128.13, 129.14, 130.14) from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes between samples via the relative ratio to the reference pool. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for relative quantitation, excluding those common to other isoforms or proteins of the same family. Only peptides with a score >10 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of p = 0.05 were included. Single peptide identifications required a score equal to or above the Mascot identity threshold. Normalisation of protein median was used and the median of peptides was used for determining protein ratio and the resulting ratios were exported into Excel for manual data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital muscular dystrophy with laminin &#x3b1;2 chain deficiency (MDC1A) is one of the most severe forms of muscular disease and is characterized by severe muscle weakness and delayed motor milestones. The genetic basis of MDC1A is well known, yet the secondary mechanisms ultimately leading to muscle degeneration and subsequent connective tissue infiltration are not fully understood. In order to obtain new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying MDC1A, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of affected muscles (diaphragm and gastrocnemius) from laminin &#x3b1;2 chain-deficient dy(3K)/dy(3K) mice, using multidimensional protein identification technology combined with tandem mass tags. Out of the approximately 700 identified proteins, 113 and 101 proteins, respectively, were differentially expressed in the diseased gastrocnemius and diaphragm muscles compared with normal muscles. A large portion of these proteins are involved in different metabolic processes, bind calcium, or are expressed in the extracellular matrix. Our findings suggest that metabolic alterations and calcium dysregulation could be novel mechanisms that underlie MDC1A and might be targets that should be explored for therapy. Also, detailed knowledge of the composition of fibrotic tissue, rich in extracellular matrix proteins, in laminin &#x3b1;2 chain-deficient muscle might help in the design of future anti-fibrotic treatments. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000978 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000978).

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix proteins, Calcium dysregulation, Laminin α2 chain deficient muscle, Metabolic alteration

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy  Gothenburg University

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy  Gothenburg University


