### Accession
PXD019431

### Title
Circadian Mouse Articular Cartilage Proteomics

### Description
Mouse hip articular cartilage was collected every 4 hour for 48 hours and analysed by mass spec

### Sample Protocol
Articular cartilage from the head of the proximal femur was separated from the subchondral bone as described previously. Cartilages from two hips of one mouse were pooled together and washed 3 times in PBS with protease (Roche 11836170001) and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P0044 and P5726) and subsequently snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Cartilage tissues were pulverized using a liquid-nitrogen-cooled tissue grinder and proteins extracted as previously described. Briefly, cartilage samples were reconstituted in 100 μL of 100 mM Tris acetate buffer pH 8.0 containing 10 mM EDTA and protease/phosphatase inhibitors and deglycosylated by treatment with 0.1 units of chondroitinase ABC for 6 h at 37 °C. Proteins were sequentially extracted in a chaotropic buffer containing guanidine hydrochloride (4M GuHCl, 65 mM DTT, 10 mM EDTA in 50 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.8). Protein samples were precipitated with nine volumes of ethanol, washed once in 70% ethanol, then resuspended in 120 μL of solubilisation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0) and the volume was adjusted to achieve a concentration of ∼1 mg/mL, as estimated using the EZQ protein quantitation protocol (Thermo Fisher). Samples were then stored at −80 °C until required. Protein samples were analysed by SDS-PAGE and detected by silver staining as previously described.  Protein samples for LC-MS/MS analysis were sequentially reduced and alkylated under nitrogen by incubation in 10 mM dithiothreitol (overnight at 4 C) then 50 mM iodoacetamide (2 h at 25 C in the dark).  Proteins were co-precipitated with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at -20 C in 1 ml methanol.  The trypsin-protein precipitates were washed once with chilled methanol, dried and reconstituted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by trypsinization at 37 C for 5 h, with addition of 1 µg trypsin after 2 h.  Digests were terminated by freezing on dry ice.  Samples were dissolved in of 0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and applied to 30K cutoff spin filter column (Millipore Ultracel YM-30).Mass spectrometry was performed by the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility (Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne). LC-MSMS was carried out on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray interface coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystem (Dionex). The nanoLC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap analytical column (Dionex C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm). 2 µl of the peptide mix was loaded onto the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 µl/min of 3% CH3CN containing 0.1% formic acid for 5 min before the enrichment column is switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the liquid chromatography were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and 100% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) (solvent B). The flow following gradient was used : 6% to 10% B for 12 min, 10% to 30% B in 20 min, 30% to 45% B in 2 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min and maintained at 80% B for 3 min followed by equilibration at 3% B for 7min before the next sample injection. The LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode with nano ESI spray voltage of +2.0 kv, capillary temperature of 250oC and S-lens RF value of 60%. A data dependent mode whereby spectra were acquired first in positive mode with full scan scanning from m/z 300-1650 in the FT mode at 240,000 resolution followed by Collision induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap with ten most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 isolated and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 35 and activation Q of 0.25.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant version 1.5.8.3 was used to analyse the raw files from the LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) with ultimate 3000 nanoLC. Spectra were searched against a Fasta file of the complete Mus musculus proteome downloaded from Uniprot, using Maxquant internal search engine Andromeda. Settings in Maxquant for Label free quantification were left as default except that ‘match between runs’ was selected with a match time window of 2mins. Specific enzyme was Trypsin/P with max missed cleavages set to 2. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01 with maximal posterior error probability (PEP) set to 0.01. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 and minimum peptide and ‘razor+ unique peptides’ was set to 1. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification as recommended by Cox et al. [42] with a minimum ratio count of 2. Normalised intensity values (LFQ intensity) was used for quantification and the protein groups results file was analyse using Perseus (1.5.3.1). Reverse and ‘only identified by site’ hits were removed. LFQ intensity data was log transformed. Intensity data in protein groups were further required to be detected in half of the total number of samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Cartilage, Oseoarthritis, Mouse

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Michal Dudek

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Jun Meng
University of Manchester


