### Accession
PXD023679

### Title
Delineation of the pH-responsive regulon controlled by the Helicobacter pylori ArsRS two2 component system

### Description
Helicobacter pylori encounters a wide range of pH within the human stomach. In a comparison of H. pylori cultured in vitro under neutral or acidic conditions, about 15% of genes are26 differentially expressed, and corresponding changes are detectable for many of the encoded proteins. The ArsRS two-component system (TCS), comprised of the sensor kinase ArsS and its cognate response regulator ArsR, has an important role in mediating pH-responsive changes in H. pylori gene expression. In this study, we sought to delineate the pH-responsive ArsRS regulon and further define the role of ArsR in pH-responsive gene expression. We compared H. pylori strains containing an intact ArsRS system with an arsS null mutant or strains containing site32 specific mutations of a conserved aspartate residue (D52) in ArsR, which is phosphorylated in response to signals relayed by the cognate sensor kinase ArsS. We identified 178 genes that were pH-responsive in strains containing an intact ArsRS system but not in ∆arsS or arsR mutants. These constituents of the pH-responsive ArsRS regulon include genes involved in acid acclimatization (ureAB, amidases), oxidative stress responses (katA, sodB), transcriptional regulation related to iron or nickel homeostasis (fur, nikR), and genes encoding outer membrane proteins [including sabA, alpA, alpB, hopD (labA), and horA]. When comparing H. pylori strains containing an intact ArsRS TCS with arsRS mutants, each cultured at neutral pH, relatively few genes are differentially expressed. Collectively, these data suggest that ArsRS41 mediated gene regulation has an important role in H. pylori adaptation to changing pH conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial pellets were resuspended in 10 mL of TNKCM buffer (50 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4), and centrifuged at 4,500 x g for 15 min. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 5 mL resuspension/lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor (Roche cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets). The bacteria were then lysed by sonication 3 pulses, 20 seconds on/40 seconds off, 25% amplitude of maximum power, using a 1/8-inch tip (Scientific Sonicator, Fisher). Lysates were centrifuged at 4500 x g at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 32,000 rpm for 1 hour at 4°C, resulting in a soluble fraction (predicted to be enriched in soluble cytoplasmic and periplasmic proteins) and an insoluble fraction (predicted to be enriched in membrane proteins) (86). The insoluble membrane fraction was resuspended in 0.5 mL RIPA buffer (87) containing cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Following a 60 min incubation (rotisserie, 3 x 20 min), the resuspended membrane fraction was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm (4o C) for 10 min. Protein concentrations of the subcellular fractions were determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of each subcellular fraction, standardized by protein concentration, were analyzed to determine to protein content (88). Samples were partially resolved, ~2 cm, by SDS585 PAGE using a 10% NuPAGE gel, and peptides were recovered via in-gel tryptic digestion. 750 ng of these peptides were analyzed by nano-flow LC-MS/MS using a self-packed 20 cm C18 column and eluting directly into a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). MS/MS spectra were acquired data-dependently over a 70 minute aqueous to organic gradient (2% to 40% acetonitrile) with a 90 min total cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Resulting spectra were searched against a database containing H. pylori 26695 sequences, and peptide intensities were integrated, normalized, and aggregated back to the protein level using MaxQuant-LFQ (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24942700/). A total of 706 and 901 proteins were identified in the soluble (cytoplasmic/periplasmic) fractions and membrane fractions, respectively. Relative quantitative comparisons and statistical analysis were performed using the ProStaR package in R (https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/33/1/135/2525689). A p-value cutoff of 0.01, and a >2-fold or <0.5-fold difference in protein abundance were used as criteria to identify proteins that were differentially abundant in H. pylori cultures grown at neutral or acidic pH.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Helicobacter pylori</i> encounters a wide range of pH within the human stomach. In a comparison of <i>H. pylori</i> cultured <i>in vitro</i> under neutral or acidic conditions, about 15% of genes are differentially expressed, and corresponding changes are detectable for many of the encoded proteins. The ArsRS two-component system (TCS), comprised of the sensor kinase ArsS and its cognate response regulator ArsR, has an important role in mediating pH-responsive changes in <i>H. pylori</i> gene expression. In this study, we sought to delineate the pH-responsive ArsRS regulon and further define the role of ArsR in pH-responsive gene expression. We compared <i>H. pylori</i> strains containing an intact ArsRS system with an <i>arsS</i> null mutant or strains containing site-specific mutations of a conserved aspartate residue (D52) in ArsR, which is phosphorylated in response to signals relayed by the cognate sensor kinase ArsS. We identified 178 genes that were pH-responsive in strains containing an intact ArsRS system but not in &#x394;<i>arsS</i> or <i>arsR</i> mutants. These constituents of the pH-responsive ArsRS regulon include genes involved in acid acclimatization (<i>ureAB</i>, amidases), oxidative stress responses (<i>katA</i>, <i>sodB</i>), transcriptional regulation related to iron or nickel homeostasis (<i>fur</i>, <i>nikR</i>), and genes encoding outer membrane proteins (including <i>sabA</i>, <i>alpA</i>, <i>alpB</i>, <i>hopD</i> [<i>labA</i>], and <i>horA</i>). When comparing <i>H. pylori</i> strains containing an intact ArsRS TCS with <i>arsRS</i> mutants, each cultured at neutral pH, relatively few genes are differentially expressed. Collectively, these data suggest that ArsRS-mediated gene regulation has an important role in <i>H. pylori</i> adaptation to changing pH conditions.

### Keywords
Gene regulation, Rna-seq, Two-component signal transduction systems

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine; Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Hayes McDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy L. Cover
Department of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine; Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN


