### Accession
PXD007881

### Title
Disease-linked lysine glutarylation impairs function and interactions of mitochondrial proteins and contribute to mitochondrial heterogeneity

### Description
Inherited deficiencies of the lysine and tryptophan catabolic pathways, due to mutations in the glutaryl-CoA-dehydrogenase (GCDH) gene, cause glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1). In mammals two metabolic routes for L-lysine oxidation exist, the mitochondrial saccharopine pathway, which is predominant in extracerebral tissue and the peroxysomal/cytosolic pipecolate pathway, the main pathway in adult brain. A unique feature of all pathways is the formation of glutaryl-CoA that is converted into crotonyl-CoA via GCDH.  In this study we identified increased lysine glutarylation, a novel reversible post-translational modification, in various tissues and cultured cells of Gcdh KO mice as a result of glutaryl-CoA accumulation. Our analysis revealed that glutarylation is widespread in mitochondria. By using a proteomic approach, we identified 37 and 154 glutarylated mitochondrial proteins in brain and liver tissue from Gcdh KO mice, respectively. We further showed that glutarylation supresses glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) and carbonic anhydrase 5B activity, plus the direct interaction between GCDH and GDH.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of Kglu peptides.  Glutarylated peptides from mouse brain or liver were immunoprecipitated according to Chen et al. (Chen et al, 2013) with slight modifications: Frozen mouse tissue was used instead of cultured cell material. Tissue was weighted and homogenized by a dounce homogenizer in 5-fold volume of NETN-buffer, incubated for 1 h on ice, treated by ultrasonification and centrifuged at 16000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended again in NETN buffer and the procedure was repeated, both supernatants were pooled and used for trichloroacetic acid precipitation as described. For alkylation of free sulfhydryl groups on cysteine residues 1 % acrylamide was used instead of iodoacetamine to avoid artificial lysine modifications. LC-MS measurements.  Peptides were redissolved in 8 µl 0.1 % TFA (v/v), 2.5 μl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made in-house. Peptides were separated on a C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid, a linear gradient of 3 % to 55 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) at 350 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Ions between 330 and 1700 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 30,000. Technical replicate 1 was acquired with a gradient length of 90 min and collision induced dissociation (CID) of the 25 most intense precursor ions (intensity threshold 5000, charge ≥2, isolation width 1.5 Da, normalized energy 35 %, fragment analysis in the linear ion trap). A 200 min gradient was used for technical replicate 2. Fragmentation of the top 20 ions was done with higher energy CID (HCD, 42 % normalized energy, fragment detection in the Orbitrap). Ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in house Mascot server version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against murine sequences from SwissProt (release 2017_01). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 5 ppm in order to exclude false annotations of di-Glycine remnants from ubiquitinated proteins (mass difference 11 mDa). Fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da (CID) or 0.02 Da (HCD). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage were searched. Propionamide (Cys) was set as a static modification. Oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-terminus), and glutarylation (C5H6O3: 114.03169 Da on Lys) were allowed as dynamic modifications. Mascot results were assigned posterior error probabilities (PEP) by the percolator algorithm (Kall et al, 2008) version 2.05 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications with PEP > 0.01 were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Proteins were included if at least two peptides were identified with <1 % FDR after built-in Quality algorithm re-assessment.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine glutarylation (Kglu) of mitochondrial proteins is associated with glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) deficiency, which impairs lysine/tryptophan degradation and causes destruction of striatal neurons during catabolic crisis with subsequent movement disability. By investigating the role of Kglu modifications in this disease, we compared the brain and liver glutarylomes of Gcdh-deficient mice. In the brain, we identified 73 Kglu sites on 37&#xa0;mitochondrial proteins involved in various metabolic degradation pathways. Ultrastructural immunogold studies indicated that glutarylated proteins are heterogeneously distributed in mitochondria, which are exclusively localized in glial cells. In liver cells, all mitochondria contain Kglu-modified proteins. Glutarylation reduces the catalytic activities of the most abundant glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) and the brain-specific carbonic anhydrase 5b and interferes with GDH-protein interactions. We propose that Kglu contributes to the functional heterogeneity of mitochondria and may metabolically adapt glial cells to the activity and metabolic demands of neighboring GCDH-deficient neurons.

### Keywords
Glutamate dehydrogenase, Post-translational modifications, Glutaryl-coa-dehydrogenase, Proteolysis & proteomics, Metabolism, Protein interaction, Molecular biology of disease, Glutaryl-proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Children´s Hospital Department of Biochemistry Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Braulke
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Children´s Hospital Department of Biochemistry Hamburg, Germany


