### Accession
PXD008378

### Title
Proteomic characterization of CD34+ CD123+ stem cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
The comparative characterization of hematopoietic stem cells from healthy stem cell donors and patients with acute myeloid leukemia on a proteome level has the potential to reveal differentially regulated proteins which might be candidates for specific immunotherapy target molecules. Exemplarily, we analyzed the proteome of the cytosolic and the membrane fraction of CD34 and CD123 co-expressing FACS-sorted leukemic progenitors from five patients with acute myeloid leukemia employing mass spectrometry. As a reference, CD34+CD123+ normal hematopoietic progenitor cells from five healthy stem cell donors were analyzed. In this TMT 10-plex labeling based approach 2068 proteins were identified with 256  proteins differentially regulated in one or both cellular compartments.  This study demonstrates the feasibility of a mass spectrometry based proteomic approach to detect differentially expressed proteins in two compartment fractions of leukemic stem cells as compared to their healthy stem cell counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
The cellular content was fractionated using the commercially available Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). 10 µg of each sample was used for further protein digestion (trypsin) and TMT 10-plex labeling as described in the user’s manual. Samples were evaporated, reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and stored at -20°C until further measurements. LC-MS/MS measurements were conducted using Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (both Thermo Fisher). Briefly, peptides were injected at starting conditions of 96 % eluent A (0.1 % FA in water) and 4 % eluent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN) and trapped at steady conditions and a flow of 5 µl/min on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 µm x 2 cm for 3 min. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 µm x 25 cm (both columns Thermo Fisher) using a 90 min linear increasing gradient from 4 % to 25 % of eluent B followed by a 25 min linear increase to 50 % eluent B. Afterwards the column was flushed up to 99 % B and reconstituted to starting conditions of 4 % eluent B. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the Q Exactive HF at constant voltage of 1.7 kV using a chip-based electrospray device (TriVersa NanoMate ion source, Advion, Ithaca, NY). MS1 scans were acquired at R=120k, AGC target of 3 x 10^6 and a max. injection time (IT) of 200 ms at a range of 350-1550 m/z. The Top 10 most abundant peptides exceeding a threshold of 5 x 103 were triggered for MS2 acquisition with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Peptides were fragmented at NCE=38 and the fragment spectra were acquired at R=60k, AGC target = 5 x 10^5 with an max. IT of 200 ms. A fixed first mass was set to 115 m/z. All peptides were selected for a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, Thermo Fisher). All MS2 spectra were searched against a human reference proteome provided by Uniprot knowledgebase (retrieved 23rd February 2017, 70714 entries) in target/decoy mode. Both Sequest HT and MS Amanda were used in parallel using the same parameter. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, whereas the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. 2 missed cleavages were allowed setting trypsin in ‘full’ digestion mode. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 6plex labels of lysine were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and TMT 6plex labels of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. Peptides were evaluated by Percolator. Protein identification was based on at least one unique peptide. FDR for peptides and proteins were set to be < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Targeting of leukemic stem cells with specific immunotherapy would be an ideal approach for the treatment of myeloid malignancies, but suitable epitopes are unknown. The comparative proteome-level characterization of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from healthy stem cell donors and patients with acute myeloid leukemia has the potential to reveal differentially expressed proteins which can be used as surface-markers or as proxies for affected molecular pathways. We employed mass spectrometry methods to analyze the proteome of the cytosolic and the membrane fraction of CD34 and CD123 co-expressing FACS-sorted leukemic progenitors from five patients with acute myeloid leukemia. As a reference, CD34&#x207a;CD123&#x207a; normal hematopoietic progenitor cells from five healthy, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) mobilized stem cell donors were analyzed. In this Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex labelling-based approach, 2070 proteins were identified with 171 proteins differentially abundant in one or both cellular compartments. This proof-of-principle-study demonstrates the potential of mass spectrometry to detect differentially expressed proteins in two compartment fractions of the entire proteome of leukemic stem cells, compared to their non-malignant counterparts. This may contribute to future immunotherapeutic target discoveries and individualized AML patient characterization.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Aml, Proteomics, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Department for Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Johannes R. Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department for Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


