### Accession
PXD020523

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Raphidiopsis raciborskii strains with different toxigenicity in response to iron under N2-fixing conditions

### Description
A comparative proteomic study of two Raphidiopsis raciborskii strains with different toxigenicities in response to varied iron concentrations under nitrogen fixing conditions

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested, resuspended in protein extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% Triton X-100) and the cells were broken using a combination of freeze/thaw cycles and sonication. Protein extracts were precipitated overnight at -20oC with acetone. The protein pellets were resuspended in a dissolving buffer (500 mM NaHCO3, 2% SDS, Milli Q) and 100μg was of protein was reduced and alkylated as per iTRAQ kit manufacturer’s protocol, substituting iodoacetamide (37mg IAA/ml) as the alkylating agent. Samples were digested with trypsin (1:10) overnight at 37oC. Labeling was done as per manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled peptides were pooled, followed by ICAT cation exchange and C18 clean up. The resulting eluant was dried and stored at -20oC until mass spectrometry analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on QStar Elite ESI by Dr Anne Poljak at Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of New South Wales.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation was performed using ProteinPilot software v4.0 with the paragon search algorithm. The search database used consisted of protein sequences of C. raciborskii CS-505 downloaded from NCBI and C. raciborskii CS-506 and CS-509 with a decoy database created by ProteinPilot software.

### Publication Abstract
Raphidiopsis raciborskii is an invasive bloom-forming cyanobacteria with the flexibility to utilize atmospheric and fixed nitrogen. Since nitrogen-fixation has a high requirement for iron as an ezyme cofactor, we hypothesize that iron availability would determine the success of the species under nitrogen-fixing conditions. This study compares the proteomic response of cylindrospermopsin-producing and non-toxic strains of R. racibroskii to reduced iron concentrations, under nitrogen-fixing conditions, to examine any strain-specific adaptations that might increase fitness under these conditions. We also compared their proteomic responses at exponential and stationary growth phases to capture the changes throughout the growth cycle. Overall, the toxic strain was more competitive under Fe-starved conditions during exponential phase, with upregulated growth and transport-related proteins. The non-toxic strain showed reduced protein expression across multiple primary metabolism pathways. We propose that the increased expression of porin proteins during the exponential growth phase enables toxic strains to persist under Fe-starved conditions with this ability providing a potential explanation for the increased fitness of cylindrospermoipsin-producing strains during unfavourable environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Raphidiopsis raciborskii, Cyanobacteria, Cylindrospermopsin, Iron stress, Comparative proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
University of Sydney
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Anna Yeung

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Yeung
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research


