### Accession
PXD010785

### Title
Analyzing Bioactive Effects of the Minor Hop Compound Xanthohumol C on Human Breast Cancer Cells Using Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
We provide label-free data-dependent acquisition proteomics data of mcf-7 breast cancer cell lines treated with the pure minor hop compounds xanthohumol and xanthohumol c.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing was performed as described in the following publication: S. Roehrer, V. Stork, C. Ludwig, M. Minceva, J. Behr, Analyzing Bioactive Effects of the Minor Hop Compound Xanthohumol C on Human Breast Cancer Cells Using Quantitative Proteomics, Journal of Natural Products, (submitted 08/2018). Briefly, MCF-7 breast cancer cells were incubated and treated at IC50 concentration with xanthohumol (12.25 μM), xanthohumol C (4.18 μM) and DMSO as control. After two more days of incubation, the cells were shock frozen and resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM EDTA di-sodium salt, 100 mM (NH4)HCO3, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DDT), 10% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (SigmaFast 10x stock), pH 8.0). 100 µg protein extract was used per sample for in-solution digestion. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (at 30°C for 30 min), and subsequently carbamidomethylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 60 min. Proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin (1:100 trypsin:protein) for 3 hours at 37°C and another 1 µg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide samples were desalted. Purified peptide samples were dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.25 µg µl-1.  Peptides were measured via LC-MSMS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany).  Up to 20 peptide precursors were isolated, fragmented by HCD using 25% NCE and analyzed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3), searching against a human Uniprot reference database (version 18.07.2017, UP000005640, canonical, 20 236 reviewed entries) with Andromeda. Label-free quantification (LFQ) and data matching between consecutive analyses were enabled. Search results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR, contaminants and reverse identifications. Each condition was monitored in four biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Minor prenylated hop compounds have been attracting increasing attention due to their promising anticarcinogenic properties. Even after intensive purification from natural raw extracts, allocating certain activities to single compounds or complex interactions of the main compound with remaining impurities in very low concentration is difficult. In this study, dose-dependent antiproliferative and cytotoxic effects of the promising xanthohumol (XN) analogue xanthohumol C (XNC) were evaluated and compared to XN and a XN-enriched hop extract (XF). It was demonstrated that the cell growth inhibition of human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7) significantly increases after being treated with XNC compared to XN and XF. Based on label-free data-dependent acquisition proteomics, physiological influences on the proteome of MCF-7 cells were analyzed. Different modes of action between XNC and XN treated MCF-7 cells could be postulated. XNC causes ER stress and seems to be involved in cell-cell adhesion, whereas XN influences cell cycles and DNA replication as well as type I interferon signaling pathway. The results demonstrate the utility of using quantitative proteomics for bioactivity screenings of minor hop compounds and underscore the importance of isolating highly pure compounds into their distinct forms to analyze their different and possibly synergistic activities and modes of action.

### Keywords
Human, Mcf-7, Xanthohumol c, Minor hop compounds, Lc-ms/ms, Bioactivity, Cancer

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany current address: Leibniz-Institute for Food Systems Biology at the Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Leibniz-Institute for Food Systems Biology at the Technical University of Munich
Lise-Meitner-Str. 34
85354 Freising

### Submitter
Juergen Behr

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Behr
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany current address: Leibniz-Institute for Food Systems Biology at the Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


