### Accession
PXD007909

### Title
The Ewing sarcoma secretome and its response to activation of Wnt/beta- catenin signaling

### Description
Tumor: tumor microenvironment (TME) interactions are critical for tumor progression and the composition and structure of the local extracellular matrix (ECM) are key determinants of tumor metastasis. We recently reported that activation of Wnt/beta- catenin signaling in Ewing sarcoma cells induces widespread transcriptional changes that are associated with acquisition of a metastatic tumor phenotype. Significantly, ECM protein-encoding genes were found to be enriched among Wnt/beta-catenin induced transcripts, leading us to hypothesize that activation of canonical Wnt signaling might induce changes in the Ewing sarcoma secretome. To address this hypothesis, conditioned media from Ewing sarcoma cell lines cultured in the presence or absence of Wnt3a was collected for proteomic analysis. Label-free mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify differentially secreted proteins. We then used in silico databases to identify only proteins annotated as secreted. Comparison of the secretomes of two Ewing sarcoma cell lines revealed numerous shared proteins, as well as a degree of heterogeneity, in both basal and Wnt-stimulated conditions. Gene set enrichment analysis of secreted proteins revealed that Wnt stimulation reproducibly resulted in increased secretion of proteins involved in ECM organization, ECM receptor interactions, and collagen formation. In particular, Wnt-stimulated Ewing sarcoma cells upregulated secretion of structural collagens, as well as matricellular proteins, such as the metastasis-associated protein, tenascin C (TNC). Interrogation of published databases confirmed reproducible correlations between Wnt/beta-catenin activation and TNC and COL1A1 expression in patient tumors. In summary, this first study of the Ewing sarcoma secretome reveals that Wnt/beta-catenin activated tumor cells upregulate secretion of ECM proteins. Such Wnt/beta-catenin mediated changes are likely to impact on tumor: TME interactions that contribute to metastatic progression.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were either treated with vehicle (PBS, Life Technologies) or 100 ng/uL of recombinant Wnt3a (Wnt3a; R&D Systems). Cells were treated once a day for three days in media with full serum prior to changing to either RPMI or IMDM lacking FBS. Cells were then treated once a day for two additional days before media was collected. Protein in the media was concentrated using three kilodalton cutoff Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter Units (Fisher). Protein concentration was measured using the DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Two cell lines were used for analysis with each condition. For each cell line, three replicates of control (vehicle treated samples) were compared against three replicates of Wnt3a treated samples. All samples for each cell line were processed at the same time to account for batch effect. Equal amounts of proteins (50 ug) were used for processing. Cysteines were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 55 °C for 30 min and alkylated using 50 mM chloroacetamide (RT, 30 min). Digestion with 500 ng of sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega) was carried out overnight at 37 °C. Reaction was terminated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (0.1% v/v) and peptides were purified using SepPak C18 cartridge following manufacturer’s protocol (Waters Corp). An aliquot of the resulting peptides (~2 ug) were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min (2-25% acetonitrile in 105 min; 25- 40% acetonitrile in 20 min followed by a 90% acetonitrile wash for 10 min and a further 30 min re-equilibration with 2% acetonitrile) and directly introduced in to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA).

### Data Protocol
MS1 scans were acquired at 60K resolution (AGC target=3e 6 , max IT=50ms). Data- dependent high-energy C-trap dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired for the 20 most abundant ions (Top20) following each MS1 scan (15K resolution; AGC target=1e 5 ; relative CE ~28%). Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific). Proteins were identified by searching the data using Sequest HT against Homo sapiens (Swissprot, v2016-11- 30) appended with common contaminants. Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered as potential modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of <= 1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor: tumor microenvironment (TME) interactions are critical for tumor progression and the composition and structure of the local extracellular matrix (ECM) are key determinants of tumor metastasis. We recently reported that activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in Ewing sarcoma cells induces widespread transcriptional changes that are associated with acquisition of a metastatic tumor phenotype. Significantly, ECM protein-encoding genes were found to be enriched among Wnt/beta-catenin induced transcripts, leading us to hypothesize that activation of canonical Wnt signaling might induce changes in the Ewing sarcoma secretome. To address this hypothesis, conditioned media from Ewing sarcoma cell lines cultured in the presence or absence of Wnt3a was collected for proteomic analysis. Label-free mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify differentially secreted proteins. We then used in silico databases to identify only proteins annotated as secreted. Comparison of the secretomes of two Ewing sarcoma cell lines revealed numerous shared proteins, as well as a degree of heterogeneity, in both basal and Wnt-stimulated conditions. Gene set enrichment analysis of secreted proteins revealed that Wnt stimulation reproducibly resulted in increased secretion of proteins involved in ECM organization, ECM receptor interactions, and collagen formation. In particular, Wnt-stimulated Ewing sarcoma cells up-regulated secretion of structural collagens, as well as matricellular proteins, such as the metastasis-associated protein, tenascin C (TNC). Interrogation of published databases confirmed reproducible correlations between Wnt/beta-catenin activation and <i>TNC</i> and <i>COL1A1</i> expression in patient tumors. In summary, this first study of the Ewing sarcoma secretome reveals that Wnt/beta-catenin activated tumor cells upregulate secretion of ECM proteins. Such Wnt/beta-catenin mediated changes are likely to impact on tumor: TME interactions that contribute to metastatic progression.

### Keywords
Ewing sarcoma, Label-free mass spectrometry, Tumor microenvironment, Wnt/beta-catenin, Extracellular matrix, Secretome

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
University of Michigan, 1600 Huron Parkway, NCRC Building 520, Rm1352, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2800

### Submitter
Felipe da Veiga Leprevost

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth R. Lawlor
University of Michigan, 1600 Huron Parkway, NCRC Building 520, Rm1352, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2800


