### Accession
PXD008017

### Title
More is not always better: Evaluation of 1D- and 2D-LC-MS2 methods for metaproteomics

### Description
Metaproteomics is a powerful tool to characterize the structure of microbial communities and the physiology, metabolism and interactions of the species in these communities. Metaproteomics seeks to identify and quantify proteins from microbial communities on a large scale using gel electrophoresis or advanced liquid chromatography (LC) combined with high-resolution, accurate-mass mass spectrometry. To achieve extensive coverage of a metaproteome using shotgun proteomics, the sample complexity has to be decreased, for which a main approach is the on-line separation of peptides using one or more LC dimensions. The aim of this study is to test different 1D- and 2D-LC methods, also in comparison with the standard GeLC (pre-separation of proteins via gel electrophoresis) to find the best approach for analyzing metaproteome samples, using a mock community with 32 species in different abundances.

### Sample Protocol
For 1D and 2D-LC-MS/MS, lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 0.1 M DTT) was added in a 10:1 ratio to mock community samples (Kleiner et al. (2017, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/130575)). Cell disruption was done by beat-beating in lysing matrix B tubes (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116911100) for 45 s at 6.0 m/s (Omni International) and incubation at 95° C for 10 min. Cell debris was pelleted (21,000 x g, 5 min). Tryptic peptides were prepared following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol of Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)) with modifications. Briefly, 30 µl of the lysate were mixed with 200 µl UA (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged (14,000 x g, 20 min). 200 µl UA were added and filters spun at 14,000 x g for 20 min. 100 µl IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA) were added and filters incubated at 22° C for 20 min. After centrifugation, filters were washed 3x with 100 µl UA.  Filters were then washed 3x with 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). 1.1 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce) in 40 µl ABC were added and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. Peptides were eluted (14,000 x g, 20 min, followed by adding 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifugation). Eluates were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with 0.2 % FA for buffer exchange. Peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed via 1D- and 2D-LC-MS/MS. Carryover was reduced by two C18 wash (plus one SCX wash for 2D) and one blank run between samples.  For GeLC, cells were disrupted as for LC only-separations, with no DTT in the lysis buffer. After cell debris removal, protein concentration was determined with the Pierce BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (enhanced protocol). 30 µg of protein were mixed with 4x Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad; containing 50 mM DTT) and separated on 12% polyacrylamide gels. Gels were fixed for 15 min (40% (v/v) ethanol, 10% (v/v) glacial acetic acid), washed twice in DI water and stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie Stain (Bio-Rad) for 2 h. After overnight destaining, gel lanes were each cut into 10 equal-sized pieces. In-gel digestion of proteins and peptide elution was done according to Eymann et al. 2004 (Proteomics 4, 2849-2876) with modifications. In brief, gel pieces were washed twice (15 min, 900 rpm, 37 °C) in 300 µl destaining solution (200 mM ABC in 50% v/v acetonitrile) and dried for 30 min in a vacuum centrifuge. Gel pieces were rehydrated for 30 min in an aqueous 2 ng µl-1 trypsin solution (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega). Surplus trypsin solution was removed and gel pieces incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were eluted by adding 20 µl of DI water and applying ultrasound for 15 min in a sonication bath.   For 1D-LC-MS/MS and GeLC-MS/MS runs, an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to load 1.6-2.5 μg of peptide onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After loading, peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), column was heated to 45 °C (1D and GeLC); or 75 cm x 75 μm analytical column with the same packing material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), heated to 60 °C (1D-LC only)). An Easy-Spray source connected the analytical column to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides on the analytical column was achieved at a flow rate of 225 nl min-1 using a gradient of eluent A (0.1 % formic acid) and eluent B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) with 460 or 720 min separation time. Mass spectra were acquired as in Kleiner et al. (2017, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/130575). For 2D-LC-MS/MS, 4.5 or 9 μg of peptide were loaded onto a 10 cm, 300 µm ID Poros 10 S SCX column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the same LC as for 1D analysis. Peptides were eluted from the SCX column onto the C18 pre-column with 20 μl injections of pH steps (P/N CTIBiphase buffers, Column Technology Inc.) with increasing pH values (pH 2.5-pH 8) or salt plugs containing different concentrations of NaCl (1 mM – 2000 mM) from the autosampler. After each of the salt or pH step injections, the pre-column was switched in line with the 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column. Peptides were separated using gradients of eluent A and B. Mass spectra were acquired as in Kleiner et al. (2017, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/130575).  For the gradients and methods, please see the Gradients.txt and Methods.txt file, which have been uploaded together with the *.raw files, and the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a database containing the reference genome sequences from the organisms present in the mock community was used. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), which contains common laboratory contaminants, was appended to this database.  The final database contained 123,100 protein sequences.  Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3. At least 1 unique peptide was required for identification. All other parameters were left at their default values, including FDRs for PSMs and proteins of 1 %. Proteins identified by second peptides (i.e. proteins which were identified but had 0 MS/MS spectra), reverse hits and protein groups only identified by a modification site were excluded from further analyses. For further information, please refer to the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics, the study of protein expression in microbial communities, is a versatile tool for environmental microbiology. Achieving sufficiently high metaproteome coverage to obtain a comprehensive picture of the activities and interactions in microbial communities is one of the current challenges in metaproteomics. An essential step to maximize the number of identified proteins is peptide separation via liquid chromatography (LC) prior to mass spectrometry (MS). Thorough optimization and comparison of LC methods for metaproteomics are, however, currently lacking. Here, we present an extensive development and test of different 1D and 2D-LC approaches for metaproteomic peptide separations. We used fully characterized mock community samples to evaluate metaproteomic approaches with very long analytical columns (50 and 75 cm) and long gradients (up to 12 h). We assessed a total of over 20 different 1D and 2D-LC approaches in terms of number of protein groups and unique peptides identified, peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated, the ability to detect proteins of low-abundance species, the effect of technical replicate runs on protein identifications and method reproducibility. We show here that, while 1D-LC approaches are faster and easier to set up and lead to more identifications per minute of runtime, 2D-LC approaches allow for a higher overall number of identifications with up to &gt;10,000 protein groups identified. We also compared the 1D and 2D-LC approaches to a standard GeLC workflow, in which proteins are pre-fractionated via gel electrophoresis. This method yielded results comparable to the 2D-LC approaches, however with the drawback of a much increased sample preparation time. Based on our results, we provide recommendations on how to choose the best LC approach for metaproteomics experiments, depending on the study aims.

### Keywords
Microbial community; microbiota; microbiome; mock community; method evaluation; microbial ecology; q exactive; liquid chromatography; gelc

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Greifswald Intitute of Marine Biotechnology
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Tjorven Hinzke

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA


