### Accession
PXD021144

### Title
Mapping the Host Circulating Exosome Response to SARS-CoV-2

### Description
The knowledge of the host response to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is still limited, slowing the understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and the development of therapeutic strategies. During the course of a viral infection, host cells release exosomes and other extracellular vesicles carrying viral and host components, which can modulate the immune response. The present study used a shotgun proteomic approach to mapping the host circulating exosomes response to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We investigated how SARS-CoV-2 modulates extracellular vesicles content, their involvement in disease progression and the potential use of plasma exosomes as biomarkers of disease severity. Proteomic analysis of patients derived exosomes identified several molecules involved in immune response, inflammation, activation of coagulation and complement pathways, the main mechanisms of  COVID-19-associated tissue damage and multiple organ dysfunctions. In addition, several potential exosomal biomarkers such as C-reactive protein, Fibrinogen gamma chain, C4b-binding protein alpha chain and Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1, presenting an area under the curve (AUC) of 1, were identified. Proteins correlated to the severity of the disease were also detected.  These data indicate the existence of a significant contribution of circulating exosomes to inflammation, coagulation, and immunomodulation during SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of plasma exosomes  Exosomes were isolated using Exo-Spin exosome purification kit for plasma (Cell Guidance Systems, UK). In brief, 250 μL of plasma samples were centrifuged first at 300g and then at 16 000g for 10 and 30 minutes, respectively, to remove platelets and larger vesicles. Half the volume of Exo-Spin buffer was added to the plasma samples, which were then mixed by inverting and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h before centrifugation at 16 000g for 60 min. Exosome pellets were resuspended in 100 μL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and purified using the Exo-Spin column. Finally, exosome were eluted in 200 μL PBS. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NanoSight NS300) Particle size and concentration of plasma-derived exosomes were analysed by NTA using the NanoSight Technology NS300. In brief, exosomes were diluted in sterile saline buffer solution (1:100) and analyzed by the Nanoparticle Analyses System using the NTA 1.4 Analytical Software.   Western blotting Analysis of exosomes by immunoblotting was performed using standard protocols: proteins were denatured, separated on 4–12% polyacrylamide gels, transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and probed with antibodies against tetraspanins CD9 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and CD63 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The immunocomplexes were visualized by chemiluminescence using the Chemidoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Signal intensity of the bands was measured by using Image Lab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories).  Immunodepletion of high-abundant plasma proteins and digestion  Exosomes were lysed using 200 μL of RIPA buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.2, 0.05%SDS) and sonication. Proteins were then precipitated overnight using cold acetone at -20°C. The pellet was then resuspended using urea buffer and ammonium bicarbonate.  In order to improve the identification and quantification of exosomal proteins we depleted high-abundance proteins using the Seppro IgY14 spin column kit (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer's procedure. The method was used to bind human serum HSA, IgG, fibrinogen, transferrin, IgA, IgM, haptoglobin, alpha 2-macroglobulin, alpha 1-acid glycoprotein, alpha 1-antitrypsin, Apo A-I HDL, Apo A-II HDL, complement C3 and LDL (ApoB) in order to increase low-abundance protein identification. The samples were transferred into an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL 3 kDa centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) following the manufacturer's procedure to collect high molecular weight proteins. The samples were then subjected to reduction with DTT 200 mM, to alkylation with IAM 200mM and to complete protein digestion with 2 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide digests were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). The SPE plate was preconditioned with 1 mL of acetonitrile and 2 mL of water. After loading the sample, the SPE was washed with 1 mL of water. The adsorbed proteins were eluted with 800 μL of acetonitrile:water (80:20). After the desalting process, the sample was vacuum-evaporated and reconstituted in mobile phase for the analysis.

### Data Protocol
The digested peptides were analyzed with an EASY nano-LC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, Milano, Italy) coupled to a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada). The liquid chromatography parameters were as follows: analytical column Acclaim PepMap C18 and injection volume 2 μL. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, phase A was 0.1% formic acid/water and phase B was 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/20% water. A two hours gradient was used (3-45%). For identification purposes the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1600 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 400 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (40 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 30 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, ionspray floating voltage (ISFV) at 2700 V, source temperature at 90 °C and declustering potential at 85V.  For label-free quantification, samples were then subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window. A 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed, followed by MS/MS experiments on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada).  The mass spectrometry files were searched using Protein Pilot (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). Samples were input in the Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada), with the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and False Discovery Rate at 1%. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 01/02/2018, containing 42271 sequence entries) and SARS-CoV-2 (version 28/04/2020, containing 13175 sequence entries) The Mascot search was performed on Mascot v. 2.4, the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages and a search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteines as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification.  The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test.   Statistical analysis and related graphical representations were done using GraphPad Prism v.7 and MetaboAnalyst software (www.metaboanalyst.org). Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA, USA) and FunRch (http://www.funrich.org) were used for bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge of the host response to the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 remains limited, hindering the understanding of COVID-19 pathogenesis and the development of therapeutic strategies. During the course of a viral infection, host cells release exosomes and other extracellular vesicles carrying viral and host components that can modulate the immune response. The present study used a shotgun proteomic approach to map the host circulating exosomes' response to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We investigated how SARS-CoV-2 infection modulates exosome content, exosomes' involvement in disease progression, and the potential use of plasma exosomes as biomarkers of disease severity. A proteomic analysis of patient-derived exosomes identified several molecules involved in the immune response, inflammation, and activation of the coagulation and complement pathways, which are the main mechanisms of COVID-19-associated tissue damage and multiple organ dysfunctions. In addition, several potential biomarkers-such as fibrinogen, fibronectin, complement C1r subcomponent and serum amyloid P-component-were shown to have a diagnostic feature presenting an area under the curve (AUC) of almost 1. Proteins correlating with disease severity were also detected. Moreover, for the first time, we identified the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the exosomal cargo, which suggests that the virus might use the endocytosis route to spread infection. Our findings indicate circulating exosomes' significant contribution to several processes-such as inflammation, coagulation, and immunomodulation-during SARS-CoV-2 infection. The study's data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD021144.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; plasma exosomes; host response; biomarkers

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale


