### Accession
PXD013055

### Title
The homophilic receptor PTPRK selectively dephosphorylates multiple junctional regulators to promote cell-cell adhesion

### Description
Cell-cell communication in multicellular organisms depends on the dynamic and reversible phosphorylation of protein tyrosine residues. The receptor-linked protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) receive cues from the extracellular environment and are well placed to influence cell signaling. However, the direct events downstream of these receptors have been challenging to resolve. We report here that the homophilic receptor PTPRK is stabilized at cell-cell contacts in epithelial cells. By combining interaction studies, quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics, proximity labelling and dephosphorylation assays we identify high confidence PTPRK substrates. PTPRK directly and selectively dephosphorylates at least five substrates, including Afadin, PARD3 and -catenin family members, which are all important cellcell adhesion regulators. In line with this, loss of PTPRK phosphatase activity leads to disrupted cell junctions and increased invasive characteristics. Thus, identifying PTPRK substrates provides insight into its downstream signaling and a potential molecular explanation for its proposed tumor suppressor function.

### Sample Protocol
WT or PTPRK-KO MCF10A cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 7 days followed by lysis in 6M guanidine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (Alfa Aesar) with 1X EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Equal amounts of heavy and light labelled protein lysates were combined and a total of 10 mg of protein was processed per replicate. Proteins were reduced by 5 mM DTT at RT for 20 min and then alkylated by 14 mM IAA at RT for 20 min in the dark. Samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1.5 M guanidine with 0.06 AU of LysC (Wako) added and incubated at RT for 3 h. Samples were diluted to 0.5 M guanidine, 100 µl of 124 ng/µl Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added and incubated at 37°C overnight followed by a further 100 µl of 124 ng/µl Trypsin at 37°C for 2 h. Tryptic digests were desalted using 1cc/50 mg Sep-Pak® Vac tC18 cartridges (Waters, UK). Twenty mg of tryptic digest was split across four SepPak® cartridges. Peptides eluted from loaded Sep-Paks in a stepwise manner. Fraction 1: 350 µl 12.5% (v/v) AcN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, Fraction 2: 350 µl 25% (v/v) AcN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, Fraction 3: 350 µl 37.5% (v/v) AcN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, Fraction 4: 350 µl 50% (v/v) AcN/0.1% (v/v) TFA. Corresponding fractions were pooled and 10% (v/v) removed for total proteome analysis. Peptides were then dried down using a vacuum centrifuge (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf) at 45°C and stored at -20°C until further processing.  For phospho-tyrosine enrichment, peptide fractions were resuspended in 400 µl of ice-cold IAP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 10 mM Na2HPO4 (Acros Organics), 100 mM NaCl) and incubated for 10 min on ice. Added to each fraction was 10 µl of rabbit anti-pY-1000 antibody (Cell Signal Technologies, New England Biolabs) preconjugated to 5 µl of protein G agarose bead suspension (Merck Millipore) and 2.4 µg each of biotinylated Src and Grb2 SH2 mutant domains, pre-conjugated to 5 µl of streptavidin agarose bead suspension (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ice-cold IAP buffer up to 1 ml. Samples were then incubated at 4°C for 16-24 h on a rotator. Beads were pelleted at 14000 x g for 30s and washed three times with 1 ml ice-cold IAP buffer followed by two washes with 1 ml ice-cold proteomics grade water. Peptides from each fraction were eluted in 125 µl of 0.15% (v/v) TFA at RT for 15 min.; beads were pelleted and the supernatant transferred to a new 1.5 ml low protein binding tube (Eppendorf) with a total of three repeat elutions combined. Eluted peptides were desalted using graphite spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to manufacturer’s instructions, using 2 columns per fraction, and dried down using a vacuum centrifuge at 45°C. For further enrichment of phospho-peptides using TiO2, peptide fractions were resuspended in 100 µl 2% (v/v) TFA and incubated at RT for 10 min. Each fraction was then split and processed on two Titansphere Phos-TiO Tips (200 µl/3 mg; GL Sciences Inc) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted in 50 µl of 5% (w/v) NH4OH (35% w/v; Acros Organics, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by 50 µl of 60% (v/v) AcN. Peptides were dried down using a vacuum centrifuge at 45°C, prior to analysis by mass spectrometry. Samples were re-suspended in 20 µL sample solution (3% MeCN, 0.1% TFA). LC-MSMS data acquisition was performed on a Q Exactive Plus and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with both instruments configured to RSLC3000 nanoUHPLCs. Both the Q Exactive Plus and the Fusion Lumos were operated with an EASYspray source using a 50 cm PepMap EASYspray emitter at 40 °C. The Fusion Lumos was also operated using a 75 cm Acclaim PepMap column at 55 °C with SilicaTip coated emitters (New Objective, USA). All nanoHPLCs were operated with solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (80% MeCN, 0.1% FA). Total peptides were resolved using 4 different gradients Gradient 1 (for sample fraction 1) rose from 3 to 15% solvent B by 125 min and 40% B by 175 min. Gradient 2 (for sample fraction 2) rose from 3 to 25% B by 125 min and 40% B by 175 min. Gradient 3 (for sample fraction 3) rose from 3 to 40% B by 175 min and gradient 4 (for sample fraction 4) rose from 12 to 58% B by 175 min. Phosphopeptides were resolved using 4 different gradients. Gradient 1 (for sample fraction 1) rose from 3 to 15% solvent B by 70 min and 40% B by 95 min. Gradient 2 (for sample fraction 2) rose from 3 to 25% B by 80 min and 40% B by 95 min. Gradient 3 (for sample fraction 3) rose from 10 to 40% B by 95 min and gradient 4 (for sample fraction 4)  rose from 15 to 50% B by 95 min. MSMS data on the Q Exactive Plus were acquired in a Top10 DDA fashion and on the Fusion Lumos MSMS data were acquired in the ion trap using a 3 sec cycle.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.2.3 with a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (downloaded 28/1/2018). Variable modifications were set as oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and phospho (STY) with “re-quantify” and “match between runs” enabled. Data were re-processed with peptide and protein FDR set to 0.01. Quantification was carried out using Perseus ver. 1.5.8.5 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Normalized H/L ratios from MaxQuant were log2(x) transformed prior to filtering out proteins labelled as identified only by site or reverse. Proteins were then further filtered out based on the minimum number of valid values; a minimum of two valid values were required for high confidence analysis. Missing values were then imputed from the normal distribution and log2(x) transformed normalized H/L SILAC ratios were inverted, prior to averaging. Statistical significance was calculated via a one-sample, two-sided t test performed with truncation by a Benjamini Hochberg FDR (threshold value 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Cell-cell communication in multicellular organisms depends on the dynamic and reversible phosphorylation of protein tyrosine residues. The receptor-linked protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) receive cues from the extracellular environment and are well placed to influence cell signaling. However, the direct events downstream of these receptors have been challenging to resolve. We report here that the homophilic receptor PTPRK is stabilized at cell-cell contacts in epithelial cells. By combining interaction studies, quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics, proximity labeling and dephosphorylation assays we identify high confidence PTPRK substrates. PTPRK directly and selectively dephosphorylates at least five substrates, including Afadin, PARD3 and &#x3b4;-catenin family members, which are all important cell-cell adhesion regulators. In line with this, loss of PTPRK phosphatase activity leads to disrupted cell junctions and increased invasive characteristics. Thus, identifying PTPRK substrates provides insight into its downstream signaling and a potential molecular explanation for its proposed tumor suppressor function.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation; silac

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jack Houghton

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Hayley J Sharpe
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research


