### Accession
PXD011294

### Title
Defective AP-3-dependent VAMP8 trafficking impairs Weibel-Palade body exocytosis in Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome type 2 blood outgrowth endothelial cells.

### Description
Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs) are endothelial secretory organelles that contain VWF, P-selectin and CD63. Release of VWF from WPBs is crucial for platelet adhesion during primary hemostasis. Endosomal trafficking of proteins like CD63 to WPBs during maturation is dependent on the AP-3 complex. Mutations in the AP3B1 gene, which encodes the AP-3 β1 subunit, result in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome 2 (HPS-2), a rare genetic disorder that leads to neutropenia and a mild bleeding diathesis. This is caused by abnormal granule formation in neutrophils and platelets due to defects in trafficking of cargo to secretory organelles. The impact of these defects on the secretory pathway of the endothelium is largely unknown.  In this study we have investigated the role of AP-3-dependent mechanisms in trafficking of proteins during WPB maturation in endothelial cells. An ex vivo patient-derived endothelial model of HPS-2 was established using blood outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) that were isolated from an HPS-2 patient with compound heterozygous mutations in AP3B1. HPS-2 BOECs and CRISPR/Cas9-engineered AP3B1-/- BOECs contain WPBs that are entirely devoid of CD63, indicative of disrupted endosomal trafficking to the WPB membrane. HPS-2 BOECs have impaired Ca2+- and cAMP-mediated WPB exocytosis. Whole proteome analysis of HPS-2 BOECs revealed that apart from AP-3β1 also the AP-3µ1 subunit and the v-SNARE VAMP8 were depleted. Stimulus-induced VWF secretion was impaired in CRISPR/Cas9-engineered VAMP8-/- BOECs.  Our data show that defects in AP-3 dependent maturation of WPBs impairs WPB exocytosis by affecting the recruitment of the WPB-localized member of the SNARE fusion machinery VAMP8.

### Sample Protocol
BOECs were cultured in 10-cm culture dishes in triplicate. Upon confluency, cells were  rinsed 3 times in PBS and subsequently scraped in 100 μL SDS lysis buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 100 mmol/L DTT, 100 mmol/L Tris.HCl pH 7.5, supplemented with MS grade Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, 78440). Next, cell lysates were incubated for 5 minutes at 95°C, sonicated using a Branson Sonifier 250 (Branson Ultrasonics S.A., Geneva, Switzerland), and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16000g. The cleared lysates were obtained, and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford. Fifty microgram of protein was processed into tryptic peptides using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method. Ten microgram peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetic acid and 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile as described before.Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA to a final volume of 12 μL. Three microliter of the tryptic peptide samples were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 μm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column wasinstalled on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5 % acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5 %acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5%  buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87 min) and 15-38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90 % anda 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine byquerying the human Uniprot database, (downloaded February 2015). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, label-free quantification, and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated proteingroups.txt table was filtered for reverse hits, only identified by site and potential contaminants using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The label-free quantification values were transformed in log2 scale. Samples were grouped per BOEC donor (HPS-2 patient (ID 8621), 4 healthy controls (IDs 7908, 7950, 7958 and 7977); 5 groups, 3 samples per group), and proteins were filtered for at least 3 valid values in atleast 1 of the 5 groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Global changes inprotein levels were assessed using ANOVA (false discovery rate, 0.05, S0: 0.4). Z-scored LFQ (log2) values were represented using a heatmap combined with hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Weibel-Palade bodies are endothelial secretory organelles that contain von Willebrand factor, P-selectin and CD63. Release of von Willebrand factor from Weibel-Palade bodies is crucial for platelet adhesion during primary hemostasis. Endosomal trafficking of proteins like CD63 to Weibel-Palade bodies during maturation is dependent on the adaptor protein complex 3 complex. Mutations in the <i>AP3B1</i> gene, which encodes the adaptor protein complex 3 &#x3b2;1 subunit, result in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome 2, a rare genetic disorder that leads to neutropenia and a mild bleeding diathesis. This is caused by abnormal granule formation in neutrophils and platelets due to defects in trafficking of cargo to secretory organelles. The impact of these defects on the secretory pathway of the endothelium is largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of adaptor protein complex 3-dependent mechanisms in trafficking of proteins during Weibel-Palade body maturation in endothelial cells. An <i>ex vivo</i> patient-derived endothelial model of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 was established using blood outgrowth endothelial cells that were isolated from a patient with compound heterozygous mutations in <i>AP3B1</i> Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 endothelial cells and CRISPR-Cas9-engineered <i>AP3B1<sup>-/-</sup></i> endothelial cells contain Weibel-Palade bodies that are entirely devoid of CD63, indicative of disrupted endosomal trafficking. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 endothelial cells have impaired Ca2<sup>+-</sup>mediated and cAMP-mediated exocytosis. Whole proteome analysis revealed that, apart from adaptor protein complex 3 &#x3b2;1, also the &#x3bc;1 subunit and the v-SNARE VAMP8 were depleted. Stimulus-induced von Willebrand factor secretion was impaired in CRISPR-Cas9-engineered VAMP8<sup>-/-</sup>endothelial cells. Our data show that defects in adaptor protein complex 3-dependent maturation of Weibel-Palade bodies impairs exocytosis by affecting the recruitment of VAMP8.

### Keywords
Hps2, Ap3 complex, Weibel-palade bodies, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr M. van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


