### Accession
PXD027317

### Title
comparative proteomic profile in duodenum sample of male slow-growing chicken

### Description
Since the molecular mechanism underlying feed efficiency (FE) in slow-growing chickens is poorly understood. Thus, this study aimed to investigate the proteome differences and possible pathways associated with FE in male slow-growing chicken by using a label-free quantitative proteomic approach. At 10 weeks of ages duodenum samples from six animals (three high-FE and three low-FE chickens) were collected for differential abundant proteins (DAPs), protein networks, functional enrichment and pathway analysis. In this study, we found 40 DAPs significantly associated with FE pathways included glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, peroxisome, oxidative phosphorylation, tight junction, and cysteine and methionine metabolism. Thus, the differences of protein driving those pathways affected the FE potential of slow-growing chicken might be interesting candidate biomarkers for genomic selection of animals with a higher efficient feed utilization.

### Sample Protocol
1. The frozen duodenum samples were freeze-dried, crushed to fine powder and lysed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (AMBIC) containing 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The lysed proteins were sonicated on ice and isolated by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4˚C. Protein samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea. Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Then, 100 µg proteins of each sample were transferred to a 1.5 ml tube. Finally, the protein was reduced for 20 min at 50-60˚C with a final concentration of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and then alkylated for 20 min at room temperature in the darkness with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA).  2. Protein samples was digested with 2 µg trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer. One technical replicate of each six samples was combined to perform the database search.

### Data Protocol
1. The raw data from Orbitrap mass spectrometry were imported into MaxQuant software  for peptide matching to MS/MS spectra. Resulting spectra were identified against the Uniport database of Gallus gallus reference proteome (34,925 entries). The parameters for the protein identification were trypsin specificity; two missed cleavages and methythio (C) was selected as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) as a variable modification. The MaxQuant Orbitrap default search was setting. The initial precursor (MS) mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 6 ppm in the main search. Additionally, fragment (MS/MS) mass deviation was set to 20 ppm and both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1%. The MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for quantification (minimum ratio count = 2). 2. The LFQ intensity values generated by MaxQuant was used in Perseus software for the statistical analysis and data visualization. Prior to the analysis, proteins identified by post-translation modification, contaminant proteins, or hits the reverse sequence were removed. Only proteins occurring in two out of three biological replicates in both experiment groups were kept. LFQ intensity values were transformed to a logarithmic scale with base 2. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Student’s t-test was used for comparison between the high- and low-FE groups. Protein with a p-value < 0.05 were considered as a differential abundant protein (DAPs). Hierarchical clustering was performed with DAPs after Z-score normalization. 3.The over-representation analysis (ORA) of gene ontology (GO) enrichment, Networks of protein-protein interaction (PPI) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis were performed using STRING platform against Gallus gallus database and considering a medium confidence score of 0.4 for interaction. The GO enriched proteins and KEGG pathways were considered enriched with p-value < 0.05, correcting by FDR with Benjamini-Hochberg method (p-adjust < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The Korat chicken (KR), developed in Thailand, is a slow-growing breed developed as an alternative breed for Thai chicken producers. The growing interest in slow-growing chicken meat, due to its unique taste, distinct texture, health benefits, and higher broiler welfare have led to higher market demand for KR. However, its low feed efficiency (FE) has a significant negative impact on farm profitability. Understanding the molecular mechanism regulating FE allows for designing a suitable selection program and contributing to breeding more efficient chicken for poultry production. Thus, the objective of our study was to investigate the proteome differences and possible pathways associated with FE in male KR using a label-free quantitative proteomic approach. Seventy-five KR males were individually evaluated for FE, and duodenum samples from 6 animals (3 high-FE and 3 low-FE chickens) were collected at 10 wk of age for differential abundant proteins (DAPs), protein networks, functional enrichment, and pathway analyses. In this study, we found 40 DAPs significantly associated with FE pathways, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, peroxisome, oxidative phosphorylation, tight junction, and cysteine and methionine metabolism. Thus, variations in observed DAPs or genes related to DAPs could be interesting biomarker candidates for selection for higher feed utilization efficiency in chicken.

### Keywords
Duodenum, Feed efficiency, Slow-growing chicken, Label-free lc-msms

### Affiliations
animal breeding
head of center of Excellence on Technology and iInnovation for Korat Chicken Business Development

### Submitter
Pramin Kaewsatuan

### Lab Head
Dr Amonrat molee
head of center of Excellence on Technology and iInnovation for Korat Chicken Business Development


