### Accession
PXD005290

### Title
Proteomic profiling of culture filtrates from M.tuberculosis H37Rv

### Description
In this report, a novel tandem cascade of biomimetic affinity chromatography (BiAC) system was used to fractionate the culture filtrate proteins (CFPs) of M. tuberculosis (MTB) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Consequently, in fractionations by 6 BiAC columns, 541 proteins from CFPs were identified using stringent database research by Mascot and scaffold software with ƿ < 0.05, each protein was determined with two distinct peptide sequences. And 248 proteins were identified in un-fractionated culture filtrates. Compared with un-fractionated sample, both proteomic coverage and accuracy of MS analysis were remarkably improved using BiAC fractionations. In 242 identifications by both BiAC fractionations and un-fractionated samples, the average number of matched peptide sequence was increased from 14 hits to 44 hits after BiAC fractionation. The average coverage of peptide sequence of these 242 proteins was also increased from 19.6% (un-fractionation) to 26.1% (fractionation). Compared with previous identifications in CFPs, 11.15% (61/547) identifications in this study have not been reported. The majority of these newly identifications possess extremely biochemical characteristics that usually are not suitable be fractionated by gel-based proteomic approach, of which 12 proteins with Mw<10kDa or Mw>140kDa, 10 with pI<4.0 or pI>10. And 20 membrane proteins, of which have 9 with 2-14 transmembrane domains. Taken together, the BiAC system can enhance the proteomic detection coverage especially by reducing the complexity of sample, improving the low copy and extremely biochemical characteristic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CFPs samples from MTB (ATCC 27294) are prepared as common methods. Briefly, 4×106 MTB cells were cultured in Middlebrook 7H9 medium (Difco, Detroit, MI) with 0.5% glycerol, 0.05% Tween-80 and 10% OADC (Rishui biotech, Qindao, China) at 37℃for 1 week, with slow shaking (< 50rpm). The bacteria were collected by centrifugation (4000×g, 15 min at 4℃) and washed 3 times with PBS (pH 7.4). The pellet was re-suspended in Sauton medium at 2X108/ml, incubated at 37℃ for 3 weeks without shaking. The culture was filtered through 0.22 µm filters (Millipore, USA), and the filtrate was buffer exchanged into PBS and concentrated in Amicon Ultra-15 (3K, Millipore). The final proteins concentration was 4-5 mg/ml.  The library of the biomimetic affinity ligands were constructed in our laboratory previously. Six biomimetic affinity ligand pairs (labeled as L1-L2) were selected for their distinct binding properties to CFPs. In briefly, sepharose 6FF was activated by epichlorohydrin, then aminated and derivatized by cyanuric chloride, and finally coupled stepwise with the ligand pair (Ref.). The media were packed, into 1ml columns, labeled with AL1-L2.  Fractionation of CFPs   The six affinity columns were connected sequentially, and the CFPs sample was loaded onto the column system at 0.2ml/min using AKTA prime plus system (Uppsala, Sweden). The flow through was reloaded onto the system for 10 times. After wash with 15ml of PBS, The columns were disconnected and the individual column-bound proteins were eluted with 50 mM Glycine (pH3.0). The elution was buffer-exchanged into PBS and concentrated to 1.5-2.0 mg/ml.  Tryptic Digestion   Three batches of individual fractions were preparation respectively, and 20 µl of which was mixed with 5µl 100mM DTT, incubated at 37℃ for 3 hours. Then, 5 µl 450 mM IAA was added, and the mixture was incubated at 37℃ for 30 minutes in the dark after which 1µl MS grade trypsin (Cat: V5280, Promega, Madison, USA) was added, and the mixture was incubated at 37℃ for 16 hours. The reaction was stopped by addition of 3.5 µl formic acid. The resulting peptides were vacuum dried and re-suspended in 30µl 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Nano LC-MS/MS   5µl of the re-suspended peptide sample was desalted using a peptide trap column (0.1mm x 2cm, 5µm, Dionex) and analyzed using a nano LC system (Dionex-UltiMate 3000) coupled to an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (maXis, Bruker Daltonik). The analytical column (C18 capillary, 75 μm x 15 cm, 3μm, Dionex) was equilibrated in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The solvent system was consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The peptides were separated at a flow rate of 400 nL/min by a multi-step solvent gradient: 2–30% B in 87 min, 30–50% B in 10 min, 50–80%B in 10 min and 80%B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with full MS survey scan (350-1500m/z) followed by MS/MS scans on the ten most intense ions. The source capillary was set at 1900 v, the flow and temperature of dry gas was 2.0 L/min and 120 °C respectively.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Compass Data Analysis (version 4.1, Bruker Daltonics). The peak list was generated from raw data using centroid algorithm with peak width set as 0.1 m/z and intensity above 100. No peak smooth or filter was applied. After the charge states were calculated, the de-isotoped peak list was exported as mgf file. Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) was set up to search the Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv 2016_0907 (4441 entries) at Uniprot TREMBLE database with the following parameters: Carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, Trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages allowed, mass tolerance 20 ppm for MS precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment ions, peptide charges +2, +3, and +4. Peptide identification is established according to the MASCOT score (p≤0.05), and proteins with detection of at least two distinct peptides are considered as true identification.

### Publication Abstract
The culture filtrate proteins (CFPs) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis have been shown to induce protective immune responses in human and animal models, making them a promising source of candidate targets for tuberculosis drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics. The constituents of the M. tuberculosis CFP proteome are complex and vary with growth conditions. To effectively profile CFPs, gel-based prefractionation is usually performed before MS analysis. In this study, we describe a novel prefractionation approach by which the proteome is divided into seven partially overlapping fractions by biomimetic affinity chromatography (BiAC) using a six-column cascade. The LC-MS/MS analysis of individual fractions identified a total of 541 CFPs, including 61 first-time identifications. Notably, &#x223c;1/3 (20/61) of these novel CFPs are membrane proteins, among which nine proteins have 2-14 transmembrane domains. In addition, &#x223c;1/4 (14/61) of the CFPs are basic proteins with pI values greater than 9.0. Our data demonstrate that biomimetic affinity chromatography prefractionation markedly improves protein detection by LC-MS/MS, and the coverage of basic and hydrophobic proteins in particular is remarkably increased.

### Keywords
Biomimetic affinity chromatography, Culture filtrate proteins of mycobacterium tuberculosis, Low-abundant proteins, Extreme biochemical characteristics proteins

### Affiliations
shanghai jiaotong university
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

### Submitter
guorong ma

### Lab Head
Dr Rongxiu Li
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China


