### Accession
PXD028098

### Title
Turnip succinylation modification

### Description
Quantitative succinyl-proteome profiling of turnip (Brassica rapa var. rapa) in response to cadmium stress.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Plants samples collected at different time points were first grinded with liquid nitrogen, then the powders were transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation.). Equal volumes of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) were added. Then, the mixtures were further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000 ×g), the upper phenol phases were transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatants were discarded. The remaining precipitates were washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times.  Trypsin digestion The same amount of protein for each sample was adjusted to the same volume with lysate for trypsin digestion. The samples were slowly added to the final concentration of 20% v/v TCA to precipitate protein, then vortexed to mix and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. The precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The precipitated proteins were washed with pre-cooled acetone for 3 times and dried for 2 h. The protein samples were then redissolved in 100 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. Succinylation modification enrichment To enrich succinyl-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 105032317G009, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed for four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS) analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and then separated using NanoElute ultra high performance liquid system. Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 42 min, 22% to 30% solvent B in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flowrate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separated peptides were implanted into Capillary ion source for ionization then analyzed in Timstof Pro MS (Bruker Daltonics). The ion source voltage applied was 1.6 kV. Peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution TOF. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry was set to 400–1500 m/z. The data acquisition mode uses parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After a primary MS is collected, the PSEF mode is used for 10 times to collect the secondary spectrum with the charge number of parent ions in the range of 0–5. The dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS scanning is set to 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). The data were searched against the turnip (Data is not public yet) and B. campestris genomic database (Blast_Brassica_campestris_3711_TX_H700_genomic_20201221.fasta; 55950 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contaminated library was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results. The trypsin digestion mode was set to trypsin/P; the number of missing bits was set to 4; the minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5; the mass error tolerance of primary parent ions in first search and main search were set to 20 ppm and 20 ppm respectively, and the mass error tolerance of secondary fragment ions is set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification and variable modifications were set as oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal and succinylation of lysine.  In order to obtain high-quality analysis results, database search results need to be further filtered. The FDR for the identification accuracy at the three levels of spectrum, peptide and protein was set as 1% and the identified protein needs to contain at least one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) is an efficient biological mechanism to regulate protein structure and function, but its role in plant responses to heavy metal stress is poorly understood. The present study performed quantitative succinyl-proteome profiling using liquid chromatography&#x2212;mass spectrometry analysis to explore the potential roles of lysine succinylation modification in turnip seedlings in response to cadmium (Cd) stress (20 &#x3bc;M) under hydroponic conditions over a short time period (0&#x2212;8 h). A total of 547 succinylated sites on 256 proteins were identified in the shoots of turnip seedlings. These succinylated proteins participated in various biological processes (e.g., photosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, amino acid metabolism, and response to stimulation) that occurred in diverse cellular compartments according to the functional classification, subcellular localization, and protein interaction network analysis. Quantitative analysis showed that the intensities of nine succinylation sites on eight proteins were significantly altered (p &lt; 0.05) in turnip shoots after 8 h of Cd stress. These differentially succinylated sites were highly conserved in Brassicaceae species and mostly located in the conserved domains of the proteins. Among them, a downregulated succinylation site (K150) in the glycolate oxidase protein (Gene0282600.1), an upregulated succinylation site (K396) in the catalase 3 protein (Gene0163880.1), and a downregulated succinylation site (K197) in the glutathione S-transferase protein (Gene0315380.1) may have contributed to the altered activity of the corresponding enzymes, which suggests that lysine succinylation affects the Cd detoxification process in turnip by regulating the H2O2 accumulation and glutathione metabolism. These results provide novel insights into understanding Cd response mechanisms in plants and important protein modification information for the molecular-assisted breeding of Brassica varieties with distinct Cd tolerance and accumulation capacities.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Turnip, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Kunming Institute of Botany, CAS

### Submitter
Xiong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiong Li
Kunming Institute of Botany, CAS


