### Accession
PXD034025

### Title
Analysis of proteotype, cell growth and metabolic changes induced by caspase-9 inhibition in chondrogenic cells

### Description
Caspase-9 is the major apical caspase responsible for triggering the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Our pilot study indicated that specific inhibition of caspase-9 caused microscopically evident alterations in appearance of the primary chondrogenic cultures which cannot be explained by decrease in apoptosis. In order to search for the complex molecular background of the effect, proteomics analysis after caspase-9 inhibition was performed. A selective fluoromethylketone inhibitor was applied to inhibit caspase-9 in the chondrogenic cultures. In this PRIDE project we present three LC-MS datasets: i) diaPASEF data obtained using timsTOF Pro LC-MS system; ii) iTRAQ-2DLC-MS3 dataset; and iii) conventional LC-DIA-MS dataset, both measured on Orbitrap Lumos. In this project we demonstrate superiority of the diaPASEF method offering better proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed using FASP method on Microcon filter device, cut-off 30 kDa with 8 M urea in 0.5 M TEAB, pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced with 50 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, alkylated with 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate and digested with trypsin (1:30), as described previously (PMID: 26306309). Peptides were desalted using C18 Silica MicroSpin columns (PMID: 19053527). For diaPASEF dataset, LC-MS/MS analyses were done using nanoElute system connected to timsTOF Pro spectrometer (Bruker). One column (separation column: Aurora C18, 75μm ID, 250 mm long, 1.6 μm particles, Ion Opticks) mode was used (separation column equilibration: 4 column volumes at 800 bars; sample loading at 800 bars using 2x pick up volume + 2μl). Peptides were eluted by 120 min linear gradient (300nl/min, 40°C, 3-30% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in ACN) followed by system wash step at 80% mobile phase B. Emitter was installed into CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker). MSn data were acquired in data independent acquisition (DIA) and using PASEF approach (diaPASEF) with base method m/z range of 100-1700 and 1/k0 range of 0.6-1.6 V×s×cm-2. m/z 400-1100 precursor range was used with equal windows size of 26 Th (incl. 1 Th overlaps) using two steps each PASEF scan and cycle time of 100ms locked to 100% duty cycle. For the iTRAQ-2DLC-MS3 dataset, the same biological replicates as for the diaPASEF dataset were used. After FASP trypsin digestion, iTRAQ reagents were added to the samples: 113, 114, 117 and 118 to the samples with inhibitor treatment and 115, 116, 119 and 121 to the control samples. Fractionation of pooled iTRAQ-labeled samples was performed on Agilent 1260 Infinity liquid chromatograph (Agilent Technologies) using Extend-C18 5 µm 4.6 x 250 mm column (Agilent Technologies) as described previously (PMID: 26306309). A final set of 12 fractions based on peptide content was generated.  For the iTRAQ-2DLC-MS3 dataset, LC-MS/MS analyses were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (2 μg) were desalted on trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, μPrecolumn, 5μm particles, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific; 40 °C). After washing with 0.1% FA, peptides were eluted (flow rate - 300 nl/min) onto analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; 40°C, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by linear 160 or 95 min long gradient program (1-35% of mobile phase B followed by the analytical column wash by 70% of the mobile phase B for 15 minutes; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The analytical column outlet was connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective) utilization. ABIRD was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent iTRAQ SPS-MS3 strategy with cycle time for 3 seconds and with survey scan (380-1500 m/z). The resolution was 120,000 (200 m/z) with a target value of 3×105 ions. MS/MS spectra after collisional induced dissociation fragmentation (CID; quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th, 35% relative fragmentation energy) were recorded in ion trap with a target value of 1.0x104 and automatic maximum injection time mode. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. MS3 spectra were recorded in orbitrap analyser (resolution 30,000) after HCD fragmentation (rel. collisional energy 55%) using 10 synchronously isolated MS/MS fragments (precursor selection range 400-1200) for up to 54 ms (target value 1×105). For the conventional LC-DIA-MS dataset, LC-MS/MS analyses were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mixture of iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked into all samples. Peptides (2 μg) were desalted using trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, μPrecolumn, 5μm particles, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific; 40 °C). After washing with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (300 nl/min) onto analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; 40 °C, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 109 min linear gradient (5-37% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The analytical column outlet was connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective) utilization. ABIRD was installed. Data were acquired in a data-independent acquisition mode (DIA-MS). The survey scan covered m/z 350-1650 at resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) with AGC target value of 2 × 105 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS (28% relative fragmentation energy) were acquired in the range of m/z 200-1800 at 30,000 resolution with a target value of 5 × 105. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Overlapping window patterns in m/z range from 400 to 1200 were used as isolation window placements.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of the LC-MS/MS DIA data was performed in Spectronaut 15.1 (Biognosys, Switzerland) software using the directDIA approach against Mus musculus UniProt/SwissProt database (2021_03, 17,519 sequences, downloaded on 7/29/2021). Precursor Qvalue cutoff and experiment protein Qvalue cutoff were set to 0.01. Peptides identified with Qvalue<0.01 in at least 1 of 8 analyses were included (q value percentile 0.125 setting). Fixed modifications were set to Methylthio (C), variable modifications were set to Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). Other parameters were set as default. Differential abundance testing was performed using Student’s t-test in Spectronaut 15.1, proteins with absolute log2 fold change (|log2FC|) > 0.58 and with Qvalue < 0.05 were considered differentially abundant between sample groups. Protein identification and quantification of the iTRAQ data was performed in MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 software (PMID: 27809316). Database search was performed against Mus musculus UniProt/SwissProt database (2021_03, 17,519 sequences, downloaded on 7/29/2021) using default settings for Orbitrap Lumos with the reported ions measured in MS3. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, two missed cleavages were allowed, fixed modifications were set to Methylthio (C), and variable modifications were set to Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (protein N-terminus). Match between runs and re-quantification were inactivated. FDR at peptide and protein levels were set to 0.01. Quantitative analysis of the LC-MS/MS DIA data from Orbitrap Lumos was performed in Spectronaut 15.5 (Biognosys, Switzerland) software using the directDIA approach against Mus musculus UniProt/SwissProt database (2021_03, 17,519 sequences, downloaded on 7/29/2021). Precursor Qvalue cutoff and experiment protein Qvalue cutoff were set to 0.01. Peptides identified with Qvalue < 0.01 in at least 1 of 8 analyses were included (Qvalue percentile 0.125 setting). Fixed modifications were set to Methylthio (C), variable modifications were set to Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). Other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
Caspase-9 is the major apical caspase responsible for triggering the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Our previous study indicated that specific inhibition of caspase-9 caused microscopically evident alterations in appearance of the primary chondrogenic cultures which cannot be explained by decrease in apoptosis. To describe a complex molecular background of this effect, proteomics analysis of control and caspase-9 inhibitor-treated chondrogenic cultures were performed. Proteins were extracted, identified and quantified using LC-MS in both data dependent and data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. While directDIA analysis of diaPASEF data obtained using timsTOF Pro LC-MS system revealed 7849 protein groups (Q-value&#xa0;&lt;0.01), a parallel analysis of iTRAQ-2DLC-MS3 and conventional DIA-MS data identified only 5146 and 4098 protein groups, respectively, showing diaPASEF a superior method for the study. The detailed analysis of diaPASEF data disclosed 236/551 significantly down-/up-regulated protein groups after caspase-9 inhibition, respectively (|log2FC|&gt;0.58, Q value &lt;0.05). Classification of downregulated proteins revealed changes in extracellular matrix organization, collagen metabolism, and muscle system processes. Moreover, deregulations suggest a switch from glycolytic to lipid based metabolism in the inhibited cells. No essential changes were found in the proteins involved in apoptosis. The data indicate new non-apoptotic participation of caspases in chondrocyte homeostasis with potential applications in cartilage pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Micromass cultures, Proteomics, Caspase-9, Diapasef, Metabolism, Ms3, Chondrogenesis, Itraq, Dia

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry


