### Accession
PXD002780

### Title
Exonuclease-1 interactome and phosphorylation sites

### Description
To help shedding light on regulatory aspects of DNA repair and remodeling pathways in which EXO1 participates and to help revealing novel cellular processes in which EXO1 is involved, we set out to identify proteins interacting with EXO1. Both a small-scale approach and a comprehensive analysis of the EXO1 interactome allowed identifying novel protein partners that are involved in RNA processing or that are the causative agents of rare X-linked disorders. Follow-up biochemical studies allowed validating the direct interaction with selected proteins. Extensive coverage of EXO1 sequence (>85%) allowed conducting an in-depth analysis of its phosphorylation sites, with the identification of 26 residues that are differentially modified in untreated conditions or upon induction of DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation and affinity Strep-tag purification of EXO1 interacting proteins. TCA precipitated protein pellets were washed with Aceton, reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with Jodoacetamide and digested with Trypsin. Tryptic peptides were injected onto a reversed phase column for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis in the information-dependent acquisition mode. Electrospray ionization LC-MSMS was performed using a Magic C18 HPLC column (75 μm × 10 cm; Swiss BioAnalytics) with a 1200 Nano-HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) connected to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a peptide captrap (Michrom BioResources) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min for 5 minutes. They were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nl/min with a linear gradient of 2–36% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 0.005%TFA in H2O in 30 minutes. Information-dependent acquisition analyses were done according to the manufacturer's recommendations, i.e. 1 survey scan (MS1) at 60K resolution in the Orbitrap cell was followed by up to 20 product ion scans (MS2) in the linear ion trap, and precursors were excluded for 15 s after their second occurrence. To improve both sequence coverage and the number of identified proteins the analyses were done 4 times with different mass ranges for MS1 (gas phase extraction). The mass ranges were as follows: 400-1200, 400-600, 600-800 and 800-2000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were analysed with MASCOT distiller 2.3, MASCOT 2.3 searching the human sub-set of Swiss-Prot 2011_08. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0245 Da) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da),  phosphorylation (+79.966331 Da) of serine and threonine and Acetylation of protein N-termini. (42.0106 Da), Pyroglutamine (Q, -17) and deamidation (NQ, -1) were set as variable modifications. Parent tolerance was 3 PPM and fragment tolerance 0.6 Da.  Scaffold 4.4.5 was used to visualize the data and for mzid and MGF generation. Phsophorylation side probabilities were calculated with ScaffoldPTM 2.2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Error-free repair of DNA double-strand breaks is orchestrated by homologous recombination (HR) pathways and requires the concerted action of several factors. Among these, Exonulcease-1 (EXO1) and DNA2/BLM execute extensive resection of DNA ends to produce 3'-overhangs, which are key intermediates for downstream steps of HR. To help shedding light on regulatory aspects of DNA repair pathways in which EXO1 participates, we set out to identify proteins interacting with EXO1. Affinity purification of EXO1 followed by Orbitrap mass spectrometry led to the identification of novel partners that are involved in RNA processing or that are the causative agents of rare X-linked disorders. Depletion of a selected subset of EXO1 interacting proteins led to reduction of the DNA damage response. Among those, we examined the RRP5-homologue and NF-kappa-B-interacting protein PDCD11/ALG-4, which has roles in apoptosis and is a putative driver gene in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. We provide evidence that depletion of PDCD11 decreased the formation of &#x3b3;-H2AX foci and the phosphorylation of DNA damage response (DDR) signaling intermediates in response to camptothecin or bleomycin, resulting in increased cellular resistance to DNA damage. Furthermore, extensive coverage of EXO1 sequence by mass spectrometry allowed conducting an in-depth analysis of its phosphorylation sites, with the identification of 26 residues that are differentially modified in untreated conditions or upon induction of DNA damage.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Affinity tag purification, Exo1

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research Maulbeerstr. 66 CH-4058 BASEL
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Daniel Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Hess
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research Maulbeerstr. 66 CH-4058 BASEL


