### Accession
PXD013284

### Title
HiRIEF-LC-MS based proteomics analysis of subcellular fractions of human CD4+ T-Cells with and without T-cell Receptor stimulation.

### Description
Subcellular proteomics analysis of human T-cells in response to T-cell receptor stimulation. High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS/MS and relative quantification by TMT 10-plex was used to analyze subcellular fractions (Cytosol, Nuclear and Mitochondria-Small Organelle-Membrane) of Human T-cells from 3 separate donors stimulated with T-cell receptor stimulation for 0, 15 minutes or 60 minutes. The data was obtained from 3 separate TMT10 plex sets which included: 126 – Cytosol, unstimulated; 127N – Cyto, 15 min; 127C – Cyto, 60 min; 128N – Mitochondrion-Small Organelle-Membrane, unstimulated; 128C – Mito-SmO-Mem, 15 min; 129N – Mito-SmO-Mem, 60 min; 129C – Nuclear, unstimulated; 130N – Nuc, 15 min; 130C– Nuc, 60 min; 131 – pooled internal control of all samples.

### Sample Protocol
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were freshly isolated using Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare) from three anonymized healthy blood donor buffy coats which were purchased from Karolinska University Hospital. ‘Untouched’ CD4+CD25− T cells were isolated from PBMCs using the CD4+ T cell Isolation Kit, human (Miltenyi Biotec) including additional depletion of CD25+ cells with CD25 specific MACS beads (8 µl per 107 cells). Cell purity was accessed with flow cytometry. T cells were stimulated with antibodies against CD3 (0.2 µg/ml, clone OKT3, BioLegend, LEAF grade), CD28 (2 µg/ml, clone 15E8, Miltenyi Biotec, functional grade), and goat anti-mouse Ig as a cross-linker (2 µg/ml, Southern Biotech) mimicking TCR and co-stimulation. The cells were either not stimulated or stimulated for either 15 min or 1 h.  20 million T cells from 3 donors without any treatment (0 min) or after 15 min or 60 min of TCR stimulation were fractionated into cytosolic, membrane (including mitochondrion and membranous organelles) and nuclear fractions with the Qproteome Cell Compartment Kit (Qiagen). Fractionation was performed as per manufacturer’s protocol except 500 µl of extraction buffer was used for the extraction of cytosolic and membrane fraction whereas 250 µl of extraction buffer was used for nuclear fraction instead of recommended volumes. Following extraction, the protein fractions were precipitated using acetone precipitation to remove contaminants from the fractionation buffers. The resulting precipitates were dissolved in buffer containing 4% SDS, 1 mM DTT and 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6 followed by heating to 95°C for 5 min and were sonicated for 1-5 min in order to shear the genomic DNA.  Protein lysates from all the 3 subcellular fractions, 3 donors and 3 timepoints were digested using the FASP protocol. The lysates were mixed with 1 mM DTT, 8M urea, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.6 and subsequently transferred to a 10-kDa cut-off centrifugation filtering unit, and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min. Proteins were alkylated by 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES for 10 min. The proteins were then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min followed by 2 more additions and centrifugations with 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES. Enzymatic digestion was performed at 37°C with gentle shaking for 3 h by addition of Lys-C (enzyme: protein ratio 1:50, Wako Pure Chemical Industries) in 500 mM urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 buffer, followed by an overnight digestion with trypsin (enzyme: protein ratio 1:50) in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.6. The filter units were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min followed by another centrifugation with MilliQ water and the flow-through was collected. Peptide concentration was determined by Bio-Rad DCC assay and 36.1 µg of peptides from each digested fraction was labeled with TMT 10-plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific; 1 TMT 10-plex per T cell donor). Additionally, 5.48 µg of peptides from each sample was aliquoted, pooled and labelled to be used as internal control for all of the 3 plates. Labeled samples were pooled, cleaned by strata-X-C-cartridges and dried in a Speed-Vac. TMT labelled peptides were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3-10 strips using the HiRIEF method (19). Peptides were extracted from the strips by a prototype liquid handling robot (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB). A plastic device with 72 wells was put onto each strip and 50 µl of MilliQ water was added to each well. After 30 minutes incubation, the liquid was transferred to a 96 well plate and the extraction was repeated 2 more times (first with 35% acetonitrile (ACN), second with and 35% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water, respectively). The extracted peptides were dried in a Speed-Vac and dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1 % FA. Extracted peptide fractions were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap nanotrap column (C18, 3 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 20 mm, Thermo Scientific), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a gradient of mobile phase A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 6 % to 37 % B in 60 min (depending on IPG-IEF fraction complexity) with a flow of 0.25 µl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in a data-dependent manner, selecting top 10 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. The survey scan was performed at 70,000 resolution from 400-1600 m/z, with a max injection time of 100 ms and target of 1 x 106 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, a max ion injection time of 140 ms and AGC of 1 x 105 were used before fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, 35,000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 m/z and put on the exclusion list for 70 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT 10-plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to channel 131 (the internal standard) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).   Holman, J.D., Tabb, D.L., and Mallick, P. (2014). Employing ProteoWizard to Convert Raw Mass Spectrometry Data. Current protocols in bioinformatics 46, 13 24 11-19. Granholm, V., Kim, S., Navarro, J.C., Sjolund, E., Smith, R.D., and Kall, L. (2014). Fast and accurate database searches with MS-GF+Percolator. Journal of proteome research 13, 890-897. Kim, S., and Pevzner, P.A. (2014). MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nature communications 5, 5277. Savitski, M.M., Wilhelm, M., Hahne, H., Kuster, B., and Bantscheff, M. (2015). A Scalable Approach for Protein False Discovery Rate Estimation in Large Proteomic Data Sets. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 14, 2394-2404. Sturm, M., Bertsch, A., Gropl, C., Hildebrandt, A., Hussong, R., Lange, E., Pfeifer, N., Schulz-Trieglaff, O., Zerck, A., Reinert, K., et al. (2008). OpenMS - an open-source software framework for mass spectrometry. BMC bioinformatics 9, 163.

### Publication Abstract
We have curated an in-depth subcellular proteomic map of primary human CD4+ T cells, divided into cytosolic, nuclear and membrane fractions generated by an optimized fractionation and HiRIEF-LC-MS/MS workflow for limited amounts of primary cells. The subcellular proteome of T cells was mapped under steady state conditions, as well as upon 15 min and 1 h of T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, respectively. We quantified the subcellular distribution of 6,572 proteins and identified a subset of 237 potentially translocating proteins, including both well-known examples and novel ones. Microscopic validation confirmed the localization of selected proteins with previously known and unknown localization, respectively. We further provide the data in an easy-to-use web platform to facilitate re-use, as the data can be relevant for basic research as well as for clinical exploitation of T cells as therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Human, T-cell receptor, T-cell, Subcellular

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


