### Accession
PXD034460

### Title
Cancer-associated fibroblasts produce matrix-bound vesicles that influence endothelial cell function (part 2: THP-1 proteome )

### Description
Intercellular communication between different cell types in solid tumors contributes to tumor growth and metastatic dissemination. The secretome of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) plays major roles in these processes. Using human mammary CAFs, we unveil a mechanism of cell-cell communication between CAFs with a myofibroblast phenotype and endothelial cells (ECs) based on intercellular protein transfer through extracellular vesicles (EVs). CAFs transfer proteins to ECs, including plasma membrane receptors, which we have identified by using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using THY1 as an example of transferred plasma membrane-bound protein, we show that CAF-derived proteins can influence how ECs interact with other cell types. Here, we show that CAFs produce high amounts of matrix-bound EVs that have a key role in protein transfer. Hence, our work paves the way for further studies to understand how CAF-derived matrix-bound EVs influence tumor pathology by regulating functions of neighboring cancer, stromal and immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis of THP-1, cells were washed three times in PBS and lysed in 6 M urea/ 2 M thiourea supplemented with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA in 75 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCl and sonicated using a metal tip. 10 μg of proteins were digested with trypsin, desalted using C18 StageTip (1) and analyzed by MS. Desalted peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out for a total run time duration of 265min (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 135min (EV proteome), using a binary gradient with buffer A (water) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% of formic acid. Peptide mixtures were separated at 300 nl/min flow, using a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitter was kept at 50°C by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). The eluting peptide solutions were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI source solutions) was used to decrease ambient contaminant signal level. Samples were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Advanced Peak Determination was turned on and Monoisotopic Precursor Selection was set to “Peptide” mode. A full scan was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 60,000 (EV proteome) at 200 m/z, over mass range of 375-1500 m/z (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 375-1400 m/z (EV proteome). The top 20 (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 15 (EV proteome) most intense ions were selected using the quadrupole, fragmented in the ion routing multipole, and finally analyzed in the linear ion trap (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or analyzed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution (EV proteome), using a maximum injection time of 35ms (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 125ms (EV proteome), or a target value of 2x104 ions (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 1.5x105 ions (EV proteome). Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60s (THP-1 and sorted pCAF proteome) or 30s (EV proteome).

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) (4) and searched with the Andromeda search engine. The following setting was used: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, trypsin specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. For the analysis of EV proteome, TMTzeroTM was added as fixed modification and maximum 4 missed cleavages were allowed. Minimum peptide ratio count was set to 2, except that for the trans-SILAC experiments and the analysis of pCAF1 proteome where this parameter was set to 1. “Unique + razor” peptides were used for quantification in the analysis of THP-1 proteome; “unique” peptides were used for quantification in all the other experiments. For trans-SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to 2: light labels were Arg0 and Lys0; heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8. Label free quantification (LFQ) setting was enabled for all the other experiments. The false discovery rates at protein and peptide levels were set to 1%. 1. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003;75(3):663-70. 2. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62. 3. Kugeratski FG, Atkinson SJ, Neilson LJ, Lilla S, Knight JRP, Serneels J, et al. Hypoxic cancer-associated fibroblasts increase NCBP2-AS2/HIAR to promote endothelial sprouting through enhanced VEGF signaling. Sci Signal. 2019;12(567). 4. Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(12):2301-19.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix-bound vesicles, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer, Mycafs, Endothelial cells, Intercellular protein transfer.

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


