### Accession
PXD042558

### Title
Auranofin targets UBA1 and enhances UBA1 activity by facilitating ubiquitin trans-thioesterificlation to E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes

### Description
UBA1 is the primary E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, regulating stability and function of numerous proteins via initiating their ubiquitination. Decreased or insufficient ubiquitination can cause or drive aging and many deadly diseases. Therefore, a small-molecule UBA1 activity enhancer could have broad therapeutic potential. Here we report that auranofin, a drug approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is a potent UBA1 activity enhancer. Auranofin binds to the UBA1’s ubiquitin fold domain in vitro with a KD of 5.19 nM. The binding enhances UBA1 interactions with at least 20 different E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, facilitating ubiquitin charging to E2 and increasing the activities of five representative E3s in vitro. Auranofin promotes ubiquitination and degradation of misfolded ER proteins during ER-associated degradation in cells at low nanomolar concentrations. It also facilitates outer mitochondrial membrane-associated degradation. This study discovered the first small-molecule UBA1 activity enhancer, providing a much-needed tool for UBA1 research and therapeutic exploration.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics On-beads digestion: IP samples in quadruplicates were digested using an on-beads digestion protocol. In brief, the beads were washed 5 times using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to adding 15 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), incubating for 30 min at 55 °C. After cooling down, 15 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the beads and incubated in the dark for 30 mins. This was followed by addition of 50 ng of trypsin to the beads and incubation at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was quenched by adding 1% of formic acid (FA) and the supernatant was transferred to a clean and protein lo-bind tube. The beads were resuspended in 60% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA and incubated for 5 mins, and then the second supernatant was transferred with the first supernatant. The samples were dried in the speed vac and resuspended in 15 µL of sample buffer (97.9% water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA) prior to HPLC-MS/MS analysis. AF/UBA1 binding sites experiment: three samples were prepared including 1) NT, non-treated control UBA1, ~ 4.2 µM in PBS; 2) AF, 5 µM UBA1 incubated with ~21 µM AF at room temperature for 1 hour; 3) AF-LO, ~0.5 µM UBA1 incubated with ~2.5 µM AF at room temperature for 1 hour. All the three samples were further denatured by adding 0.1% RapidGest prior to protein precipitation and trypsin/lys-C digestion at 37 °C overnight, followed by adding formic acid (1%) to quench the digestion for HPLC-MS/MS analysis. All proteomic HPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000-nano LC system coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with the Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size: 3 µm, 100 Å) and separated with an analytical column with the spray tip (75 µm x 30 cm, 1.7 µm, 100 Å; CoAnn Technologies) using a 200 min method (~180 min gradient). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column by autosampler using loading solvent (2% acetonitrile in 98% UHPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a 180 min gradient (including sample loading and re-equilibration) starting at 98% A (0.1% formic acid in UHPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was maintained at 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, 2-9% B for 4 min, 9-38% B for 141 min, 38-50% B for 25 min, 50-90% B for 3 min, and maintained at 90% B for 10 min, followed by re-equilibration of the column with 2% B for 10 min. Column oven parameters were set as follows: temperature, 40 °C. For UBA1 AF/UBA1 samples, a short gradient (45 min) method was used, the gradient was adjusted as below. The mobile phase was maintained at 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, 2-9% B for 2 min, 9-38% B for 33 min, 38-50% B for 2 min, 50-90% B for 3 min, and maintained at 90% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of the column with 2% B for 9 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with the Nanospray Flex ion source with spray voltage set at 1800 V, and ion transfer tube temperature set at 250 °C. The MS scan was operated at data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 375-1,800 with detection in the Orbitrap (120 K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 1.0 x 106. The fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap (15 K resolution) with a normalized collision energy of 28% at HCD activation mode. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, the most intense ions above were selected for the MS/MS analysis, and the cycle time for MS and MS/MS analysis was set as 2 s. The AGC for MS/MS was set as Standard and a maximum injection time was 22 ms. Precursor ions with charges of +2 to +7 were isolated for MS/MS sequencing. The MS/MS isolation window was 1.2 Da, and the dynamic exclusion time was set at 60 s (after one MS/MS acquisition) with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher) with Sequest algorithm were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The MS raw data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (version Jan 2019, reviewed database) consisting of 20,350 entries using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Peptide identification false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to a maximum of 0.01 using identifications from a concatenated database from the non-decoy and the decoy databases. For UBA1 samples, the MS raw data were searched against a UBA1 protein database (Accession number: P22314) using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to four internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues, phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) and Auranofin (+314.0499 Da) of cysteine residue. Label-free quantification analysis used the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Uba1, Auranofin

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health


