### Accession
PXD027981

### Title
The cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor Roscovitine reverses diet-induced metabolic disruption in obese mice

### Description
We show that roscovitine; a cyclin-dependent kinases inhibitor; given to mice during the last six weeks of a 19-week high fat diet, reduced weight gain and prevented accompanying insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, visceral adipose tissue (eWAT) inflammation and fibrosis. It also restored insulin secretion and enhanced whole body energy expenditure. Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of eWAT demonstrated that Roscovitine induced a limited set of proteins associated with lipid metabolism, fatty acid oxidation metabolism and adipose tissue remodeling but suppressed expression of a larger array of peptides and phosphopeptides linked to inflammation and extracellular matrix proteins. Furthermore, the phosphoproteome analysis identified 17 putative protein kinases perturbed by roscovitine, including CMGC kinases [e.g., CDKs and MAPKs], AGC kinases [e.g., S6K and PKC isoforms], and CAMK kinases [e.g., SIK1 and SIK2]). Pathway enrichment analysis of annotated kinase-substrate pairs showed that lipid metabolism, TCA cycle, fatty acid beta oxidation and phosphatidylcholine and creatine biosynthesis are enriched following roscovitine treatment. The increased creatine pathways combined with more active mitochondria in eWAT may contribute to roscovitine-induced weight loss. Surprisingly, we found that unlike for eWAT, roscovitine led to up regulation of large sets of proteins and phosphosites in brown adipose tissue (BAT). Analysis of upstream kinases controlling the phosphoproteome revealed two major kinase groups (AGC kinases [e.g., PKD1 and PKA] and CMGC kinases [e.g., CDKs and MAPKs]. Among the top enriched pathways of kinase-substrate pairs were insulin signaling, regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes, thyroid hormone signaling, thermogenesis and cAMP-PKG signaling, suggesting that roscovitine led to a metabolically more active BAT. Overall, roscovitine treatment led to restoration of mitochondrial activity in BAT and eWAT suppressed by HFD, likely accounting for enhanced energy expenditure and weight loss.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL6 mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory at 4-week of age and acclimated for 2-week. Mice were housed in a temperature-controlled environment with a 12 hr light-dark cycle and ad libitum water and diet. At 6-week of age mice were fed either low fat diet or high fat diet for 13 weeks. During the last 6 weeks of the diet, the mice were intraperitoneally injected daily with roscovitine (50 mg/kg) or vehicle. For diet studies, 8-week-old C57BL/6N wild-type male mice were fed a diet with 60% kcal% fat for 9 weeks. eWAT and BAT from HFD and LFD feed mice were lysed in 8M urea buffer containing protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. After brief sonication on ice, the samples were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 5 mM for 60 min at RT, and alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (5 mM) and incubation at RT for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring urea concentration down to below 1M and digested with sequence-grade trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at 37°C overnight followed by the addition of formic acid to 1% in solution. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18. One hundred micrograms of peptide per sample was resuspended in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate and incubated in 30% acetonitrile with 0.4 mg Tandem Mass Tag isobaric labelling reagents Reactions were carried out for 1 h at room temperature and then quenched for 15 min in 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined in a new tube and dried. The labeled peptides were desalted using C18. Labeled peptides were fractionated offline on a Waters XBridge BEH C18 (3.5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm) reverse phase column using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system operated at a flow rate of 0.45 ml/min with two buffer lines: buffer A (consisting of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide-2% acetonitrile-water) and buffer B (consisting of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide-98% acetonitrile, pH 9). Peptides were separated by a gradient from 0 to 10% B, followed by a linear increase to 45% B, and then 100% and continued for 5 min, resulting in 48 fractions that were collected but were combined into 12 fractions prior to being evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. 2 μg of peptide from each fraction was reconstituted in 1% formic acid, and kept in −80°C prior to analysis by nLC-MS/MS. Titanium dioxide coated magnetic beads were used to enrich phosphopeptides obtained from HPLC fractions. Beads were pre-incubated in a DHB buffer (5 μl/mg) consisting of 6% TFA, 5 mM KH2PO4, 80% ACN, 20 mg/ml 2,5-dyhydroxybenzoic acid for 15 min. The peptide mixture from each fraction was resuspended in 500 μl of DHB buffer and incubated with beads (10:1 bead to peptide ratio, w/w) for 30 min while shaking. Beads were step washed: 1% TFA-80% ACN, followed by 1% TFA-50% ACN, and 1% TFA-10% ACN twice, then the supernatant was discarded. The bound phosphopeptides were eluted by 5% NH4OH with 25% ACN and dried by speed vac before nLC-MS analysis. Both peptides obtained from the HPLC fractionated sample digests and the bead-enriched phosphopeptides from each fraction were individually loaded onto a C18 trap column (3 μm, 75μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected in-line to a C18 analytical column (2 μm, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo EasySpray) using the Thermo EasyLC 1200 system. The nanoflow gradient consisted of buffer A (composed of 2% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (consisting of 80% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% formic acid). For protein analysis, nLC was performed for 180 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, with a gradient of 2–8% B for 5 min, followed by an 8–20% B for 96 min, a 20–35% gradient for 56 min, and a 35–98% B gradient for 3 min, 98% buffer B for 3 min, 100-0% gradient of B for 3 min, and finishing with 5% B for 14 min. Peptides were directly ionized using a nanospray ion source into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The QE-HF was run using data dependent MS2 scan mode, with the top 10 most intense ions acquired per profile mode full-scan precursor mass spectrum subject to HCD fragmentation. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC of 3e6 or maximum injection time of 60 ms and a scan range of 350–1650 m/z, while the MS2 scans were performed at 45,000 resolution, with an ion-packet setting of 2e4 for AGC, maximum injection time of 90 ms, and using 33% NCE. Source ionization parameters were optimized with the spray voltage at 2.1 kV, transfer temperature at 275°C. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. For phosphoprotein analysis, the enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto a 50 cm C18 microcolumn followed by separation over a condensed 90 min gradient. In this case, data dependent MS2 scans were performed on the top six ions, with the maximum injection time of MS2 of 400 ms.

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse complete proteome FASTA database, using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.7.0) that integrates the Andromeda search engine. TMT reporter ion quantification was performed using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phosphopeptides serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation were specified as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 6 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). A threshold Andromeda score of 40 and a threshold delta score of 8 was applied to phosphopeptides, in accordance with parameters described previously. The MaxQuant output files designated “Phospho(STY)sites” and “ProteinGroups” were used for data normalization and other statistical analysis using in-house generated scripts in the R environment. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R: version 4.0. The MaxQuant tables of protein group and phosphosite feature intensities was log transformed and loess normalization was applied. For differential analysis, the LIMMA R package was used to fit a linear model accounting for the experimental conditions. Moderated t-tests were corrected with the Benjamini-Hochberg method for false discovery rate (FDR). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the fgsea R package using gene libraries generated by the Bader lab. Upstream kinase prediction was analyzed using PhosR package. Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad) and are presented as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). Group comparisons were analyzed using either two-tailed unpaired student t test or a two-way ANOVA followed by multiple comparisons correction method stated in Figure legend. Differences were deemed statistically significant with p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Most strategies to treat obesity-related disorders have involved prevention of diet-induced weight gain in lean mice. Treatment of obese individuals will require therapies that reverse the detrimental effects of excess body weight. Cyclin-dependent kinases have been shown to contribute to obesity and its adverse complications. Here, we show that roscovitine; a an orally available cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor; given to male mice during the last six weeks of a 19-week high fat diet, reduced weight gain and prevented accompanying insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, visceral adipose tissue (eWAT) inflammation/fibrosis as well as restored insulin secretion and enhanced whole body energy expenditure. Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of eWAT demonstrated that roscovitine suppressed expression of peptides and phosphopeptides linked to inflammation and extracellular matrix proteins. It also identified 17 putative protein kinases perturbed by roscovitine, including CMGC kinases, AGC kinases and CAMK kinases. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that lipid metabolism, TCA cycle, fatty acid beta oxidation and creatine biosynthesis are enriched following roscovitine treatment. For brown adipose tissue (BAT), analysis of upstream kinases controlling the phosphoproteome revealed two major kinase groups, AGC and CMGC kinases. Among the top enriched pathways were insulin signaling, regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes, thyroid hormone signaling, thermogenesis and cAMP-PKG signaling. We conclude that roscovitine is effective at preventing prolonged diet-induced metabolic disruption and restoring mitochondrial activity in BAT and eWAT.

### Keywords
Obesity, Therapy, Proteomics, Roscovitine, Adipose mitochondria

### Affiliations
Boston University
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Ryan Hekman

### Lab Head
Dr Nabil Rabhi
Boston University School of Medicine


