### Accession
PXD016417

### Title
The human cholesterogenic enzymes DHCR14 and LBR are differentially regulated transcriptionally and post-translationally

### Description
Cholesterol synthesis is a tightly regulated process, both transcriptionally and post-translationally. Transcriptional control of cholesterol synthesis is relatively well understood. However, of the ~20 enzymes in cholesterol biosynthesis, post-translational regulation has only been examined for a small number.  Three of the four sterol reductases, DHCR7, DHCR14 and LBR, share evolutionary ties with a high level of sequence homology and predicted structural homology. Despite their homology and that they uniquely share the same 14 reductase activity in cholesterol biosynthesis, little is known about the post-translational regulation of DHCR14 and LBR. Using CHO-7 cells stably expressing epitope tagged DHCR14 or LBR we investigated the post-translational regulation of these enzymes. We found that DHCR14 and LBR undergo differential post translational regulation, with DHCR14 being rapidly turned over, triggered by cholesterol and other sterol intermediates while LBR remained stable. DHCR14 is degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome system and we identified several DHCR14 and DHCR7 putative interaction partners including the E3 ligase WWP2, which plays a role in the basal and cholesterol-mediated regulation of DHCR14. Interestingly, we found that gene expression across an array of human tissues showed that the C14-SRs gene expression is negatively related; one enzyme or the other tends to be predominately expressed in each tissue. Overall, our findings indicate that while LBR tends to be the constitutively active C14-SR, DHCR14 levels are tuneable, responding to the local cellular demands for cholesterol.

### Sample Protocol
To identify new candidate E3 ligases for the degradation of DHCR14 and DHCR7, we employed a proteomics-based approach. Utilizing CHO-DHCR14 cells and Hek293 cells transiently expressing DHCR7-myc-His with appropriate empty vector controls, interaction partners were co-immunoprecipitated and separated via SDS-PAGE. After pulling down target proteins, mass spectrometry was utilized to identify E3 ligase peptides present in the DHCR14 or DHCR7 samples, but not in the empty vector controls as potential interacting partners.

### Data Protocol
Sequence database searches were performed using the Proteome Discoverer mass informatics platform (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific), using the search program Mascot (versions 2.3, Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
Cholesterol synthesis is a tightly regulated process, both transcriptionally and post-translationally. Transcriptional control of cholesterol synthesis is relatively well-understood. However, of the &#x223c;20 enzymes in cholesterol biosynthesis, post-translational regulation has only been examined for a small number. Three of the four sterol reductases in cholesterol production, 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7), 14-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR14), and lamin-B receptor (LBR), share evolutionary ties with a high level of sequence homology and predicted structural homology. DHCR14 and LBR uniquely share the same &#x394;-14 reductase activity in cholesterol biosynthesis, yet little is known about their post-translational regulation. We have previously identified specific modes of post-translational control of DHCR7, but it is unknown whether these regulatory mechanisms are shared by DHCR14 and LBR. Using CHO-7 cells stably expressing epitope-tagged DHCR14 or LBR, we investigated the post-translational regulation of these enzymes. We found that DHCR14 and LBR undergo differential post-translational regulation, with DHCR14 being rapidly turned over, triggered by cholesterol and other sterol intermediates, whereas LBR remained stable. DHCR14 is degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and we identified several DHCR14 and DHCR7 putative interaction partners, including a number of E3 ligases that modulate DHCR14 levels. Interestingly, we found that gene expression across an array of human tissues showed a negative relationship between the C14-sterol reductases; one enzyme or the other tends to be predominantly expressed in each tissue. Overall, our findings indicate that whereas LBR tends to be the constitutively active C14-sterol reductase, DHCR14 levels are tunable, responding to the local cellular demands for cholesterol.

### Keywords
Dhcr14, Cholesterol synthesis enzymes, Lbr

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Gene Hart-Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew J Brown
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW


