### Accession
PXD008135

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Biomphalaria glabrata hemocyte  during in vitro encapsulation of Schistosoma mansoi sporocycts

### Description
In order to provide a better understanding of molecular interactions/responses of snail host hemocyte and early-developing schistosome larvae (sporocyst stage) we perfomed comparative proteomic analyses on hemocytes during active encapsulation of sporocysts under in vitro conditions

### Sample Protocol
Hemolymph (containing circulating hemocytes) from genetically inbred susceptible (NMRI) and resistant (BS-90) strains of snail B. glabrata was removed and transferred to 1-mL tube containing 50 in vitro transformed S. mansoni sporocysts or empty tubes (negative control). After 16-h incubation at 26C, hemocyte encapsulations (cell clumps) were removed, washed in snail saline, placed into cryomolds containing OTC (cryogenic mounting medium) and frozen at -80C. 10 um sections were cut using a CM1900 cryostat, placed onto membrane-coated glass slides and stored at -80C. Prior to laser-capture microdissection (LCM), slide-mounted sections were fixed with 70% EtOH, stained with Mayer's hematoxylin, washed 2x with water which was followed by dehydration in a graded EtOH series. Sections were then air-dried prior to LCM. Using MMI CellCut software, areas of interest in cellular encapsulations were identified, laser-dissected (cut) and microdissected sections were collected in MMI Isolation-Cap tubes. After collection of ~3x106 sq. um of sectioned tissues, samples were trypsinized and protein identified via nanoLC/MS-MS on the Orbitrap-Elite platform

### Data Protocol
Post data acquisition raw files were searched through ProteomeDiscoverer with Mascot and Seaquest against concatenated databases of Biomphalaria glabrata and Schistosoma mansoi (96,790 sequences including decoys and common lab contaminants). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 15ppm and fragment masses at 0.6Da. Search results were indexed and validated furter using Scaffold software where protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Circulating hemocytes of the snail <i>Biomphalaria glabrata</i>, a major intermediate host for the blood fluke <i>Schistosoma mansoni</i>, represent the primary immune effector cells comprising the host's internal defense system. Within hours of miracidial entry into resistant <i>B. glabrata</i> strains, hemocytes infiltrate around developing sporocysts forming multi-layered cellular capsules that results in larval death, typically within 24-48 h post-infection. Using an <i>in vitro</i> model of hemocyte-sporocyst encapsulation that recapitulates <i>in vivo</i> events, we conducted a comparative proteomic analysis on the responses of hemocytes from inbred <i>B. glabrata</i> strains during the encapsulation of <i>S. mansoni</i> primary sporocysts. This was accomplished by a combination of Laser-capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate sections of hemocyte capsules both in the presence and absence of sporocysts, in conjunction with mass spectrometric analyses to establish protein expression profiles. Comparison of susceptible NMRI snail hemocytes in the presence and absence of sporocysts revealed a dramatic downregulation of proteins in during larval encapsulation, especially those involved in protein/CHO metabolism, immune-related, redox and signaling pathways. One of 4 upregulated proteins was arginase, competitor of nitric oxide synthetase and inhibitor of larval-killing NO production. By contrast, when compared to control capsules, sporocyst-encapsulating hemocytes of resistant BS-90 <i>B. glabrata</i> exhibited a more balanced profile with enhanced expression of shared proteins involved in protein synthesis/processing, immunity, and redox, and unique expression of anti-microbial/anti-parasite proteins. A final comparison of NMRI and BS-90 host hemocyte responses to co-cultured sporocysts demonstrated a decrease or downregulation of 77% of shared proteins by NMRI cells during encapsulation compared to those of the BS-90 strain, including lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, thioredoxin reductase 1 and hemoglobins 1 and 2. Overall, using this <i>in vitro</i> model, results of our proteomic analyses demonstrate striking differences in proteins expressed by susceptible NMRI and resistant BS-90 snail hemocytes to <i>S. mansoni</i> sporocysts during active encapsulation, with NMRI hemocytes exhibiting extensive downregulation of protein expression and a lower level of constitutively expressed immune-relevant proteins (e.g., FREP2) compared to BS-90. Our data suggest that snail strain differences in hemocyte protein expression during the encapsulation process account for observed differences in their cytotoxic capacity to interact with and kill sporocysts.

### Keywords
Biomphalaria glabrata, Hemocyte, Laser-capture microdissection, Schistosome mansoi, Proteomic analysis, Hemolytic encapsulation, Sporocyst

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Professor of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Timothy Yoshino
Professor of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Madison


