### Accession
PXD042307

### Title
Direct mapping of ligandable tyrosines and lysines in cells with chiral sulfonyl fluoride probes

### Description
Advances in chemoproteomic technology have revealed covalent interactions between small molecules and protein nucleophiles, primarily cysteine, on a proteome-wide scale. Most chemoproteomic screening approaches are indirect, relying on competition between electrophilic fragments and a minimalist electrophilic probe with inherently limited proteome coverage. Here, we develop a chemoproteomic platform for direct electrophile-site identification based on enantiomeric pairs of clickable arylsulfonyl fluoride probes. Using stereoselective site modification as a proxy for ligandability in intact cells, we identified 634 tyrosines and lysines within functionally diverse protein sites, liganded by structurally diverse probes. Among multiple validated sites, we discovered a chiral probe that modifies Y228 in the MYC binding site of the epigenetic regulator WDR5, as revealed by a high-resolution crystal structure. A distinct chiral probe stimulates tumor cell phagocytosis by covalently modifying Y387 in the recently discovered immuno-oncology target, APMAP. Our work provides a deep resource of ligandable tyrosines and lysines for the development of covalent chemical probes.

### Sample Protocol
For TMT 6-plex samples, Jurkat cells (10 mL, 3×106 per mL) were treated with the (R) or (S) enantiomer (10 μM) at 37 °C for 1 h (3 replicates each). Cells were pelleted (500g, 5 min, 4 °C), washed with PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: 10010049) and collected. For the TMT 11- plex sample, HEK293T cells (0.8×106) stably overexpressing APMAP were seeded in 6-well plates and grown overnight. Cells were treated with (R)-1-SF or (S)-1-SF (0, 3.75, 7.5, 15, 30 and 60 μM) in serum-free medium for 1.5 h at 37 ˚C. Four wells of cells were utilized for each treatment condition. Cells were lysed in 1.2 mL of 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP40, 2 mM phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 2X complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat #: 11873580001). Cell lysates were centrifuged (18,000g, 30 min, 4 °C) and the protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher, Cat #: 23225). Protein concentrations were normalized to 1 mg mL-1. Lysates (1 mg mL-1, 1.1 mL) were incubated with 20 μL of settled streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: 20353) at 4 °C for 1 h to remove endogenous biotinylated proteins. After centrifugation (2000g, 5 min, 4 °C), the supernatant (1 mL) was combined with 160 μL of click chemistry cocktail, resulting in a final concentration of 1 mM CuSO4, 100 μM Tris((1-benzyl-4-triazolyl)methyl)amine (TBTA) (from a 2 mM stock prepared in 1:4 DMSO:t-butyl alcohol), 100 μM biotin DADPS azide (250 μM for the TMT 11-plex sample) (Click Chemistry Tools, Cat #: 1330-5), 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 1% SDS. After incubation at room temperature for 90 min, proteins were precipitated by adding 10 mL of prechilled acetone and incubating overnight at –20 °C. The precipitated protein was centrifuged (4000g, 4 °C, 10 min), washed with cold methanol twice and solubilized in 150 μL of 1% SDS in PBS. The protein solution was diluted with 1350 μL of 1.1% NP40 in PBS and the protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay and normalized. The protein solution was incubated with 20 μL of settled high-capacity NeutrAvidin agrose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: 29204) at 4 °C overnight. The beads were washed with 1% NP40, 0.1% SDS in PBS (2 x 10 min, room temperature) and 6 M urea in PBS (3 x 30 min, 4 °C). The beads were incubated with 80 μL of PBS containing 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 6 M urea at 56 °C for 30 min. Then 4 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in the dark. On-bead digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight by adding 1 μg sequencing grade trypsin/Lys-C mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: A41007) in 100 μL of digestion buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM CaCl2). After digestion, the beads were sequentially washed with 500 μL of PBS (5 x), 6 M urea in PBS (5 x), water (5 x), 50% methanol in water (5 x), water (5 x) and TMT labeling buffer (200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 15% MeCN). The beads were suspended in 20 μL of TMT labeling buffer and subjected to TMT labeling with the TMT 6-plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: 90062) or the TMT 10-plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: 90110; TMT 131C was purchased separately, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #: A37724) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. Briefly, TMT 6-plex reagents were reconstituted in 20 μL of MeCN per vial and TMT 10-plex reagents were reconstituted in 12 μL of MeCN per vial. 3 μL of the TMT stock solution was added to each sample and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. The labeling reaction was quenched by adding 2 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating at room temperature for 10 min. Afterwards, the beads were washed twice with 1 mL of water and incubated with 20 μL of 2% formic acid in water (2 x 1 h, room temperature). The supernatants from 6 samples were collected, combined and desalted using C18 Omix Tips (Agilent, Cat #: A57003100). Peptides were eluted with 80% MeCN, 0.1% TFA and dried by SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were searched using MaxQuant (v.1.6.7.0)54 against the HUMAN reviewed Swiss-Prot FASTA database. Under “Group-specific parameters”, for MS2 data, the “type” was set as “Reporter ion MS2”. For RTS data, the “type” was set as “Reporter ion MS3”. The “Isobaric labels” was set as “6plex TMT” or “11plex TMT” and the reporter ion isotopic distributions were incorporated to correct for impurities during synthesis of the TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and probe modification on tyrosine and internal lysine were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. “Trypsin” was selected as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. All other parameters were set as default. Modified sites with localization probability ≥ 0.75 were selected for further analysis. For TMT 6-plex samples, TMT intensities in each channel were normalized such that the median TMT intensity values (based on all modified sites) were equivalent across all six channels. Mean site intensities from each treatment arm (R, n = 3; S, n = 3) were used to calculate the (R)/(S) ratios. P values were calculated using Student's t-test (two-tailed, two- sample equal variance). For the TMT 11-plex sample, TMT intensities for each concentration of (R)-1-SF were normalized to the same concentration of (S)-1-SF such that the median intensity values (based on all modified sites) were equivalent across the two TMT channels corresponding to a given concentration of (R)-1-SF and (S)-1-SF.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Eclipse, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco
UCSF

### Submitter
Ying Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jack Taunton
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco


