### Accession
PXD010382

### Title
High quality MS/MS spectrum prediction for data-dependent and -independent acquisition data analysis

### Description
Peptide fragmentation spectra are routinely predicted in the interpretation of mass spectrometry-based proteomics data. Unfortunately, the generation of fragment ions is not well enough understood to estimate fragment ion intensities accurately. Here, we demonstrate that machine learning can predict peptide fragmentation patterns in mass spectrometers with accuracy within the uncertainty of the measurements. Moreover, analysis of our models reveals that peptide fragmentation depends on long-range interactions within a peptide sequence. We illustrate the utility of our models by applying them to the analysis of both data-dependent and data-independent acquisition datasets. In the former case, we observe a significant increase in the total number of peptide identifications at fixed false discovery rate. In the latter case we demonstrate that the use of predicted MS/MS spectra is equivalent to the use of spectra from experimentallibraries, indicating that fragmentation libraries for proteomics are becoming obsolete.

### Sample Protocol
For DIA experiment EDTA plasma samples were collected from three healthy patients that were pooled together and then clarified by centrifugation at 17000 x g for 10 min. at 4 C. Aliquots were prepared and stored at -80 C. immediately before processing, plasma aliquots were thawed at room temperature. Subsequently, four replicate samples were prepared following the Biognosys Sample Preparation Pro Kit. Each sample was transferred into a LoBind tube (Eppendorf),dried by vacuum centrifugation, and then stored at -80 C. For mass spectrometry analysis dried peptide samples were resuspended by the addition of 20 uL of 0.1% formic acid in water and water bath sonication for 10 min. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 17000 x g for 5 min. at 4 C. Subsequently, 18 uL were transferred into a new LoBind tube (Eppendorf) followed by the addition of 2 uL of 10x iRT solution (Biognosys). LC-MS/MS experiment were performed using 1 uL injections. Samples were subjected to reversed phase chromatography with an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) connected in-line with a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. External mass calibration was performed prior to analysis. A binary solvent system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile (v/v)) was employed. The mass spectrometer was outfitted with a nanospray ionization source (Thermo Nanoflex source). The LC was performed using a PepMap100 3um C18 (75 μm x 2 cm) trapping column followed by a PepMap RSLC 2um C18 (75 μm x 25 cm) analytical column. For both DDA and DIA experiments, the same 120 min biphasic method was used, consisting of a gradient from 4% to 25% buffer B for 105 min followed by 25% to 35% for 15 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
DDA library. Each full-scan mass spectra was recorded in positive ion mode over the m/z scan range of 375 to 1700 in profile mode at a resolution of 70,000. The AGC target was 3e6 with a max injection time of 50 msec. The 12 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation. Tandem spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 1e5 and max injection time of 60 msec. Dynamic exclusion and charge state screening were enabled, rejecting ions with an unknown or +1 charge state. An isolation window of 1.5 and normalized collision energy of 28 were used when triggering a fragmentation event. DIA. Two scan groups were employed. First, using the MS-SIM scan group, a full-scan mass spectra was recorded in positive ion mode over the m/z scan range of 400 to 1200 in profile mode at a resolution of 70,000. The AGC target was 3e6 with a max injection time of 100 msec. Next, the DIA scan group was used to acquire 32 DIA segments of 15 Da each at a resolution of 35,000. The AGC target was 1e6 with a max injection time of 120 msec. An isolation window of 20 and normalized collision energy of 28 were used when triggering a fragmentation event. A global inclusion list was used to define each DIA segment.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide fragmentation spectra are routinely predicted in the interpretation of mass-spectrometry-based proteomics data. However, the generation of fragment ions has not been understood well enough for scientists to estimate fragment ion intensities accurately. Here, we demonstrate that machine learning can predict peptide fragmentation patterns in mass spectrometers with accuracy within the uncertainty of measurement. Moreover, analysis of our models reveals that peptide fragmentation depends on long-range interactions within a peptide sequence. We illustrate the utility of our models by applying them to the analysis of both data-dependent and data-independent acquisition datasets. In the former case, we observe a q-value-dependent increase in the total number of peptide identifications. In the latter case, we confirm that the use of predicted tandem mass spectrometry spectra is nearly equivalent to the use of spectra from experimental libraries.

### Keywords
Deep learning, Andromeda, Machine learning, Intensity prediction, Dia

### Affiliations
Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany; Verily Life Sciences, 269 E Grand Ave, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Shivani Tiwary

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Cox; Peter Cimermancic
Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany; Verily Life Sciences, 269 E Grand Ave, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA


