### Accession
PXD008529

### Title
Chemical stresses fail to mimic the unfolded protein response resulting from luminal load with unfolded polypeptides

### Description
The stress sensors ATF6, IRE1 and PERK monitor deviations from homeostatic conditions in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a protein biogenesis compartment of eukaryotic cells. Their activation elicits unfolded protein responses (UPR) to re-establish proteostasis. UPR have been extensively investigated in cells exposed to chemicals that activate ER stress sensors by perturbing calcium, sugars or redox homeostasis. Cell responses to variations in luminal load with unfolded proteins are, in contrast, poorly characterized. Here, we compared gene and protein expression profiles in cells challenged with ER stress-inducing drugs or expressing model polypeptides. Drugs titration to limit up-regulation of the endogenous ER stress reporters BiP/HSPA5 and HERP/HERPUD1 to levels comparable to luminal accumulation of unfolded proteins substantially reduced the amplitude of transcriptional and translational responses. Nevertheless, these remained pleiotropic and failed to recapitulate responses to ER load with unfolded proteins, which induced a limited subset of genes participating in a chaperone complex that binds unfolded chains.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were plated on 3.5 cm dishes at 70-80% confluency. Once attached they were induced for the expression of the model protein using media 100 ng/ml tetracycline (tet), treated with UPR inducing drugs or mock (ethanol and DMSO respectively). After 17 h cells were lysed in 8 M urea in 0.1 M NH4HCO3, followed by sonication in order to shear genomic DNA. Total protein content was measured using Pierce™ BCA protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instruction. Total 50 µg proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 40 nM iodoacetamide (IAA). A first digestion was performed with Lys-C (WAKO), then samples were diluted to 2 M urea and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Peptide samples were cleaned by MacroSpin C18 silica columns (The Nest Group), evaporated to dryness and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid for HPLC-MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus with a 2 hour gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed with MaxQuant (57) and Perseus (58) (Computational Systems Biochemistry). Statistical significance was assessed by t-test (p < 0.05) and fold change greater than 1.2 or smaller than 0.8 based on LFQ values. Protein interactions were analyzed using STRING (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The stress sensors ATF6, IRE1, and PERK monitor deviations from homeostatic conditions in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a protein biogenesis compartment of eukaryotic cells. Their activation elicits unfolded protein responses (UPR) to re-establish proteostasis. UPR have been extensively investigated in cells exposed to chemicals that activate ER stress sensors by perturbing calcium, <i>N</i>-glycans, or redox homeostasis. Cell responses to variations in luminal load with unfolded proteins are, in contrast, poorly characterized. Here, we compared gene and protein expression profiles in HEK293 cells challenged with ER stress-inducing drugs or expressing model polypeptides. Drug titration to limit up-regulation of the endogenous ER stress reporters heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5 (BiP/<i>HSPA5</i>) and homocysteine-inducible ER protein with ubiquitin-like domain 1 (HERP/<i>HERPUD1</i>) to levels comparable with luminal accumulation of unfolded proteins substantially reduced the amplitude of both transcriptional and translational responses. However, these drug-induced changes remained pleiotropic and failed to recapitulate responses to ER load with unfolded proteins. These required unfolded protein association with BiP and induced a much smaller subset of genes participating in a chaperone complex that binds unfolded peptide chains. In conclusion, UPR resulting from ER load with unfolded proteins proceed via a well-defined and fine-tuned pathway, whereas even mild chemical stresses caused by compounds often used to stimulate UPR induce cellular responses largely unrelated to the UPR or ER-mediated protein secretion.

### Keywords
Unfolded protein response (upr), Endoplasmic reticulum (er), Proteostasis, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Endoplasmic reticulum stress (er stress)

### Affiliations
IRB
Institute for research in biomedicine

### Submitter
Timothy Bergmann

### Lab Head
Dr Maurizio Molinari
Institute for research in biomedicine


