### Accession
PXD045894

### Title
Plasma Extracellular vesicles (EVs) in dengue disease

### Description
- Here, we have isolated EVs from the plasma of three different groups Healthy donors (HD), Other febrile illness(OFI),  and Severe dengue disease(SDV) by ultracentrifugation process. And proteomics of these EVs analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were prepared with three technical replicates for each of the group. three groups- Healthy donors EVs, OFI-EVs, and SDV-EVs. All three biological replicates were processed for protein digestion (trypsin digest) separately, followed by peptide purification

### Data Protocol
Three technical replicates for each of the sets. Then, raw data was loaded in Spectronaut X TM software version 12.0.2 (Biognosys) and data analysis was performed using the directDIA method, against the UniProt - Human database.

### Publication Abstract
Severe dengue manifestations caused by the dengue virus are a global health problem. Studies suggest that severe dengue disease depends on uncontrolled immune cell activation, and excessive inflammation adds to the pathogenesis of severe dengue disease. Therefore, it is important to understand the process that triggers the uncontrolled activation of the immune cells. The change in immune response in mild to severe dengue may be due to direct virus-to-cell interaction or it could be a contact-independent process through the extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from infected cells. The importance of circulating EVs in the context of dengue virus infection and pathogenesis remains unexplored. Therefore, understanding the possible biological function of circulating EVs may help to delineate the role of EVs in the progression of disease. Our present study highlights that EVs from plasma of severe dengue patients can have immunosuppressive properties on CD4+ T cells which may contribute to T cell suppression and may contribute to dengue disease progression.

### Keywords
Plasma, Immune response, Pathogenesis, Dengue, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Regional Centre for Biotechnology
Regional Centre For Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sharda Kumari

### Lab Head
Dr Arup Banerjee
Associate Professor, Regional Centre for Biotechnology


