### Accession
PXD007281

### Title
Liver proteomics of the HMDP - Hepatosteatosis underlies several diseases including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease and liver disease

### Description
Hepatosteatosis underlies several diseases including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease and liver disease. Unfortunately, our understanding of the contributing pathways that initiate and advance hepatosteatosis to subsequent complications is still poorly understood. Here, we take advantage of recent developments in “omics” technologies to perform high resolution proteomics (>5000 proteins) and quantitative lipidomics (>300 lipids) on livers from 107 genetically diverse inbred mouse strains from the hybrid mouse diversity panel. Integration of these data allowed us to define novel regulators of lipid metabolism in the liver.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver (10 mg) was homogensized in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.0 containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche; 11873580001) by tip-probe sonication and centrifuged at 16,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C. Lysates were precipitated with 6 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C. Protein pellets were centrifuged at 10,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM TEAB, pH 7.9 and quantified by Qubit fluorescence (Thermo Fisher; Q33212). Concentrations were normalized and 100 µg of protein reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 25ºC followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25ºC in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol and digested with lysyl endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries; 125-05061) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 h at 25ºC. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (Promega; V5111) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 16 h at 30ºC. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid, 0.1% trifuoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic lipophilic balance – solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) 96-well plates (Waters; 186000128) followed by elution with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For proteomic analysis of the HMDP by TMT multiplexing, peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 250 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 quantified by Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher; 23275) and normalized to 10 µg / 10 µl. Peptides were labelled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tags according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher; 90110; lot PI202555). Each 10-plex experiment contained 9 different strains with a tenth reference label (either 126 or 131) made up of the same peptide digest from pooled mix of C57BL/6J livers. A list of the sample labelling strategy and replicates is available in the SEARCH folder. Peptides were labelled in a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile for 90 min at room temperature followed by de-acylation with 0.25% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature and quenching with 0.1% TFA. Peptides from each 10-plex experiment were pooled and desalted using HLB-SPE and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Approximately 12 µg of peptide was fractionated into 9 fractions on an in-house packed TSKgel amide-80 HILIC column as previously described [PMID: 21127490].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex 3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 40 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 100 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1400 m/z (120,000 resolution, 4e5 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with CID and detection in the ion trap (1e4 AGC, 70 ms injection time, 30% normalized collision energy, 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Multi-notch isolation of the top 10 most intense MS/MS ions from 400 – 1000 m/z excluding the precursor ion and neutral loss clusters <40 m/z were subjected to MS3 with HCD and detection in the orbitrap (1e5 AGC, 200 ms injection time, 55% normalized collision energy, 2 m/z ion trap isolation width, 100 – 500 m/z) [PMID: 24927332]. TMT labelled data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) using Sequest [PMID; 24226387]. The precursor MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavage. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. All data were searched as a single batch with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate set to 1%. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node for TMT quantification in Proteome Discoverer. TMT precision was set to 10 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference were used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hmdp, Proteome wide association study, Hybrid mouse diversity panel, Liver, Genetic reference panel

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


