### Accession
PXD015804

### Title
Targeting immunosuppressive macrophages overcomes PARP-inhibitor resistance in BRCA1-associated triple-negative breast cancer

### Description
Despite objective responses to PARP inhibition and improvements in progression-free survival compared to standard chemotherapy in patients with BRCA-associated triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), benefits are transitory. Using high dimensional single-cell profiling of human TNBC, here we demonstrate that macrophages are the predominant infiltrating immune cell type in BRCA-associated TNBC. Through multi-omics profiling we show that PARP inhibitors enhance both anti- and pro-tumor features of macrophages through glucose and lipid metabolic reprogramming driven by the sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP-1) pathway. Combined PARP inhibitor therapy with CSF-1R blocking antibodies significantly enhanced innate and adaptive anti-tumor immunity and extends survival in BRCA-deficient tumors in vivo and is mediated by CD8+ T-cells. Collectively, our results uncover macrophage-mediated immune suppression as a liability of PARP inhibitor treatment and demonstrate combined PARP inhibition and macrophage targeting therapy induces a durable reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment, thus constituting a promising therapeutic strategy for TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by homogenization (QIAshredder cartriges, Qiagen) in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4).  Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark, alkylation reactions quenched with freshly prepared DTT added to a concentration of 50 mM and proteins precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Digests were carried out in 1 M urea freshly prepared in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 in presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) with LysC (Wako, 2mg/ml, used 1:75 w/w protease:substrates during digest) overnight at 37C temperature and after subsequent addition of trypsin (Promega #V5111, stock 1:100 w/w protease:substrates) overnight at 37C. Missed cleavage rate was assayed from a small aliquot by mass spectrometry. For whole proteome analysis, digests containing approximately 60 g of peptide material were directly labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeling efficiency and TMT ratios were assayed by mass spectrometry, while labeling reactions were stored at -80C. After quenching of TMT labeling reactions with hydroxylamine, TMT labeling reactions were mixed, solvent evaporated to near completion and TMT labeled peptides purified and desalted by acidic reversed phase C18 chromatography. Peptides were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography into 96 fractions and combined into 24 samples. For mass spectrometry analysis data collection followed a MultiNotch MS3 TMT method 119 using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary column used was packed with C18 resin (35 cm length, 75 m inner diameter, matrix 2.6 m Accucore (Thermo Fisher Scientific)).  Peptides of each fraction were separated for 4 hours over acidic acetonitrile gradients by LC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The scan sequence started with an MS1 scan (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 Th). MS2 analysis followed collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE=35) with a maximum ion injection time of 250 ms and an isolation window of 0.4 m/z. In order to obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th with a maximum injection time of 350 ms. Further details on LC and MS parameters and settings used were described recently.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) based software suite against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the h. sapiens proteome with added common contaminant proteins. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da). We applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%. MS1 data were calibrated post-search and searches performed again. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans. Quantification tables were generated requiring an MS2 isolation specificity of >70% for each peptide and a sum of TMT signal-to-noise (s/n) of >200 over all channels for any given peptide and exported to Excel and further processed therein. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described previously. The relative summed TMT s/n for proteins between two experimental conditions (PARPi vs. DMSO) was calculated from the sum of TMT s/n for all peptides quantified of a given protein. For gene ontology (GO) term enrichment, the BINGO package in Cytoscape was used125. Scaled quantification data were subjected to two-way clustering (JMP software package) and fold change was analyzed using Graphpad Prism 8 (Graphpad Software). FDR corrected p-values 126 were used for volcano plots with a cutoff of p <0.05 are reported. . GO full terms were obtained by utilizing the Cytoscape with the BINGO plugin and 100 most highly upregulated proteins or 100 most significantly upregulated proteins with FDR<0.05 were used. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

### Publication Abstract
Despite objective responses to PARP inhibition and improvements in progression-free survival compared to standard chemotherapy in patients with BRCA-associated triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), benefits are transitory. Using high dimensional single-cell profiling of human TNBC, here we demonstrate that macrophages are the predominant infiltrating immune cell type in BRCA-associated TNBC. Through multi-omics profiling we show that PARP inhibitors enhance both anti- and pro-tumor features of macrophages through glucose and lipid metabolic reprogramming driven by the sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP-1) pathway. Combined PARP inhibitor therapy with CSF-1R blocking antibodies significantly enhanced innate and adaptive anti-tumor immunity and extends survival in BRCA-deficient tumors <i>in vivo</i> and is mediated by CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cells. Collectively, our results uncover macrophage-mediated immune suppression as a liability of PARP inhibitor treatment and demonstrate combined PARP inhibition and macrophage targeting therapy induces a durable reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment, thus constituting a promising therapeutic strategy for TNBC.

### Keywords
Tam (tumor associated macrophage), Tmt, Parp, Lumos

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Director of The Breast Tumor Immunology Laboratory Women’s Cancer Program Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Instructor in Medicine Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jennifer Guerriero

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer L. Guerriero, PhD
Director of The Breast Tumor Immunology Laboratory Women’s Cancer Program Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Instructor in Medicine Harvard Medical School


