### Accession
PXD008259

### Title
Compositional Proteomics: The Effects of Spatial Constraints on Protein Quantification Utilizing Isobaric Tags

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become an accessible tool for whole proteome quantitation with the ability to characterize protein expression across thousands of proteins within a single experiment.  A subset of MS quantification methods (e.g., SILAC and label-free) monitor the relative intensity of intact peptides, where thousands of measurements can be made from a single mass spectrum.  An alternative approach, isobaric labeling, enables precise quantification of multiple samples simultaneously through unique and sample specific mass reporter ions.  Consequently, in a single scan, the quantitative signal comes from a limited number of spectral features (≤11).  The signal observed for these features is constrained by automatic gain control, forcing codependence of concurrent signals.  The study of constrained outcomes primarily belongs to the field of compositional data analysis.  We show experimentally that isobaric tag proteomics data are inherently compositional and highlight the implications for data analysis and interpretation.  We present a new statistical model and accompanying software, which improves estimation accuracy and the ability to detect changes in protein abundance.  Finally, we demonstrate a unique compositional effect on proteins with infinite changes.  We conclude that many infinite changes will appear small and that the magnitude of these estimates is highly dependent on experimental design.

### Sample Protocol
Boundary Case Experiment Mouse whole brain tissue lysate and yeast whole cell lysate was prepared. Protein digestion and TMT labeling was performed. After labeling, we diluted the yeast samples at ratios of 1,1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32.  The dilutions were done in both directions (diluting from the 32, and diluting from the 1).  We then repeated this setup with ratios of 1, 1, 2, 4, 0, 0, 0, 0, 32, and 100.  The mouse peptide background was constant across channels, so that it is 1:1 at the highest level of yeast peptide.  Approximately 1 µg of unfractionated sample was analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated using 60 min gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Dual multiplexed viral infection experiment with infinite changes Samples analyzed for the Human Cytomegalovirus Time Course Experiment were prepared as described previously23 .  Two TMT experiments were designed as follows: 1) a TMT10-plex in the following order from 126-131: mock infection 1, mock infection 2, 6h post-infection, 12 h post-infection, 12 h post-infection (irradiated), 18h  post-infection, 24h  post-infection, 48h  post-infection, 72h  post-infection, and 96h  post-infection and 2) a TMT2-plex with mock 1 (126) and 48h  post-infection (130N). For both TMT experiments, the TMT-labeled peptides were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples prior to off-line basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation. The combined sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) via Sep-Pak (Waters, Milford, MA). We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (cat. # 84868). Eight fractions were collected using: 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25% and 50% acetonitrile. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip24, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a manner like that described above. However, here peptides were separated over a 150 min gradient.   TMT pipeline.   The eleven TMT-labeled samples were mixed into a single sample and separated by basic pH RP HPLC We used an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280 nm wavelength) from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 fractions. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip , dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.   For MS3 analysis, eleven pooled fractions were analyzed using 3-hr gradient separations using the instrument parameters described above for the boundary case experiment, injecting roughly 1 ug per fraction for 11 pooled fractions on a Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For the MS2 analysis, the same 11 samples were analyzed on the same Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument parameters were preserved for MS1 analysis, but for MS2 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55, AGC 2.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). For MS2 analysis, we set the isolation window to 1.4 Th.

### Data Protocol
Boundary Case Experiment Data analysis. Samples were searched with the Sequest algorithm against a combined yeast (downloaded from SGD on March 24, 2014) and human database (downloaded from UniProt on February 4, 2014) which was concatenated with their reversed sequences as decoys for FDR determination.  Results were filtered to a 1% FDR at the peptide and protein levels using linear discriminant analysis and the target-decoy strategy.  MS3 spectra were processed as signal-to-noise ratios for each reporter ion based on noise levels within a 25 Th window. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion intensities across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously. PSMs with low isolation specificity (<0.7), MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal to noise ratio that is less than 200, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation.  Equal human protein starting amounts was enforced by normalizing to the sum of all human peptides for each of the 11 channels.  The normalization is slightly different for the compositional modelling.  Instead using a multiplicative factor to equalize protein level intensities, additive factors are used to ensure that the average PSM log ratio to the reference channel are equivalent for all channels.  Dual multiplexed viral infection experiment with infinite changes Data was analyzed with the same two-way ANOVA and compositional MS3 models described above.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become an accessible tool for whole proteome quantitation with the ability to characterize protein expression across thousands of proteins within a single experiment. A subset of MS quantification methods (e.g., SILAC and label-free) monitor the relative intensity of intact peptides, where thousands of measurements can be made from a single mass spectrum. An alternative approach, isobaric labeling, enables precise quantification of multiple samples simultaneously through unique and sample specific mass reporter ions. Consequently, in a single scan, the quantitative signal comes from a limited number of spectral features (&#x2264;11). The signal observed for these features is constrained by automatic gain control, forcing codependence of concurrent signals. The study of constrained outcomes primarily belongs to the field of compositional data analysis. We show experimentally that isobaric tag proteomics data are inherently compositional and highlight the implications for data analysis and interpretation. We present a new statistical model and accompanying software that improves estimation accuracy and the ability to detect changes in protein abundance. Finally, we demonstrate a unique compositional effect on proteins with infinite changes. We conclude that many infinite changes will appear small and that the magnitude of these estimates is highly dependent on experimental design.

### Keywords
Ratio compression, Infinite changes, Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (itraq), Partially pooled variance, Sps-ftms3, Tandem mass tags (tmt), Interference, Bayesian hierarchical modeling, Mass spectrometry, Signal detection

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


