### Accession
PXD015830

### Title
PPARgamma ubiquitination sites in HEK293T cells

### Description
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ (PPARγ) is the central regulator of adipogenesis, and its dysregulation is linked to obesity and metabolic diseases. Identification of the factors that regulate PPARγ expression and activity is therefore crucial for combating obesity. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor with a known role in xenobiotic detoxification. Recent studies have suggested that AhR also plays essential roles in energy metabolism. However, the detailed mechanisms remain unclear. We previously reported that experiments with adipocyte-specific Cullin 4b (Cul4b)-knockout mice showed that CUL4B suppresses adipogenesis by targeting PPARγ. Here, using immunoprecipitation, ubiquitination, real-time PCR and Gst-pulldown assays, we report that AhR functions as the substrate receptor in CUL4B–RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL4B) complex and is required for recruiting PPARγ. AhR overexpression reduced PPARγ stability and suppressed adipocyte differentiation, and AhR knockdown stimulated adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Furthermore, we found that two lysine sites on residues 268 and 293 in PPARγ are targeted for CRL4B-mediated ubiquitination, indicating cross-talk between acetylation and ubiquitination. Our findings establish a critical role of AhR in regulating PPARγ stability and suggest that the AhR–PPARγ interaction may represent a potential therapeutic target for managing metabolic diseases arising from PPARγ dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces were cut from SDS PAGE, destained with 30% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 until the gels were destained. The gels were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 ) for 30 min at 56° C, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (200 mM IAA/100 mM NH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Gel pieces were briefly rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, respectively. Gel pieces were digested overnight in 12.5 ng/μl trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The peptides were extracted three times with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. The extracts were pooled and dried completely by a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ppargamma lc-ms/ms hek293t

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics,Shandong University, PR China

### Submitter
Hao Dou

### Lab Head
Dr Yaoqin Gong
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics,Shandong University, PR China


