### Accession
PXD006416

### Title
Plasma membrane-derived extracellular microvesicles mediate non-canonical intercellular NOTCH signaling

### Description
ARMMs (arrestin domain-containing protein 1 [ARRDC1]-mediated microvesicles) are extracellular vesicles that bud directly atthe plasma membrane. However, little is known about the physiological function of these vesicles. Here we report that secreted ARMMs contain active NOTCH receptors and mediate a non-canonical intercellular NOTCH signaling. Masss pectrometry of purified ARMMs identifiedNOTCH2 as a protein component of the vesicles. The NOTCH protein in ARMMs contains the critical intracellular region (NICD) that is required for its transcriptional activity in the nucleus. ARRDC1 overexpression increased the NOTCH2 incorporation into ARMMs. Conversely, CRISPR-mediated knockout of ARRDC1 dramatically reduced the amount of NOTCH2 in secreted ARMMs. The incorporation of NOTCH2 into ARMMs is facilitated by the ITCH E3 ligase and ADAM10, which are also secreted into ARMMs. We showed NOTCH2 in ARMMs delivered into recipient cells is further activated by γ-secretase cleavage to induce NOTCH-specific signaling in recipient cells. Together, our findings revealed a role for ARMMs in a novelNOTCH signaling pathway that acts in distance beyond direct cell-cell contact.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slicesfrom coomassie blue-stained SDS-PAGE were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces, and subjected to trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted and reconstituted in 5 - 10 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary(100 μm inner diameter x ~30 cm length). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
ARMMs (arrestin domain-containing protein 1 (ARRDC1)-mediated microvesicles) are extracellular vesicles that bud directly at the plasma membrane; however, little is known about the molecular composition and physiological function of these vesicles. Here we report that ARMMs contain active NOTCH receptors and mediate a non-canonical intercellular NOTCH signaling. We identify over 100 proteins that are significantly enriched in ARMMs, including ARRDC1, TSG101 and multiple ESCRT complex proteins. About a third of ARMMs-enriched proteins are plasma membrane proteins, including the NOTCH2 receptor. The incorporation of NOTCH2 into ARMMs is facilitated by the ITCH E3 ligase and the metalloprotease ADAM10, both of which are also secreted into ARMMs. NOTCH2 in ARMMs can be delivered into recipient cells, and upon activation by &#x3b3;-secretase cleavage, induces NOTCH-specific gene expression. Together, our findings reveal a role for ARMMs in a novel NOTCH signaling pathway that acts in distance and is independent of direct cell-cell contact.ARMMs are extracellular vesicles that bud directly at the plasma membrane; their function is poorly understood. Here the authors purify and carryout a proteomics analysis of the protein components of ARMMs, and show that NOTCH receptors are recruited into ARMMs and can be transferred to recipient cells to mediate NOTCH signaling.

### Keywords
Notch, Arrdc1, Armms

### Affiliations
Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Departments of Environment Health and Genetics & Complex Diseases, T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Harvard University

### Submitter
Qiyu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Lu
Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Departments of Environment Health and Genetics & Complex Diseases, T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA


