### Accession
PXD020976

### Title
Tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping of microbial samples isolated from an industrial infrastructure.

### Description
Tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping of microbial samples isolated from an industrial infrastructure for identifying their species taxonomical rank.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed to extract taxonomical information using the phylopeptidomics procedure as described by Pible et al. (2020).

### Publication Abstract
The microbial diversity encompassed by the environmental biosphere is largely unexplored, although it represents an extensive source of new knowledge and potentially of novel enzymatic catalysts for biotechnological applications. To determine the taxonomy of microorganisms, proteotyping by tandem mass spectrometry has proved its efficiency. Its latest extension, phylopeptidomics, adds a biomass quantitation perspective for mixtures of microorganisms. Here, we present an application of phylopeptidomics to rapidly and sensitively screen microorganisms sampled from an industrial environment, i.e., a pool where radioactive material is stored. The power of this methodology is demonstrated through the identification of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, whether as pure isolates or present as mixtures or consortia. In this study, we established accurate taxonomical identification of environmental prokaryotes belonging to the <i>Actinobacteria</i>, <i>Bacteroidetes</i>, <i>Firmicutes</i>, and <i>Proteobacteria</i> phyla, as well as eukaryotes from the <i>Ascomycota</i> phylum. The results presented illustrate the potential of tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping, in particular phylopeptidomics, to screen for and rapidly identify microorganisms.

### Keywords
Fungus, Lc-msms, Taxonomy, Proteotyping, Proteomics, Eukaryote, Bacteria

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France


