### Accession
PXD016184

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of MEFs with loss-of-function PTEN mutations

### Description
The PTEN tumor suppressor controls cell death and survival by regulating functions of various molecular targets. Whilst the role of PTEN lipid-phosphatase activity on PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and inhibition of PI3K pathway is well characterized, the biological relevance of PTEN protein-phosphatase activity remains undefined. Using knock-in (KI) mice harbouring cancer-associated and functionally relevant missense mutations, we show that although loss of PTEN lipid-phosphatase function cooperates with oncogenic PI3K to promote rapid mammary tumorigenesis, the additional loss of PTEN protein-phosphatase activity triggered an extensive cell death response evident in early and advanced mammary tumors. Omics and drug-targeting studies revealed that PI3Ks act to reduce glucocorticoid receptor (GR) levels, which are rescued by loss of PTEN protein-phosphatase activity to restrain cell survival. The dual regulation of GR by PI3K and PTEN functions as a rheostat that can be exploited for the treatment of PTEN-loss driven cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Culture of MEF cells and cell lysis MEF cells (Pten+/+, PtenGE/+ and PtenCS/+) were cultured in DMEM-high glucose media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100U/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin, 1X non-essential amino acid (TermoFisher Scientific) and L-glutamine. The day before cell lysis, MEF cells (Passage 2) were plated in 15 cm dishes and harvested in steady state condition. One clone per genotype was used to build initial spectral library and 3 additional independent clones per genotype were used for phosphoproteomic analyses. MEFs were scraped in culture media at room temperature, centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 10 min at room temperature and pellets washed once with PBS. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer, incubated on ice for 5 min, and sonicated 3 times for 20 second each using a probe sonicator at magnitude 10. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4C. Protein precipitation and digestion Proteins were precipitated in 100% acetone at -20C overnight then centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4C. Pellets were washed once with acetone, solubilized in 8M urea buffer containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP). Protein concentration was quantified and samples normalized to the same volume. Samples were then alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. Urea in samples was diluted to 1 M with 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0 before digestion with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37C overnight. Samples were then acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Sample clean-up and phosphopeptides enrichment Solid-phase extraction (Oasis HLB, Waters) was used for peptides cleaning. Briefly, cartridges were conditioned with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA. Samples were then loaded and allowed to bind to the sorbent in the columns. Columns were then washed twice with 0.1% TFA and peptides eluted in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA. Samples were freeze-dried overnight. Samples were then resuspended in loading buffer (2M lactic acid in 50% acetonitrile and 5% TFA) through vortexing and sonication. Meanwhile, spherical TiO2 beads (Titansphere, GLSciences) at a ratio of 6mg/mg protein were conditioned by washing in Washing buffer (50% acetonitrile and 5% TFA) followed by Loading buffer (2M lactic acid, 50% acetonitrile and 5% TFA). Samples were incubated with 80% of the conditioned TiO2 beads for 60 min with 1500 rpm shaking and spun down. Supernatants were incubated with remaining TiO2 beads for an extra 30 min. After TiO2 enrichment, beads were packed into a home-made stage tip (a C8 plug in a 200 l tip). Peptide samples were loaded into the tips and spun through the tips at 2500 rpm for 10 min. Tips were then washed with Loading buffer and Washing buffer until all samples were loaded. Phosphopeptides were eluted in 1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide followed by 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. Samples were freeze-dried overnight.

### Data Protocol
Building a phospho-specific spectral library Spectral library was built using one clone of Pten+/+, PtenGE/+ and PtenCS/+ MEFs according to the Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS protocol. Every genotype was split into 8 fractions using high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation as per manufacturer’s instruction (Pierce). Phosphopeptides fractions were then analysed by LC-MS/MS. The Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50 ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 1.7e4 were isolated for MSMS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors fragmented using normalized collision energy of 30, a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) LC-MS/MS For phosphopeptides quantification, data-independent acquisition (DIA) of enriched phosphopeptides from each genotype was analysed via the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using the HRM-DIA methodology (Bruderer et al., 2015). Here, a survey scan from 400-1000m/z at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 3e6 at 50 ms was followed by 30, 21 m/z DIA windows at 17,500 resolution, AGC of 1e6, with the IT time set on “auto”. Stepped normalized collision energies were set at 28, 30 and 32. All spectra were acquired in the profile mode. Protein identification and quantification MS data from DDA profiling were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with the Sequest search engine to build a phosphopeptide specific library. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome FASTA file (downloaded on 14 September 2016). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered variable modifications. Protein and peptide groups were set to a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01, with a localisation probability of ≥ 0.75 to a single amino acid residue for phosphopeptide using the ptmRS algorithm (Taus et al., 2011). Quantitation was then carried out using the Spectronaut software package (Biognosys, v.9.0) DIA files were processed with default settings: ‘PTM localization’ activated, Probability cutoff ≥ 0.75, ‘Data filtering’ with Qvalue <0.01 using the phosphospecific peptide library.  Data analysis Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus package (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) (Tyanova et al., 2016), and pathway enrichment analysis was performed in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis package (Qiagen) using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mefs, Pten

### Affiliations
Monash University
Cancer Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Hon Yan Kelvin Yip

### Lab Head
Dr Antonella Papa
Cancer Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia


