### Accession
PXD023252

### Title
DDX5 promotes prostate cancer progression and activates DNA repair pathway

### Description
The small heat shock protein Hsp27 has been long demonstrated as a major driver of Castration Resistant Prostate Cancer (CRPC) progression via an androgen receptor-independent pathway. In the light of identification of its molecular mechanisms, we found that the RNA helicase protein DDX5 was an interactor of Hsp27 and DDX5 expression was regulated by Hsp27 through its cytoprotective function. We showed that DDX5 was overexpressed in a large collection of human samples in aggressive PCs, especially CRPC. Here, we described the protein-protein interaction network of DDX5 which were identified in four human prostate cell lines (PNT1A, LNCaP, DU-145 and PC-3) representing different disease stages using immunoaffinity purification and quantitative mass spectrometry. The DDX5 interactome in CRPC cells was enriched in several functions (DNA damage response, translation, transcription, RNA stability, and DNA conformation changes) involved in disease progression. Furthermore, we found a new critical function of DDX5 in DNA damage repair in CRPC and validated the interaction of DDX5 with the DNA repair complex Ku70/Ku86 which plays a pivotal role in the NHEJ process. We also showed that DDX5 overexpression conferred resistance to DNA damage poisoners (such as irradiation and cisplatin) in CRPC, a feature that could lead to genome maintenance, tumor progression and treatment resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Two milligrams protein extracts obtained from the 4 cell lines (PNT1A, LNCaP, DU145, and PC3) were diluted with the lysis buffer to obtain the final concentration of 4 mg protein per ml. The protein extracts were pre cleaned with 40 μl of the protein A Sepharose (nProtein A Sepharose® 4 Fast Flow, REF.17-5280-01, GE Healthcare, MERCK), and was incubated with 5 μg of Ab against DDX5 (mouse monoclonal Ab, sc-365164, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) overnight at 4 °C. Subsequently, the immunoprecipitated complexes were captured by incubating with 40 μl of protein A Sepharose bead for 1 hr, 4 °C, which was followed by 3 times of washing using the lysis buffer. Ultimately, the resulting beads were suspended with 20 μl Laemmli sample buffer 4X, heated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. To evaluate the efficiency of the IP, 10% of the samples were run on the SDS-PAGE gel for silver staining analysis as described. For each cell line, the IP experiments were performed in triplicate and subjected to MS analysis with three technical replications.   Mass spectrometry analysis The immunoprecipitated samples were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). Running of samples was stopped as soon as proteins stacked as a single band. Protein containing bands were stained with Thermo Scientific Imperial Blue, cut from the gel, and following reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation, digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Extracted peptides were concentrated before mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 25 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.2.1. Each cell lines were analyzed separately. For each cell line, IP against DDX5 protein was compared to control IP consisting of similar workflow excepted that no antibody was added to the lysate (Control beads). Analysis was done on biological triplicates, each injected three times on mass spectrometers. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the Human database extracted from UniProt on the 15th of May 2019 and containing 20421 entries (reviewed). The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.13). from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in above 70% of samples in one condition or more. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential, a two-sample t-test was done using permutation-based FDR-controlled at 1% and 0.1% and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
The heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) has emerged as a principal factor of the castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression. Also, an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) against Hsp27 (OGX-427 or apatorsen) has been assessed in different clinical trials. Here, we illustrate that Hsp27 highly regulates the expression of the human DEAD-box protein 5 (DDX5), and we define DDX5 as a novel therapeutic target for CRPC treatment. DDX5 overexpression is strongly correlated with aggressive tumor features, notably with CRPC. DDX5 downregulation using a specific ASO-based inhibitor that acts on DDX5 mRNAs inhibits cell proliferation in preclinical models, and it particularly restores the treatment sensitivity of CRPC. Interestingly, through the identification and analysis of DDX5 protein interaction networks, we have identified some specific functions of DDX5 in CRPC that could contribute actively to&#xa0;tumor&#xa0;progression and therapeutic resistance. We first present&#xa0;the interactions of DDX5 and the Ku70/80 heterodimer and the transcription factor IIH, thereby uncovering DDX5 roles&#xa0;in different DNA repair pathways. Collectively, our study highlights critical functions of DDX5 contributing to CRPC progression&#xa0;and provides preclinical proof of concept that a combination&#xa0;of ASO-directed DDX5 inhibition with a DNA damage-inducing therapy can serve as a highly potential novel strategy to treat CRPC.

### Keywords
Castration resistant prostate cancer (crpc), Ap-ms, Lc-msms, Interactome, Hsp27, Ddx5, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr ROCCHI Palma
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


