### Accession
PXD021266

### Title
Structure dynamics of ApoA-I amyloidogenic variants in small HDL increase their ability to mediate cholesterol efflux

### Description
Specific mutations in Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) are responsible for a late-onset systemic amyloidosis. Carriers do not exhibit increased cardiovascular disease risk despite reduced levels of ApoA-I/ HDL-cholesterol. To explain this paradox, we show that the HDL particle profile of L75P and L174S patients presents a higher relative abundance of the 8.4 nm vs 9.6 nm particles, and that serum from patients, as well as reconstituted 8.4 and 9.6 nm HDL particles (rHDL), possess increased capacity to catalyze cholesterol efflux from macrophages. Synchrotron radiation circular dichroism and hydrogen-deuterium exchange revealed that the variants in 8.4 nm rHDL have altered secondary structure composition and display a more flexible binding to lipids compared to their native counterpart. The reduced HDL-cholesterol levels of patients carrying ApoA-I amyloidogenic variants are thus balanced by higher proportion of small, dense HDL particles and better cholesterol efflux due to altered, region-specific protein structure dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) Two different preparations of 8.4 nm POPC:ApoA-I particles containing WT, L75P or L174S were analysed by HDX and data combined for the final HDX analysis. All chemicals for the HDX-MS analyses were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, except n-Dodecyl-b-D-Maltopyranoside (DDM) which was from Thermo Scientific. pH measurements were made using a SevenCompact pH-meter equipped with an InLab Micro electrode (Mettler-Toledo) and, prior to all measurements, a 4-point calibration (pH 2,4,7,10) was performed. The ApoA-I particles were placed in the autosampler in such a way that no sample had a permanence in the machine for longer than 12 hours. The HDX-MS analysis was performed using automated sample preparation on a LEAP H/D-X PAL™ platform interfaced to an LC-MS system, comprising an Ultimate 3000 micro-LC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus MS. For the HDX-MS, 5 l of POPC:ApoA-I particles were diluted either in 25 l of PBS, pH 7.4 or in HDX labelling buffer (PBS prepared in D2O, pH(read) 7.0) and  the HDX reactions were carried out for t = 0, 30, 300, 3000 and 9000 s at 8°C. At the end of incubation, labelling was quenched by adding 25 l of 1 % TFA, 0.2 % DDM, 4 M urea, pH 2.5 at 1°C, to the samples. Then, 50 l of the quenched sample (50 pmol protein/injection) were directly subjected to online pepsin digestion at 4 °C, by injection on a pepsin column (2.1 x 30 mm, Life Technologies). In order to remove lipids from the samples, the pepsin column was directly followed by a 2 x 20 mm guard column (Upchurch Scientific) packed with a washed and equilibrated ZrO2 material (Sigma Aldrich, Zirconium IV oxide, powder, <5 micron). The online digestion and trapping were performed for 4 minutes using a flow of 50 L/min 0.1 % formic acid (FA), pH 2.5. Peptides generated by pepsin digestion were subjected to on-line SPE on a PepMap300 C18 trap column (1 mm x 15 mm) and washed with 0.1% FA for 60 s. Thereafter, the trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase analytical column, Hypersil GOLD, particle size 1.9 m, 1 x 50 mm, and separation was performed at 1°C using a gradient of 5-50 % B over 8 minutes and then from 50 to 90 % B for 5 minutes, the mobile phases were 0.1 % FA (A) and 95 % acetonitrile/0.1 % FA (B). Following separation, the trap and column were equilibrated at 5 % organic content, until the next injection. The needle port and sample loop were cleaned three times after each injection with mobile phase 5 % MeOH/0.1 % FA, followed by 90 % MeOH/0.1 % FA and a final wash of 5 % MeOH/0.1 % FA. After each sample and blank injection, the pepsin column was washed by injecting 90 l of pepsin wash solution 1 % FA /4 M urea /5 % MeOH. In order to minimize carry-over, a full blank was run between each sample injection. Separated peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus MS, equipped with a HESI source operated at a capillary temperature of 250 °C. For the undeuterated samples (t = 0 s), injections were acquired using data dependent MS/MS HCD for identification of generated peptides. For the HDX analysis (all labelled samples and one t= 0 s), MS full scan spectra at a setting of 70 K resolution, AGC 3e6, Max IT 200 ms and scan range 300-2000 were collected.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 8.5 Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) was used for peptide identification after pepsin digestion of undeuterated samples (i.e. 0 s time point). The search was done on a FASTA file with only the three different ApoA-I sequences; search criteria included a mass error tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da, oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da) as variable modification and allowing for fully unspecific cleavage by pepsin. Peptides identified by PEAKS with a peptide score value of log P > 25 and no oxidation were used to generate a peptide list containing peptide sequences, charge state and retention time for the HDX analysis. HDX data analysis and visualization was performed using HDExaminer, version 3.01 (Sierra Analytics Inc., Modesto, US). Due to the comparative nature of the measurements, the deuterium incorporation levels for the peptic peptides were derived from the observed mass difference between the deuterated and non-deuterated peptides without back-exchange correction using a fully deuterated sample. HDX data was normalized to 100 % D2O content with an estimated average deuterium recovery of 75 %. The peptide deuteration of a peptide is the average of all high and medium confidence results and the two first residues assumed unable to hold deuteration. The allowed retention time window was ± 0.5 minute. Heatmaps settings were uncoloured proline, heavy smoothing and the difference heatmaps were drawn using the residual plot as significance criterion (± 0.5 Da). The data was first analysed allowing for unimodal HDX kinetics (EX2) only. Since previous studies have described bimodal HDX kinetics for regions of ApoA-I in HDL particles28, data was also analysed allowing the software to try an EX1 deuteration envelope if the EX2 score was lower than 0.9, and to accept the result if the score increased ≥ 0.05. The spectra for all timepoints were manually inspected; low scoring peptides, outliers and peptides were retention time correction could not be made consistent were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) of high density lipoproteins (HDLs) is essential for the transportation of cholesterol between peripheral tissues and the liver. However, specific mutations in ApoA-I of HDLs are responsible for a late-onset systemic amyloidosis, the pathological accumulation of protein fibrils in tissues and organs. Carriers of these mutations do not exhibit increased cardiovascular disease risk despite displaying reduced levels of ApoA-I/HDL cholesterol. To explain this paradox, we show that the HDL particle profiles of patients carrying either L75P or L174S ApoA-I amyloidogenic variants show a higher relative abundance of the 8.4-nm versus 9.6-nm particles and that serum from patients, as well as reconstituted 8.4- and 9.6-nm HDL particles (rHDL), possess increased capacity to catalyze cholesterol efflux from macrophages. Synchrotron radiation circular dichroism and hydrogen-deuterium exchange revealed that the variants in 8.4-nm rHDL have altered secondary structure composition and display a more flexible binding to lipids than their native counterpart. The reduced HDL cholesterol levels of patients carrying ApoA-I amyloidogenic variants are thus balanced by higher proportion of small, dense HDL particles, and better cholesterol efflux due to altered, region-specific protein structure dynamics.

### Keywords
Amyloidogenic apoa-i variants, Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
BioMS - Swedish National Infrastructure for Biological Mass Spectrometry, Lund University, BMC D1330, 221 84 Lund, Sweden
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden Lund Institute of Advanced Neutron and X-ray Science (LINXS), SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Simon Ekström

### Lab Head
Dr Jens O. Lagerstedt
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden Lund Institute of Advanced Neutron and X-ray Science (LINXS), SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden


