### Accession
PXD026226

### Title
RASSF1C oncogene elicits amoeboid invasion, cancer stemness and invasive EVs via a novel SRC/Rho axis

### Description
Cell plasticity is a crucial hallmark leading to cancer metastasis. Upregulation of Rho/ROCK pathway drives actomyosin contractility, protrusive forces and contributes to the occurrence of highly invasive amoeboid cells in tumors. Cancer stem cells are similarly associated with metastasis, but how these populations arise in tumors is not fully understood. Here we show that the novel oncogene RASSF1C drives mesenchymal to amoeboid transition and stem cell attributes in breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, RASSF1C activates Rho/ROCK via SRC mediated RhoGDI inhibition, resulting in generation of actomyosin contractility. Moreover, we demonstrate that amoeboid cells display the cancer stem cell markers CD133, ALDH1 and the pluripotent marker Nanog; are accompanied by higher invasive potential in vitro and in vivo; and employ extracellular vesicles to transfer the invasive phenotype to target cells and tissue. Importantly, the underlying RASSF1C driven biological processes concur to explain clinical data: namely, methylation of the RASSF1C promoter correlates with better survival in early stage breast cancer patients. Therefore, we propose the use of RASSF1 gene promoter methylation status as a biomarker for patient stratification.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (1 x 107 cells/condition) were grown for the indicated times, up to 3 days, in DMEM supplemented with  0.1 % (v/v) FBS (depleted of bovine EVs by overnight centrifugation at 100,000xg), 2 mM Glutamine and 100  U/ml Pen/Strep. Conditioned medium was collected and EVs were isolated by sequential ultracentrifugation  at 2000xg for 30 min, 10,000xg for 40 min, 100,000xg for 3 h in an Optima XPN-80 (Beckman Coulter)  ultracentrifuge using UltraClear Thinwall tubes. The EVs were washed once in 1 ml of PBS and purified by  centrifugation at 100,000xg for 80 min in an Optima MAX-XP Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter).  EV were lysed in 6M Urea, reduced and alkylated using DTT and Iodacetamide, and digested wwith LysC followed by trypsin and analysed on a QE+ as described (PMID: 28606996)

### Data Protocol
Maxquant analysis followed by Perseus as described (PMID: 28606996)

### Publication Abstract
Cell plasticity is a crucial hallmark leading to cancer metastasis. Upregulation of Rho/ROCK pathway drives actomyosin contractility, protrusive forces, and contributes to the occurrence of highly invasive amoeboid cells in tumors. Cancer stem cells are similarly associated with metastasis, but how these populations arise in tumors is not fully understood. Here, we show that the novel oncogene RASSF1C drives mesenchymal-to-amoeboid transition and stem cell attributes in breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, RASSF1C activates Rho/ROCK via SRC-mediated RhoGDI inhibition, resulting in generation of actomyosin contractility. Moreover, we demonstrate that RASSF1C-induced amoeboid cells display increased expression of cancer stem-like markers such as CD133, ALDH1, and Nanog, and are accompanied by higher invasive potential in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Further, RASSF1C-induced amoeboid cells employ extracellular vesicles to transfer the invasive phenotype to target cells and tissue. Importantly, the underlying RASSF1C-driven biological processes concur to explain clinical data: namely, methylation of the RASSF1C promoter correlates with better survival in early-stage breast cancer patients. Therefore, we propose the use of RASSF1 gene promoter methylation status as a biomarker for patient stratification.

### Keywords
Exosome, Rassf1c

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eric o' Neill
University of Oxford


