### Accession
PXD026983

### Title
APP infected and healthy pig BALF iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS

### Description
Porcine pleuropneumonia caused by Actinobacilluspleuropneumoniae (APP) is a swine respiratory disease with an important impact around the world either as a single infection or part of the porcine respiratory disease complex. The data of interaction between hosts and pathogens has becoming more crucial for exploration of the mechanism. However, up to now, comparatively little information is available on the systemic and dynamic changes that occur in pig BALF in response to APP infection. This study used iTRAQ to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in pig BALF in response to APP infection.

### Sample Protocol
Nine piglets were randomly assigned into two groups. Group 1 (control) comprised three pigs which received PBS, and group 2 nine pigs intranasally infected with L20. BALF samples were collected from control piglets at 0 h prior to infection, from three piglets of group 2 at 24 h post infection (mild symptoms), and from the remaining three piglets (group 2) at 120 h post infection (severe symptoms). BALF was separated , aliquots transferred into sterile cryovials and stored at -80 ℃.Depletion of albumin and IgG in thawed BALF was performed using the albumin and IgG depletion kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA). Immunodepleted BALF was further desalted using the 2D-cleanup kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA), protein dissolved in rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 1 m MTris, and 1 M NaCl), and the protein concentration determined using the 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA). iTRAQ analysis was performed by Beijing Qinglian Biotech co.Ltd (Beijing, China). Post-digestion iTRAQ labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). To control for biological and technical variations, three independent iTRAQ experiments were performed.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by Beijing Qinglian Biotech co.Ltd (Beijing, China).The peptide mixture from each fraction was injected for nano LC-MS/ MS analysis. To achieve reliable statistics, three technical replicates were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data from three biological replicates were transformed into Mascot generic format (.mgf) files. The MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, UK) against the nonredundant International Protein Index database from the European Bioinformatics Institute. To filter the results, we employed a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1% for identification. The unique protein with at least one particular peptide was identified. The FDR was set to ≤ 1% for identification of both proteins and peptides. All peptides with a minimum confidence level of 95% (unused confidence score > 1.3) were used as qualification criteria. Relative quantification was calculated based on the ratio of peak areas from MS/MS spectra. For DEPs, a log2 fold change ≥ 1 was considered upregulated, and a log2 fold change ≤ -1 was classified as downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine infectious pleuropneumonia is characterized by a high-rate of carriage and mixed infection with other pathogens. The host immune response induced by Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (APP) is the basis for elucidating pathogenesis and controlling disease. However, there is currently no comprehensive and dynamic data characterising the host immune response. In this study, piglets were infected with APP and differentially expressed proteins of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and peripheral serum were identified by iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS, and differentially expressed genes of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) by RNA-seq. The results of the integrated analysis of serum, BALF and PBMC showed significant metabolism and local immune responses in BALF, the general immune response in PBMC mainly involves cytokines, while that in serum mainly involves biosynthesis, phagosome, and complement and coagulation cascades. Furthermore, immune responses in PBMCs and serum were rapid and maintained compared to the lung where metabolism and cell adhesion activities were enriched. Some innate immunity pathways of the cellular response to ROS, neutrophil mediated immunity, granulocyte activation and leukocyte cell-cell adhesion were identified as central points, connecting multiple signaling pathways to form an integrated large network. At 24&#xa0;h post-infection, 14 molecules were up regulated in BALF, 10 of which were shared with PBMC, but at 120&#xa0;h, 20 down-regulated molecules were identified in BALF, 11 of them still up- regulated in PBMC. We conclude that, the immune response in the lung is different from that in blood, but there is a similarity in response in PBMC and serum.

### Keywords
Itraq-lc-ms/ms, Balf, Pig

### Affiliations
Jilin University
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, P. R. China (lab head)

### Submitter
Zhu Rining

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Liancheng
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, P. R. China (lab head)


