### Accession
PXD024634

### Title
Talin1-GFP pulldown in U2OS cells

### Description
In this study, we pull-down human Talin1-GFP and GFP from U2OS cells plated on fibronectin. Binding partners were then analysed using mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells stably expressing talin1-GFP or GFP were first generated via transient transfection using Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and selected using regular media supplemented with 500 µg/ml of G418. Cells were then plated on fibronectin for 2 hours, washed with PBS and lysed in CSK buffer [0.5% (wt/vol) Triton X-100, 10 mM Pipes, pH 6.8, 150 mM NaCl, 150 mM sucrose, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mg/ml leupeptin, 10 mg/ml aprotinin, 0.5 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 2 mM Na 3 VO 4 ]. Lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) for 1 hour at 4 ̊ C. Complexes bound to the beads were washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer and eluted in Laemmli reducing sample buffer. Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and following staining with InstantBlue (Expedeon), gel lanes were sliced into ten 2-mm bands and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 MBEH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were automatically selected for fragmentation by data-dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science). Peak list files were searched against the SwissProt human database (version 3.70, May 2013). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
U2os, Gfp trap, Talin1

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland Faculty of Science and Engineering, Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Guillaume Jacquemet

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Jacquemet
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland Faculty of Science and Engineering, Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


