### Accession
PXD038549

### Title
Short-term acidification promotes diverse iron acquisition and conservation mechanisms in upwelling-associated phytoplankton

### Description
Coastal upwelling regions are among the most productive marine ecosystems but may be threatened by amplified ocean acidification. Increased acidification is hypothesized to reduce iron bioavailability for phytoplankton thereby expanding iron limitation and impacting primary production. Here we show from community to molecular levels that phytoplankton in an upwelling region respond to short-term acidification exposure with iron uptake pathways and strategies that reduce cellular iron demand. A combined physiological and multi-omics approach was applied to trace metal clean incubations that introduced 1200 ppm CO2 for up to four days. Although variable, molecular-level responses indicate a prioritization of iron uptake pathways that are less hindered by acidification and reductions in iron utilization. Growth, nutrient uptake, and community compositions remained largely unaffected suggesting that these mechanisms may confer short-term resistance to acidification; however, we speculate that cellular iron demand is only temporarily satisfied, and longer-term acidification exposure without increased iron inputs may result in increased iron stress.

### Sample Protocol
Seawater (300-900 mL) was filtered through a 0.22 µm Sterivex-GP filter unit which was immediately sealed with a 1.2 mol L-1 HCl and Milli-Q rinsed luer-lock plug and Hemato-SealTM tube sealant, wrapped in aluminium foil, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Filters were removed from the Sterivex casing and placed in 750 µL of extraction buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA). Samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 95°C while mixed at 350 rpm. Sonication was then performed with a Diagenode Biorupter for approximately 8 minutes (15 second on/off intervals) at 4°C. Next, samples were again incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes while gently vortexing every 10 minutes. The filters were then removed from the tubes, and the remaining liquid was centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 30 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant containing the extracted protein was then removed without disturbing the pellet. Crude protein extracts were quantified with the PierceTM colorimetric BCA protein concentration assay. S-TrapTM mini columns were used to remove SDS extraction buffer from the samples and to digest extracted proteins into mass-spectrometry-compatible peptides. Proteins were first reduced and alkylated using 5 mM dithiothreitol and 15 mM iodoacetamide respectively, and then denatured using 12% phosphoric acid. Samples were then diluted with S-trapTM buffer (pH 7.1 100 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate in 90% aqueous methanol; 1sample : 7buffer) and loaded onto the S-trapTM columns. To remove SDS, each sample was washed 10 times with 600 μL S-trapTM buffer using gentle vacuum. Proteins were then digested on-column using trypsin (1trypsin : 25protein) at 37°C for 16 hours. Tryptic peptides were eluted from the S-TrapTM columns with a series of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2 % aqueous formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid washes. Eluted samples were desalted on pre-conditioned 50 mg C18 columns, dried down using a Vacufuge Plus and then resuspended in a 1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile solution prior to liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC-nano LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate, and a blank was ran between each set of biological replicates. The peptide matrix was separated using one-dimensional liquid chromatography for 125 minutes under a non-linear gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated under positive polarity, data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Annotated databases were compiled using site-specific metatranscriptome sequences and appended with a database of common contaminant proteins (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, www.thegpm.org/crap). Databases were then filtered to remove redundant sequences, and database searching was conducted using OpenMS MSGF+ with a 1% false discovery rate. Peptides were quantified using MS1 ion intensities, and FeatureFinderIdentification was used to identify unknown features based on identified MS2 spectra in other replicate injections. Unique peptides were assigned a taxonomic and functional annotation, and non-unique peptides (i.e. peptides matching to more than one taxonomic group or functional annotation) were annotated as ‘ambiguous’. Peptides were grouped into proteins/protein groups based on Kofam_KO annotations.

### Publication Abstract
Coastal upwelling regions are among the most productive marine ecosystems but may be threatened by amplified ocean acidification. Increased acidification is hypothesized to reduce iron bioavailability for phytoplankton thereby expanding iron limitation and impacting primary production. Here we show from community to molecular levels that phytoplankton in an upwelling region respond to short-term acidification exposure with iron uptake pathways and strategies that reduce cellular iron demand. A combined physiological and multi-omics approach was applied to trace metal clean incubations that introduced 1200 ppm CO<sub>2</sub> for up to four days<sub>.</sub> Although variable, molecular-level responses indicate a prioritization of iron uptake pathways that are less hindered by acidification and reductions in iron utilization. Growth, nutrient uptake, and community compositions remained largely unaffected suggesting that these mechanisms may confer short-term resistance to acidification; however, we speculate that cellular iron demand is only temporarily satisfied, and longer-term acidification exposure without increased iron inputs may result in increased iron stress.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Marine microbes, Phytoplankton, Ocean acidification

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Loay Jabre

### Lab Head
Dr Erin M.
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada


