### Accession
PXD029795

### Title
The Secretome of Human Neonatal Mesenchymal Stem Cells Modulates Doxorubicin-induced Cytotoxicity: Impact in Non-tumour Cells

### Description
Breast cancer remains one of the leading causes of death in women, being the chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin (Dox) among the most widely standard chemotherapy options for its treatment. However, its effective use has been severely limited owing to its well-documented cardiotoxic side effect that can lead to heart failure in a subset of patients. We have previously shown that a specific population of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) present immunomodulatory and regenerative properties, mainly granted by its secretome (CM), whose potential was improved when produced under 3D conditions. In cancer, the role of MSCs is still contradictory, with literature reporting both cancer promoting and suppressive effects. Therefore, we aimed at determining the effect of concomitant exposure of Dox with CM from 3D (CM3D) and 2D (CM2D) MSC cultures in breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231) and in non-tumour breast epithelial cells (MCF10A) and differentiated AC16 cardiomyocytes. As such, the whole secretome was obtained by collecting and concentrating the culture media conditioned by MSCs in 2D (CM2D) and 3D (CM3D). A Ge-LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis revealed that CM3D effects may be linked to MSC cytoprotection and tumour development, namely through regulation of cell proliferation (CAPN1, CST1, LAMC2, RANBP3), migration (CCN3, MMP-8, PDCD5), invasion (TIMP-1/2), oxidative stress (AIFM1, CD9, GSR) and inflammation (ANXA5, CDH13, GDF-15). Overall, MSC-derived CM3D decreased Dox-induced cytotoxic effects on non-tumour breast cells and cardiomyocytes, without compromising Dox chemotherapeutic nature, highlighting the potential use of CM3D as an adjuvant in chemotherapy to reduce off-target side effects.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome/CM production from MSC cultures The production of conditioned media from 2D cultures (CM2D) and 3D cultures (CM3D) was performed according to a previously optimized protocol [1]. Both CM were produced from cells having undergone the equivalent number of cPDs. For the production of CM2D, cells were seeded at an inoculum of 1 x 104 cells/cm2 in 175cm2 t-flasks and maintained in medium supplemented with 5% FBS until reaching 90% of confluence, generally at day 3. After carefully washing the cells, medium was replaced by α-MEM without FBS, at a final volume of 25 mL. After a 48 h conditioning period, CM2D was collected under sterile conditions. CM3D was obtained through the cell inoculation and expansion according with [1, 2]. After 24 h, FBS concentration was reduced to 5%, and cells were maintained in these conditions for 3 days. At day 5, medium was replaced by α-MEM without FBS. After a 48 h conditioning period, CM3D was then collected under sterile conditions. CM3D and CM2D were used at a final concentration of 10x, achieved by using 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal concentrators (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) as per manufacturer’s recommendations. The control consisted of MSC medium which was never in contact with cells. All samples were stored aseptically at -80ºC until further use.  LC-MS/MS analysis 30 µg of each sample was isolated, and the volume was adjusted 300 µl with 4% SDS in 0.5 M Tris pH 6.8. A total of 6 samples was prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis with the S-Trap® Micro Spin Column (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) digestion protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, all samples were centrifuged for 8 min at 13,000 × g and proteins in the supernatant were first reduced by addition of 20 mM DTT and incubation for 10 min at 95 ˚C and then alkylated by addition of 40 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 30 min at RT in the dark. Undissolved matter was removed by centrifugation for 8 min at 13,000 × g. Next, after adding 12% phosphoric acid at 1/10 (v/v) to the supernatant, S-trap buffer (90% MeOH in 100 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.1) was added (6/1, v/v) and the mixture was applied to a S-Trap® Micro Spin Column. The micro column was centrifuged at 4,000 × g until the complete sample was passed through and 3 washes with S-trap buffer were performed at 4,000 × g. Proteins were digested with Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (1/25, w/w) by adding trypsin in 50 mM TEAB solution to the micro column for 1 h at 47 °C. Peptides were eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Purified peptides were dried, re-dissolved in solvent A [0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)] and approximately 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC (Thermo Scientific®, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher®) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T, Chadds Ford, PA, USA). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50 °C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter; New Objective, Littleton, MA, USA) was connected to the µPAC® outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B [0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)] over 115 min, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 15-min wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 20 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 2.7 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C.  In the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite, full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 300−2,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 100 ms) with a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). The 20 most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 103 ions, maximum ion injection time 20 ms, spectrum data type: centroid, exclusion of unassigned and 1 positively charged precursors, dynamic exclusion time 20 s) were then isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented in the high-pressure cell of the ion trap. The CID collision energy was set to 35 V and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120028 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) software packages were both used for peptide identification and label-free quantification. In the MaxQuant analysis, MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot (Swiss-Prot) protein sequence database under Homo Sapiens (version December 2018) using Andromeda. Database search parameters were as follows: methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation, as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The mass tolerance of precursor mass was 20 ppm for MaxQuant and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.15 Da. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and, at most, 2 missed cleavages were allowed for both software. The FDR for identification was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Doxorubicin (Dox) is one of the most widely used treatments for breast cancer, although limited by the well-documented cardiotoxicity and other off-target effects. Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) secretome has shown immunomodulatory and regenerative properties, further potentiated under 3D conditions. This work aimed to uncover the effect of the MSC-derived secretome from 3D (CM3D) or 2D (CM2D) cultures, in human malignant breast cells (MDA-MB-231), non-tumor breast epithelial cells (MCF10A) and differentiated AC16 cardiomyocytes, co-treated with Dox. A comprehensive proteomic analysis of CM3D/CM2D was also performed to unravel the underlying mechanism. CM3D/CM2D co-incubation with Dox revealed no significant differences in MDA-MB-231 viability when compared to Dox alone, whereas MCF10A and AC16 viability was consistently improved in Dox+CM3D-treated cells. Moreover, neither CM2D nor CM3D affected Dox anti-migratory and anti-invasive effects in MDA-MB-231. Notably, Ge-LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis revealed that CM3D displayed protective features that might be linked to the regulation of cell proliferation (CAPN1, CST1, LAMC2, RANBP3), migration (CCN3, MMP8, PDCD5), invasion (TIMP1/2), oxidative stress (COX6B1, AIFM1, CD9, GSR) and inflammation (CCN3, ANXA5, CDH13, GDF15). Overall, CM3D decreased Dox-induced cytotoxicity in non-tumor cells, without compromising Dox chemotherapeutic profile in malignant cells, suggesting its potential use as a chemotherapy adjuvant to reduce off-target side effects.

### Keywords
Human;  proteome; mesenchymal stem/stromal cells; secretome; 3d cultures stem cell; cell culture

### Affiliations
Universidade de Aveiro
Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

### Submitter
Rui Vitorino

### Lab Head
Dr Joana P Miranda
Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.


