### Accession
PXD007670

### Title
Vitis vinifera rhizosphere characterization: a metaproteome approach

### Description
Rhizosphere is a complex system of interactions between plant roots, bacteria, fungi and animals, where the release of plant root exudates stimulates bacterial density and diversity. However, the majority of the bacteria in soil results to be unculturable but active. The aim of the present work was to characterize the microbial community associated to the root of V. vinifera cv. Pinot Noir not only under a taxonomic perspective, but also under a functional point of view, using a metaproteome approach. Our results underlined the difference between the metagenomic and metaproteomic approach and the large potentiality of proteomics in describing the environmental bacterial community and its activity. In fact, by this approach, that allows to investigate the mechanisms occurring in the rhizosphere, we showed that bacteria belonging to Streptomyces, Bacillus and Pseudomonas genera are the most active in protein expression. In the rhizosphere, the identified genera were involved mainly in phosphorus and nitrogen soil metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Soil proteins were extracted using NoviPure tm Soil Protein extraction kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc., Carlsbad, CA) according to manufacturer instruction. The obtained protein pellet was resuspended in 400 µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and quantified by Bradford method 54 . Proteins were digested with Trypsin (Roche, Segrate, Milano, Italy) resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (37 °C overnight) after a reduction step (DTT to final concentration of 10 mM, 30 min at 60 °C) and an alkylation step (iodoacetamide to final concentration 20 mM, 30 min, room temperature in the dark). After digestion, protein peptides were purified using Solid Phase Extraction cartridge C18 (Supelco, USA) and finally eluted with 100% Acetonitrile. The mass spectrometry analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, USA) system with as stationary phase a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm). The injection volume was 4.0 µL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min -1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40 % in 30 minutes. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source. The samples were subjected to the traditional data- dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da, followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source  16  parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N 2 ) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ionspray floating voltage (ISFV) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
The mass data were analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA) against an in house protein sequence database prepared as described below. The Mascot search was performed on Mascot v. 2.3.0, the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 3 maximum missed cleavages, a search tolerance of 120 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.6 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for, were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The following modifications were used: oxidized methionine and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. Proteins, with at least one peptide with an ion score higher than the homology or identity ion score value, were considered significantly identified.

### Publication Abstract
The rhizosphere is a hotspot of microbial activity where the release of root exudates stimulates bacterial density and diversity. The majority of the bacterial cells in soil are viable, unculturable, but active. Proteomic tools could be useful in gaining information about microbial community activity and to better understand the real interactions between roots and soil. The aim of this work was to characterize the bacterial community associated with Vitis vinifera cv. Pinot Noir roots using a metaproteome approach. Our results confirmed the large potential of proteomics in describing the environmental microbial communities and their activities: in particular, we showed that bacteria belonging to Streptomyces, Bacillus, Bradyrhizobium, Burkholderia and Pseudomonas genera are the most active in protein expression. Concerning the biological activity of these genera in the rhizosphere, we observed the exclusive presence of the phosphorus metabolic process and the regulation of primary metabolic processes. To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting the rhizosphere proteome of V. vinifera, describing the bacterial community structure and activity of an important ecosystem for the Italian landscape, agriculture and economy.

### Keywords
Vineyard, Rhizosphere metaproteome

### Affiliations
università del Piemonte orientale
Università del Piemonte Orientale, Dipartimento di Scienze e Innovazione Tecnologica, Piazza San Eusebio 5, 13100 Vercelli, Italy

### Submitter
Elisa Bona

### Lab Head
Dr Elisa Bona
Università del Piemonte Orientale, Dipartimento di Scienze e Innovazione Tecnologica, Piazza San Eusebio 5, 13100 Vercelli, Italy


