### Accession
PXD030054

### Title
S-nitrosation of SCF E3 ligase components regulates hormonal signaling in Arabidopsis

### Description
E3 ubiquitin ligases mediate the last step of the ubiquitination pathwayin the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). By targeting transcriptional regulators for their turnover, E3s play a crucial role in every aspect of plant biology. In plants, SKP1/CULLIN1/F-BOX PROTEIN (SCF)-type E3 ubiquitin ligases are essential for the perception and signaling of several key hormones including auxins and jasmonates (JAs). F-box proteins, TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1) and CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1 (COI1) bind directly transcriptional repressors AUX/IAAs and JAZs in an auxin- and JAs-depending manner, respectively, which permits the perception of the hormones and transcriptional activation of signaling pathways. Redox modification of proteins mainly by S-nitrosation of cysteines via nitric oxide (NO) has emerged as a valued regulatory mechanism in physiological processes requiring its rapid and versatile integration. Previously, we demonstrated that TIR1 and ASK1 (Arabidopsis thaliana SKP1) are targets of S-nitrosation, and these (NO)-dependent post-translational modifications enhance protein-protein interactions, and positively regulate SCFTIR1 complex assembly and expression of auxin response genes. In this work, we provide evidence on the modulation of SCFCOI1 complex by different S-nitrosation events. We demonstrated that S-nitrosation of ASK1 Cys118 enhanced ASK1-COI1 protein-protein interaction. Overexpression of non-nitrosable ask1 mutant protein impaired the activation of JA-responsive genes mediated by SCFCOI1 illustrating the functional relevance of this redox-mediated regulation in planta. Additionally, in silico analysis positioned COI1 as a promising S-nitrosation target. The regulation of SCF components involved in hormonal perception by S- nitrosation may represent a key strategy to determine the precise time and site-dependent activation of each hormonal signaling pathway, and highlights NO as a pivotal molecular player in these scenarios.

### Sample Protocol
GST-TIR1 was expressed in SF9 insect cells and purified by glutathione affinity chromatography as previously published (Tan et al. 2007; Calderón Villalobos et al. 2012). Fractions were buffer exchanged to 15% glycerol containing buffer and stored at -80 °C until use. GST-TIR1 was S-nitrosated with 1 mM GSNO in HENS (250 mM HEPES, pH 7.2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine, 1% SDS) buffer for 30 min in the dark. Then proteins were subjected to a modification of the biotin switch assay using either DTT (redox switch) or ascorbate (nitrosothiol switch) as reducing agent and iodoacetamide (IAM) for labelling, thus switching reversibly oxidized or S nitrosated Cys to carbamidomethylated Cys (Izquierdo-Álvarez et al. 2018). Free Cys were blocked with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, Sigma, USA) in 4 volumes of blocking buffer (225 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 0.9 mM EDTA, 90 μM neocuproine, 2.5% SDS, and 30 mM NEM) for 30 min at 37°C. For the redox switch, protein was precipitated with acetone, resuspended in HENS containing 1 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) and incubated for 10 min at 15 ºC, precipitated with acetone and resuspended in HENS containing IAM (Sigma, USA), and incubated for 1 h at 25 ºC. For the nitrosothiol switch, protein was precipitated with acetone and resuspended in HENS containing 100 mM ascorbate and IAM for 1 h at 25ºC. Proteins were run in SDS-PAGE and gel bands were digested as fully described in Iglesias et al. (2018). Digested peptides were analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The analysis was performed following the protocols indicated in Iglesias et al. (2018) in the Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO, Spain) Proteomics facility, a member of ProteoRed network.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by LC-MS/MS and identification of post-translational modifications were carried out in the Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO, España) protein chemistry facility, a member of ProteoRed network. The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1 mm × 20 mm precolumn Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100 A (Thermo Scientific, USA), and then separated using a 0.075 mm × 100 mm column Acclaim PepMap C18, 3 µm, 100 A (Thermo Scientific, USA) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 60-min gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water; solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% ACN in water). Electrospray ionization (ESI) was done using a Nano-bore emitters stainless steel ID 30 µm interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. The mass spectrometer was operated in the selected MS/ MS ion monitoring mode (SMIM mode). In this mode, the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro detector was programmed to perform, along the same entire gradient, a continuous sequential operation in the MS/MS mode on the doubly or triply charged ions corresponding to the peptide/s selected previously from the theoretical prediction. The MS/MS spectra from the peptide were analyzed by assigning the fragments to the candidate sequence, after calculation the series of theoretical fragmentations, according to the nomenclature of the series as previously described. Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using PEAKS Studio 6 search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
E3 ubiquitin ligases mediate the last step of the ubiquitination pathway in the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). By targeting transcriptional regulators for their turnover, E3s play a crucial role in every aspect of plant biology. In plants, SKP1/CULLIN1/F-BOX PROTEIN (SCF)-type E3 ubiquitin ligases are essential for the perception and signaling of several key hormones including auxins and jasmonates (JAs). F-box proteins, TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1) and CORONATINE INSENSITIVE 1 (COI1), bind directly transcriptional repressors AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) and JASMONATE ZIM-DOMAIN (JAZ) in auxin- and JAs-depending manner, respectively, which permits the perception of the hormones and transcriptional activation of signaling pathways. Redox modification of proteins mainly by S-nitrosation of cysteines (Cys) residues <i>via</i> nitric oxide (NO) has emerged as a valued regulatory mechanism in physiological processes requiring its rapid and versatile integration. Previously, we demonstrated that TIR1 and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> SKP1 (ASK1) are targets of S-nitrosation, and these NO-dependent posttranslational modifications enhance protein-protein interactions and positively regulate SCF<sup>TIR1</sup> complex assembly and expression of auxin response genes. In this work, we confirmed S-nitrosation of Cys140 in TIR1, which was associated <i>in planta</i> to auxin-dependent developmental and stress-associated responses. In addition, we provide evidence on the modulation of the SCF<sup>COI1</sup> complex by different S-nitrosation events. We demonstrated that S-nitrosation of ASK1 Cys118 enhanced ASK1-COI1 protein-protein interaction. Overexpression of non-nitrosable ask1 mutant protein impaired the activation of JA-responsive genes mediated by SCF<sup>COI1</sup> illustrating the functional relevance of this redox-mediated regulation <i>in planta</i>. <i>In silico</i> analysis positions COI1 as a promising S-nitrosation target, and demonstrated that plants treated with methyl JA (MeJA) or S-nitrosocysteine (NO-Cys, S-nitrosation agent) develop shared responses at a genome-wide level. The regulation of SCF components involved in hormonal perception by S-nitrosation may represent a key strategy to determine the precise time and site-dependent activation of each hormonal signaling pathway and highlights NO as a pivotal molecular player in these scenarios.

### Keywords
S-nitrosation; hormonal signaling; arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (IFIBYNE), CONICET-UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (IFIBYNE), CONICET-UBA,
Buenos Aires, Argentina

### Submitter
María José Iglesias

### Lab Head
Dr María José Iglesias
Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (IFIBYNE), CONICET-UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina


