### Accession
PXD046965

### Title
Folding of Prestin’s Anion-Binding Site and the Mechanism of Outer Hair Cell Electromotility

### Description
Prestin responds to transmembrane voltage fluctuations by changing its cross-sectional area, a process underlying the electromotility of outer hair cells and cochlear amplification. Prestin belongs to the SLC26 family of anion transporters yet is the only member capable of displaying electromotility. Prestin’s voltage-dependent conformational changes are driven by the putative displacement of residue R399 and a set of sparse charged residues within the transmembrane domain, following the binding of a Cl- anion at a conserved binding site formed by amino termini of the TM3 and TM10 helices. However, a major conundrum arises as to how an anion that binds in proximity to a positive charge (R399), can promote the voltage sensitivity of prestin. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we find that prestin displays an unstable anion-binding site, where folding of the amino termini of TM3 and TM10 is coupled to Cl- binding. This event shortens the TM3-TM10 electrostatic gap, thereby connecting the two helices, resulting in reduced cross-sectional area. These folding events upon anion-binding are absent in SLC26A9, a non-electromotile transporter closely related to prestin. Dynamics of prestin embedded in a lipid bilayer closely match that in detergent micelle, except for a destabilized lipid-facing helix TM6 that is critical to prestin’s mechanical expansion. We observe helix fraying at prestin’s anion-binding site but cooperative unfolding of multiple lipid-facing helices, features that may promote prestin’s fast electromechanical rearrangements. These results highlight a novel role of the folding equilibrium of the anion-binding site, and helps define prestin’s unique voltage-sensing mechanism and electromotility.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions, quench, and injection were all performed manually. Prior to HDX, proteins purified in Cl- ¬and SO42- were buffer exchanged to the same H2O buffer without protease inhibitor using 7K MWCO Zeba spin desalting columns (Thermo 89882). For HDX conducted in HEPES, proteins purified in Cl- were dialyzed against the “HEPES/H2O Buffer” (150 mM HEPES, 0.02% GDN, pH adjusted to 7.5 by HEPES acid or base) using a 10K MWCO dialysis device (Thermo Slide-A-Lyzer MINI 69570) with three times of buffer exchange for near-complete Cl- removal. HDX in a solution of 93% deuterium (D) content was initiated by diluting 2 μL of 25 μM prestin or SLC26A9 stock in an H2O buffer into 28 μL of the corresponding buffer made with D2O (99.9% D, Sigma-Aldrich 151882). HDX was conducted in one of the two conditions: 1) pDread 7.1, 25 °C; 2) pDread 6.1, 0 °C. The D2O buffers contained the same compositions as the corresponding H2O buffers, except that Tris was replaced with Phosphate for the “SO42-/D2O Buffer” for both HDX conditions, and the “Cl-/D2O Buffer” for HDX performed at pDread 6.1, 0 °C. The pDread was adjusted to 7.1 or 6.1 by DCl for the “Cl-/D2O Buffers” and by NaOD for other D2O buffers. For HDX in the presence of salicylate, 50 mM salicylate acid was added to the “SO42-/D2O Buffer” and the pDread was adjusted by NaOD. For HDX in the presence of urea, 4 M urea was added to the “Cl-/D2O Buffer” or the “HEPES/D2O Buffer”, with accurate urea concentration determined to be 4.16 M and 4.54 M, respectively, by refractive index using a refractometer (WAY Abbe)39.  HDX was quenched at various times, ranging from 1 s to 27 h, by the addition of 30 μL of ice-chilled quench buffer containing 600 mM Glycine, 8 M urea, pH 2.5. For HDX in the presence of urea, urea concentration in the quench buffer was adjusted to reach a 4 M final concentration. For HDX on prestin in nanodisc, the quench buffer also included 3 μL of 0.8% GDN and 3 μL of 300 mg/ml aqueous suspension of ZrO2-coated silica (Sigma-Aldrich, reference no. 55261-U). The resulting mixture was incubated on ice for 1 min to remove lipids and solubilize prestin in GDN before being filtered through a cellulose acetate spin cup (Thermo Pierce, Waltham, Massachusetts, reference no. 69702) by centrifugation for 30 s at 13,000 g, 2 °C. Quenched reactions were immediately injected into a valve system maintained at 5 °C (Trajan LEAP). Non-deuterated controls and MS/MS runs for peptide assignment were performed with the same protocol as above except D2O buffers were replaced by H2O buffers, followed by the immediate addition of the quench buffer and injection.  HDX reactions were performed in random order. No peptide carryover was observed as accessed by following sample runs with injections of quench buffer containing 4 M urea and 0.01% GDN. In-exchange controls accounting for forward deuteration towards 41.5% D in the quenched reaction were performed by mixing D2O buffer and ice-chilled quench buffer prior to the addition of the protein. Maximally labeled controls (“All D”) accounting for back-exchange were performed by a 48-h incubation with the “Cl-/D2O Buffer” at 37 °C, followed by a 30-min incubation with 8 M of deuterated urea at 25 °C.

### Data Protocol
MS data collection, peptide assignments by SearchGUI version 4.0.25, and HDX data processing by HDExaminer 3.1 (Sierra Analytics).Labeling times for HDX performed in pDread 6.1, 0 °C were corrected to those in pDread 7.1, 25 °C by a factor of 140, determined by the ratio of the kchem for full-length proteins in the two conditions – prestin: τ_chem^(pDread 6.1,0 °C) = 10 sec, τ_chem^(pDread 7.1,25 °C) = 74 msec; SLC26A9: τ_chem^(pDread 6.1,0 °C) = 9 sec, τ_chem^(pDread 7.1,25 °C)  = 65 msec. Deuteration levels were adjusted with the 93% D content but not with back-exchange levels except for Figure 6A. For HDX in the presence of urea (Figure 3A), D contents of 76% and 74% were used to account for the volumes of 4.16 M and 4.54 M urea in the “Cl-/D2O Buffer” and the “HEPES/D2O Buffer”, respectively. A hybrid statistical analysis used to generate Figure 1-figure supplement 1 was performed as described by Hageman & Weis, 201940, with significance limits defined at α = 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Prestin responds to transmembrane voltage fluctuations by changing its cross-sectional area, a process underlying the electromotility of outer hair cells and cochlear amplification. Prestin belongs to the SLC26 family of anion transporters yet is the only member capable of displaying electromotility. Prestin's voltage-dependent conformational changes are driven by the putative displacement of residue R399 and a set of sparse charged residues within the transmembrane domain, following the binding of a Cl<sup>-</sup> anion at a conserved binding site formed by the amino termini of the TM3 and TM10 helices. However, a major conundrum arises as to how an anion that binds in proximity to a positive charge (R399), can promote the voltage sensitivity of prestin. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we find that prestin displays an unstable anion-binding site, where folding of the amino termini of TM3 and TM10 is coupled to Cl<sup>-</sup> binding. This event shortens the TM3-TM10 electrostatic gap, thereby connecting the two helices, resulting in reduced cross-sectional area. These folding events upon anion binding are absent in SLC26A9, a non-electromotile transporter closely related to prestin. Dynamics of prestin embedded in a lipid bilayer closely match that in detergent micelle, except for a destabilized lipid-facing helix TM6 that is critical to prestin's mechanical expansion. We observe helix fraying at prestin's anion-binding site but cooperative unfolding of multiple lipid-facing helices, features that may promote prestin's fast electromechanical rearrangements. These results highlight a novel role of the folding equilibrium of the anion-binding site, and help define prestin's unique voltage-sensing mechanism and electromotility.

### Keywords
Voltage-sensing, Protein folding, Hydrogen exchange, Cochlear amplification, Mass spectrometry, Cryo-electron microscopy

### Affiliations
The University of Chicago
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Mechanical Excitability, Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, Prizker School for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA

### Submitter
Xiaoxuan Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Tobin R.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Mechanical Excitability, Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, Prizker School for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA


