### Accession
PXD006935

### Title
Ciliary motility and axonemal dynein pre-assembly in Drosophila require Wdr92 in association with the HSP90 co-chaperone, R2TP

### Description
To clarify the role of Wdr92, and R2TP, in motile cilium formation, we explored its function in Drosophila. We show that Drosophila Wdr92 is a cytoplasmic protein exclusively expressed in motile ciliated cells and is required exclusively for ciliary/flagellar motility. The major effect of its mutation is loss of dynein arms from the axonemes of sensory neuron cilia and sperm flagella. We confirm that Drosophila Wdr92 interacts with R2TP and that R2TP depletion also impairs dynein arm formation. We provide proteomic evidence that Wdr92 is associated especially with heavy chain assembly and propose that it acts as a specificity factor to bring axonemal dynein clients to the R2TP/HSP90 complex. Thus, Wdr92 is a new dynein assembly factor and it strongly reinforces the critical role of HSP90 and co-chaperones in dynein assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted off the beads by incubating at 27°C for 30 minutes in buffer containing 2M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 5 μg/mL Trypsin. Samples were centrifuged and supernatants collected. Bead pellets were washed twice and all supernatants were pooled and allowed to digest further overnight at room temperature. Next day, iodoacetamide was added to the samples to inhibit disulphide bond formation and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes followed by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop tryptic digestion. Digested peptide mixtures were cleaned by de-salting and pre-fractionated manually using C18 pipette stage-tips filled with 3M empore disc activated with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and then washed once with 0.1% TFA. Peptide mixtures were passed manually along to the column with a syringe to concentrate and purify the analytes. Peptides were subsequently eluted twice in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and both eluates were combined. Samples were concentrated and resuspended in 0.1% TFA followed by chromatographic separation on a reprosil column along a 3-32% acetonitrile gradient. The LC setup was attached to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer and ion mass spectra were obtained following HPLC during a tandem MS run. Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software and label-free quantification intensity values were obtained for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software and label-free quantification intensity values were obtained for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The massive dynein motor complexes that drive ciliary and flagellar motility require cytoplasmic preassembly, a process requiring dedicated dynein assembly factors (DNAAFs). How DNAAFs interact with molecular chaperones to control dynein assembly is not clear. By analogy with the well-known multifunctional HSP90-associated cochaperone, R2TP, several DNAAFs have been suggested to perform novel R2TP-like functions. However, the involvement of R2TP itself (canonical R2TP) in dynein assembly remains unclear. Here we show that in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, the R2TP-associated factor, Wdr92, is required exclusively for axonemal dynein assembly, likely in association with canonical R2TP. Proteomic analyses suggest that in addition to being a regulator of R2TP chaperoning activity, Wdr92 works with the DNAAF Spag1 at a distinct stage in dynein preassembly. Wdr92/R2TP function is likely distinct from that of the DNAAFs proposed to form dynein-specific R2TP-like complexes. Our findings thus establish a connection between dynein assembly and a core multifunctional cochaperone.

### Keywords
Primary ciliary dyskinesia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


