### Accession
PXD038990

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of SUM159 cells upon ClpP activation with ONC201 and TR57 compounds

### Description
ClpP activators ONC201 and related small molecules (TR compounds, Madera Therapeutics), have demonstrated significant anti-cancer potential in an array of in vitro and in vivo studies, including clinical trials for refractory solid tumors. Though progress has been made in identifying specific phenotypic outcomes following ClpP activation, the exact mechanism by which ClpP activation leads to broad anti-cancer activity has yet to be fully elucidated. In this study, we utilized a multi-omics approach to identify the ClpP-dependent proteomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic changes resulting from ONC201 or the TR compound TR-57 in triple-negative breast cancer cells.  In this portion of the study, we applied mass spectrometry-based proteomics, and quantified ~8000 proteins. From the proteomics data, approximately 3400 (ONC201) and 3000 (TR-57) proteins increased and ~4600 (ONC201) and ~4800 (TR-57) proteins decreased. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed strong similarities between proteins up- or downregulated by ONC201 or TR-57 treatment. Notably, this included the downregulation of many mitochondrial processes and proteins, including mitochondrial translation and mitochondrial matrix proteins. Additionally, phosphoproteomics analysis was performed, quantifying ~17,000 phosphopetides, of which >800 were significantly upregulated and >1000 were significantly downregulated phosphopeptides across both ONC201 and TR-57 treatments. Between both treatments, 245 upregulated and 477 downregulated phosphopeptides were shared. Multiple kinases were predicted to be activated including ATM, ATR, AMPK and others, while other kinases were predicted to be inactivated including CDK2, CDK4 and AurB.

### Sample Protocol
For whole cell proteomics and phosphoproteomics, SUM159 (WT and ClpP-KO) cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO, 10 μM ONC201, or 150 nM TR-57 for 24 hours. Cells were lysed in 8M urea buffer [8M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 2.5 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2, 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3]. Protein lysates (400 μg) were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56ºC for 30 minutes, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 45 minutes. Protein was precipitated using 4-times the volume of cold acetone and stored overnight at -20ºC. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4ºC, then the protein pellets were reconstituted in 1M urea. Samples were digested with LysC (Wako) for 2 hours and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37ºC at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were acidified, desalted using Thermo desalting spin columns, then the eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined using Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay.  Samples were split into two sets based on drug treatment (ONC201 or TR-57), with sixteen total samples per set, which were labeled with TMTpro (Thermo Fisher). 125 µg of each sample was reconstituted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, then individually labeled with 250 µg of TMTpro reagent for 1 hour at room temperature. Prior to quenching, the labeling efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis of a pooled sample consisting of 1ul of each sample. After confirming >98% efficiency, samples were quenched with 50% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Labeled peptide samples for each set were combined 1:1, desalted using Thermo desalting spin column, and dried via vacuum centrifugation. The dried TMT-labeled samples (two TMT sets total) were fractionated using high pH reversed phase HPLC57. Briefly, the samples were offline fractionated over a 90 minute run, into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1260) using an Agilent Zorbax 300 Extend-C18 column (3.5-µm, 4.6 × 250 mm) with mobile phase A containing 4.5 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) in 2% (vol/vol) LC-MS grade acetonitrile, and mobile phase B containing 4.5 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) in 90% (vol/vol) LC-MS grade acetonitrile. The 96 resulting fractions were then concatenated in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and 5% of each were aliquoted, dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80ºC until further analysis.  The remaining 95% of each fraction was further concatenated into 3 fractions and dried down via vacuum centrifugation. For each fraction, phosphopeptides were enriched with a two-step method, where High Select Fe-NTA kit (Thermo) was first used, and from that enrichment step the flow-through and eluates were collected. Then, with the flow-through of each fraction, the High Select TiO2 kit (Thermo) was used to further enrich for phosphopeptides. Manufacturer protocols were followed for both enrichments. Fe-NTA and TiO2 eluates were dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80ºC until further analysis.  Two sets of 24 fractions for the proteome analysis and two sets of 6 fractions (FeNTA and TiO2 eluates) for the phosphoproteome analysis were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over either a 120-minute method for the proteome fractions or a 150-minute method for the phosphoproteome fractions. For the proteome fractions, the gradient for separation consisted of 5–40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN.  For the proteome fractions, the Lumos was operated in SPS-MS3 mode58 with a 3s cycle time. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) was set to 120,000 with a AGC target set to standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans consisted of CID normalized collision energy (NCE) 32; AGC target set to standard; maximum injection time of 50 ms; isolation window of 0.7 Da. Following MS2 acquisition, MS3 spectra were collected in SPS mode (10 scans per outcome); HCD set to 55; resolution set to 50,000; scan range set to 100-500; AGC target set to 200% with a 100 ms maximum inject time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.  For the phosphoproteome fractions, the Lumos was operated in MS2 mode59,60 with a 3s cycle time. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) was set to 60,000 with a AGC target set to standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For MS2 scans, HCD was set to 35; AGC target set to 200%; maximum injection time of 120 ms; isolation window of 0.7 Da; resolution set to 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For proteome and phosphoproteome data, all raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5. ‘TMTpro 16plex’ was used as the quantitation method. Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database (downloaded Feb 2020 containing 20,350 sequences), appended with a common contaminants database (from MaxQuant, containing 245 sequences), using Sequest HT within Proteome Discoverer. Data were searched with up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites and fixed modifications were set to TMTpro peptide N-terminus and Lys, and carbamidomethyl Cys. Dynamic modifications were set to N-terminal protein acetyl and oxidation Met. Percolator node was used to calculate peptide false discovery rates (FDR).  For phosphoproteome data, additional dynamic modification was set to phosphorylation Ser, Thr, Tyr. TMT quantitation was set to MS2, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide FDR was set to 1%. The ptmRS node was used to localize phosphorylation sites within peptides. Reporter abundance based on intensity and co-isolation threshold was set to 50. Normalization was enabled (‘use all peptides’).  For proteome data, quantitation was set to MS3, precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide FDR was set to 1%. Reporter abundance based on intensity, SPS mass matches threshold set to 50, and razor and unique peptides were used for quantitation. Normalization was enabled (‘use all peptides’). SAMPLE KEY: Samples labeled as 'Set 1':  Sample Name TMTpro LABEL ONC201 8.3.2020 134N DMSO 1 8.4.2020 133C ONC201 8.4.2020 129N DMSO 1 8.17.2020 127C ONC201 8.17.2020 126 DMSO 1 8.18.2020 132N ONC201 8.18.2020 131C ClpP KO DMSO 1 8.16.2020 128N ClpP KO ONC201 8.16.2020 129C ClpP KO DMSO 1 8.14.2020 130N ClpP KO ONC201 8.14.2020 133N ClpP KO ONC201 8.18.2020 132C ClpP KO DMSO 1 8.20.2020 131N ClpP KO ONC201 8.20.2020 128C POOLED 1 127N POOLED 2 130C  Samples labeled as 'Set 2': Sample Name TMTpro LABEL TR57 8.3.2020 132C DMSO 2 8.4.2020 131N TR57 8.4.2020 128N DMSO 2 8.17.2020 128C TR57 8.17.2020 130N DMSO 2 8.18.2020 129N TR57 8.18.2020 131C ClpP KO DMSO 2 8.16.2020 127C ClpP KO TR57 8.16.2020 132N ClpP KO DMSO 2 8.14.2020 133N ClpP KO TR57 8.14.2020 126 ClpP KO TR57 8.18.2020 134N ClpP KO DMSO 2 8.20.2020 129C ClpP KO TR57 8.20.2020 133C POOLED 1 127N POOLED 2 130C

### Publication Abstract
ClpP activators ONC201 and related small molecules (TR compounds, Madera Therapeutics), have demonstrated significant anti-cancer potential in <i>vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> studies, including clinical trials for refractory solid tumors. Though progress has been made in identifying specific phenotypic outcomes following ClpP activation, the exact mechanism by which ClpP activation leads to broad anti-cancer activity has yet to be fully elucidated. In this study, we utilized a multi-omics approach to identify the ClpP-dependent proteomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic changes resulting from ONC201 or the TR compound TR-57 in triple-negative breast cancer cells. Applying mass spectrometry-based methods of proteomics and metabolomics, we identified &#x223c;8,000 proteins and 588 metabolites, respectively. From proteomics data, 113 (ONC201) and 191 (TR-57) proteins significantly increased and 572 (ONC201) and 686 (TR-57) proteins significantly decreased in this study. Gene ontological (GO) analysis revealed strong similarities between proteins up- or downregulated by ONC201 or TR-57 treatment. Notably, this included the downregulation of many mitochondrial processes and proteins, including mitochondrial translation and mitochondrial matrix proteins. We performed a large-scale transcriptomic analysis of WT SUM159 cells, identifying &#x223c;7,700 transcripts (746 and 1,100 significantly increasing, 795 and 1,013 significantly decreasing in ONC201 and TR-57 treated cells, respectively). Less than 21% of these genes were affected by these compounds in ClpP null cells. GO analysis of these data demonstrated additional similarity of response to ONC201 and TR-57, including a decrease in transcripts related to the mitochondrial inner membrane and matrix, cell cycle, and nucleus, and increases in other nuclear transcripts and transcripts related to metal-ion binding. Comparison of response between both compounds demonstrated a highly similar response in all -omics datasets. Analysis of metabolites also revealed significant similarities between ONC201 and TR-57 with increases in &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate and 2-hydroxyglutaric acid and decreased ureidosuccinic acid, L-ascorbic acid, L-serine, and cytidine observed following ClpP activation in TNBC cells. Further analysis identified multiple pathways that were specifically impacted by ClpP activation, including ATF4 activation, heme biosynthesis, and the citrulline/urea cycle. In summary the results of our studies demonstrate that ONC201 and TR-57 induce highly similar and broad effects against multiple mitochondrial processes required for cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Drug mechanism, Clpp, Drug development, Cancer

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Pharmacology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Lee Graves
Department of Pharmacology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


