### Accession
PXD046193

### Title
Multi-omics analysis reveals concerted molecular responses to heat stress in a “red tide” dinoflagellate

### Description
Harmful algal blooms are induced largely by nutrient enrichment common in warm waters. An increasingly frequent phenomenon is the “red tide”: blooms of dinoflagellate microalgae that accumulate toxins lethal to other organisms in high doses. Here, we present the de novo assembled genome (~4.75 Gbp) of Prorocentrum cordatum, a globally abundant, bloom-forming dinoflagellate, and the associated transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome data from axenic cultures to elucidate the microalgal molecular responses to heat stress. We discovered, in a high-G+C genome with long introns and extensive genetic duplication, a complementary mechanism between RNA editing and exon usage that regulates dynamic expression and functional diversity of genes and proteins, and metabolic profiles that reflect reduced capacities in photosynthesis, central metabolism, and protein synthesis. These results based on multi-omics evidence demonstrate the genomic hallmark of a bloom-forming dinoflagellate, and how the complex gene structures combined with multi-level transcriptional regulation underpin concerted heat-stress responses.

### Sample Protocol
Cells of P. cordatum were resuspended in solubilization buffer and disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24 5G, MP Biomedical, Eschwege, Germany) for 10 s at 6 m/s followed by 90 s on ice (in three repetitions) using 0.1 mm silica spheres. Cell debris and insoluble material was removed by ultracentrifugation (104,000 g, 1 h, 17°C) and the supernatant was again centrifuged (200,000 g, 1 h, 17°C). The protein content of the preparation was determined according to Bradford; 50 µg was subjected to reduction, alkylation and tryptic digest as reported previously. Generated peptides were separated using a nanoLC system (nanoRSLC; Thermo Scientific, Germering, Bavaria, Germany) operated in trap-column mode (2 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, 5 µm bead size; Thermo Scientific), equipped with a 25-cm separation column (75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm bead size; Thermo Scientific) and applying a 130-min linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations [Wöhlbrand et al. 2017]. The eluent was continuously ionized (captive spray ion source; Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and analysed by an ion trap (amaZon speed ETD; Bruker Daltonik GmbH). The instrument was operated in positive mode with a capillary current of 1.3 kV and drygas flow of 3 L/min at 150°C. Active precursor exclusion was set for 0.2 min. Per full scan MS, 20 MS/MS spectra of the most intense masses were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Mascot (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK) via the ProteinScape platform (version 4.2; Bruker Daltonik GmbH) against the genomic database of P. cordatum. A target-decoy strategy with a false discovery rate <1.0% was applied together with following settings: enzyme = trypsin, missed cleavage allowed  = 1, carbamidomethylation (C) = fixed, oxidation (M) = variable modification, peptide and MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.3 Da, monoisotopic mode, peptide charge = 2+ and 3+, instrument type = ESI-TRAP, significance threshold p < 0.05, ion score cutoff = 25.0, and minimum peptide length = 5. Search results of individual searches per sample were compiled using the ProteinExtractor function of ProteinScape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prorocentrum cordatum, Dinoflagellate, Harmful algal bloo

### Affiliations
General and Molecular Microbiology
General and molecular microbiology, Institute for chemistry and biology of the marine environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany

### Submitter
Lars Wöhlbrand

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Rabus
General and molecular microbiology, Institute for chemistry and biology of the marine environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany


