### Accession
PXD036933

### Title
Complexome profiling of heart mitochondria from WT and ClpP-/- mice

### Description
Mutations in the gene for the mitochondrial matrix protease CLPP can cause human Perrault syndrome, which is characterized by male and female infertility, progressive sensorineural deafness, ataxia and leukoencephalopathy. This gene encodes a peptidase that is conserved since bacteria and localizes to mitochondrial matrix in eukaryotes. To assess the assembly and stability of mitochondrial complexes heart tissue of WT and ClpP-/- mice was dissected and enriched mitochondrial fraction was used for complexome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from heart tissues from WT and ClpP-/- mice (n=1) (Giese et al. 2021).  Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis were essentially performed as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Briefly, mitochondria were resuspended in 40 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% (w/v) digitonin (Serva. Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).  Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 25 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min followed by a second gradient to 50% B with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v2.0.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 55470 entries, released in 4/2021. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between control and mutant.  Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial CI (979577 Da), CII (122945 Da) CIII dimer (483272 Da), CIV (213172 Da), CV (537939 Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing CI, III dimer and one copy of CIV (1676021Da) was used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].   Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28.   Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.   Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial matrix peptidase CLPP is crucial during cell stress. Its loss causes Perrault syndrome type 3 (PRLTS3) with infertility, neurodegeneration, and a growth deficit. Its target proteins are disaggregated by CLPX, which also regulates heme biosynthesis via unfolding ALAS enzymes, providing access for pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP). Despite efforts in diverse organisms with multiple techniques, CLPXP substrates remain controversial. Here, avoiding recombinant overexpression, we employed complexomics in mitochondria from three mouse tissues to identify endogenous targets. A CLPP absence caused the accumulation and dispersion of CLPX-VWA8 as AAA+ unfoldases, and of PLPBP. Similar changes and CLPX-VWA8 co-migration were evident for mitoribosomal central protuberance clusters, translation factors like GFM1-HARS2, the RNA granule components LRPPRC-SLIRP, and enzymes OAT-ALDH18A1. Mitochondrially translated proteins in testes showed reductions to &lt;30% for MTCO1-3, the mis-assembly of the complex IV supercomplex, and accumulated metal-binding assembly factors COX15-SFXN4. Indeed, heavy metal levels were increased for iron, molybdenum, cobalt, and manganese. RT-qPCR showed compensatory downregulation only for <i>Clpx</i> mRNA; most accumulated proteins appeared transcriptionally upregulated. Immunoblots validated VWA8, MRPL38, MRPL18, GFM1, and OAT accumulation. Co-immunoprecipitation confirmed CLPX binding to MRPL38, GFM1, and OAT, so excess CLPX and PLP may affect their activity. Our data mechanistically elucidate the mitochondrial translation fidelity deficits which underlie progressive hearing impairment in PRLTS3.

### Keywords
Protease function, Complexome profiling

### Affiliations
Experimental Neurology, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
University Hospital Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Jana Key

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Auburger
Experimental Neurology, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


