### Accession
PXD007700

### Title
Extracellular Matrix proteomics

### Description
Proteomics of extracellular matrix from fibroblast cell cultures (WI-38). The results of these experiments were used to supprt an electron microscopy study of the extracellular matrix.

### Sample Protocol
ECM was extracted from WI-38 fibroblast cells, a few days after reaching confluency. The cells were removed from the ECM and then the ECM eas extracted by either Urea or Guanidine and physical scraping. Urea samples were cleaved in solution by Lys-c/Trypsin. Gluanidine samples were deglycosylated prior to seperation on gel and trypsin clevage. Deglycosylation was preform by either enzyme mixture (mix II from NEB) or chemically by TFMS.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched with SearchGUI using Andromeda, X!Tandem, and myrimatch search engines. Additional variable modifications (HexNac on S,T, or N) were used for the deglycosylated samples.

### Publication Abstract
Cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) are mutually interdependent: cells guide self-assembly of ECM precursors, and the resulting ECM architecture supports and instructs cells. Though bidirectional signaling between ECM and cells is fundamental to cell biology, it is challenging to gain high-resolution structural information on cellular responses to the matrix microenvironment. Here we used cryo-scanning transmission electron tomography (CSTET) to reveal the nanometer- to micron-scale organization of major fibroblast ECM components in a native-like context, while simultaneously visualizing internal cell ultrastructure including organelles and cytoskeleton. In addition to extending current models for collagen VI fibril organization, three-dimensional views of thick cell regions and surrounding matrix showed how ECM networks impact the structures and dynamics of intracellular organelles and how cells remodel ECM. Collagen VI and fibronectin were seen to distribute in fundamentally different ways in the cell microenvironment and perform distinct roles in supporting and interacting with cells. This work demonstrates that CSTET provides a new perspective for the study of ECM in cell biology, highlighting labeled extracellular elements against a backdrop of unlabeled but morphologically identifiable cellular features with nanometer resolution detail.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Instittue of Science, Israel
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Gad Armony

### Lab Head
Dr Deborah Fass
Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Instittue of Science, Israel


