### Accession
PXD011322

### Title
KRAB Zincfinger Interactome -  The interactome of KRAB zinc finger proteins reveals the evolutionary history of their functional diversification

### Description
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-containing zinc finger proteins (KZFPs) represent the largest family of human transcription factors. The majority of its members bind to Transposable Elements (TEs), which they repress through the recruitment of the repressor KAP1 to their conserved KRAB domain. In addition to this recognized role, some KZFPs seem to favor different types of loci such as transcription start sites or display diverse functions such as imprinting and gene regulation. Intriguingly, a subset of KZFPs was shown not to recruit the corepressor KAP1. Therefore, we sought to get a better picture of KZFPs putative roles and their association with KAP1. In order to do so, we generated the interactomes of 101 KZFPs through Affinity Purification followed by Mass Spectrometry (AP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
101 HA-tagged human KZFPs were individually expressed as HA- tagged bait proteins in 293T cells. The protein interactome was determined by affinity-purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) essentially as previously described (Varjosalo et al., 2013). KZFP-HA-expressing 293T cells were DSP-fixed and lysed and resulting crude lysates treated with benzonase nuclease to remove nucleic acids and indirectly bound factors. Immunoprecipitates from an HA-specific antibody were digested by trypsin and peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer, acquiring MS/MS scans of the top 15 most-intense precursors over 90 min gradient time of injection. All affinity purifications were performed in biological duplicate, with negative controls GFP-HA and non-transduced HEK293T cells. Mass spectrometry was performed in technical duplicate and in overall 28 batches.

### Data Protocol
LCMS spectra were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human database supplemented with common contaminants, tag sequences and reversed decoys (tag: DECOY_, Swissprot release: May 2015, fasta file included with this submission) using four different search engines (XTandem 2013.06.15.1 with native score; Omssa 2.1.9; MyriMatch 2.1.138 and Comet 2015.02 rev. 3) and results integrated using peptideprophet and proteinprophet of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010) and within the iPortal compute infrastructure. Spectral counts and peptides for ProteinProphet were filtered at FDR of 0.01 iprophet-pepFDR. Only proteotypic peptides (unique to one protein in the database) were used for quantification, reporting only proteins passing 1 % protein FDR as etimated by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Kr&#xfc;ppel-associated box (KRAB)-containing zinc finger proteins (KZFPs) are encoded in the hundreds by the genomes of higher vertebrates, and many act with the heterochromatin-inducing KAP1 as repressors of transposable elements (TEs) during early embryogenesis. Yet, their widespread expression in adult tissues and enrichment at other genetic loci indicate additional roles. Here, we characterized the protein interactome of 101 of the ~350 human KZFPs. Consistent with their targeting of TEs, most KZFPs conserved up to placental mammals essentially recruit KAP1 and associated effectors. In contrast, a subset of more ancient KZFPs rather interacts with factors related to functions such as genome architecture or RNA processing. Nevertheless, KZFPs from coelacanth, our most distant KZFP-encoding relative, bind the cognate KAP1. These results support a hypothetical model whereby KZFPs first emerged as TE-controlling repressors, were continuously renewed by turnover of their hosts' TE loads, and occasionally produced derivatives that escaped this evolutionary flushing by development and exaptation of novel functions.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Zincfinger, Krab, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich Faculty of Science, University of Zurich
Lund University

### Submitter
Moritz Heusel

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich Faculty of Science, University of Zurich


