### Accession
PXD039718

### Title
The thigh muscle metabolic response is linked to feed efficiency and meat characteristics in slow-growing chicken

### Description
Since the effect of selection for better feed efficiency on meat characteristics is largely unknown. Thus, the aim of this study was to identify key proteins and pathways regulating both FE traits and meat characteristics. At ten weeks of age, thigh muscle samples from six birds (three with high FCR and three with low FCR value) were selected, and their proteomes were investigated using a label-free proteomic method. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was used to screen the key protein modules and pathways.  We found that glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, metabolic pathway, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids, pyruvate metabolism, and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum play a key role underlying these two traits. Thus, selection practices for KR should simultaneously consider both trait groups to maintain the high meat quality of slow-growing chicken while improving FE.

### Sample Protocol
Thigh muscle tissue from six samples were freeze-dried and grounded into a fine powder. Samples were lysed in denaturing buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 8M urea: AMBIC, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) using the sonication method. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4˚C. The collected proteins were diluted with 50 mM AMBIC (final concentration of 1.5 M urea). Protein quantifications were then determined with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (a final concentration of 5 mM) for 20 min at 50-60˚C. Then, iodoacetamide (final concentration of 15 mM) was added to the protein samples and incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark environment, followed by protein digestion with 2 μg of trypsin at 37˚C for 24 h.

### Data Protocol
1.) Raw MS files from Orbitrap mass spectrometry were processed using version 1.6.5.0 of MaxQuant. The mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot Gallus gallus database (34,925 total entries). Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin specificity. Data searches were conducted with variable modifications of oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term), and carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The initial mass precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 6 ppm in the first search and the main search, respectively. Furthermore, fragment (MS/MS) mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identification were set to 0.01. 2.) Protein abundance was defined by the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Prior to bioinformatics analysis the data were normalization and missing values were imputed. 3.) The over-representation analysis (ORA) of gene ontology (GO) enrichment, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis were performed using STRING platform against Gallus gallus database. The GO enriched proteins and KEGG pathways were considered enriched with p-value < 0.05, correcting by FDR with Benjamini-Hochberg method (p-adjust < 0.05). Finally, Wight Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) was conducted to investigate the relationship between feed efficiency and meat characteristics.

### Publication Abstract
The Korat chicken (KR) is a slow-growing Thai chicken breed with relatively poor feed efficiency (FE) but very tasty meat with high protein and low fat contents, and a unique texture. To enhance the competitiveness of KR, its FE should be improved. However, selecting for FE has an unknown effect on meat characteristics. Thus, understanding the genetic basis underlying FE traits and meat characteristics is needed. In this study, 75 male KR birds were raised up to 10 wk of age. For each bird, the feed conversion ratio (FCR), residual feed intake (RFI), and physicochemical properties, flavor precursors, and biological compounds in the thigh meat were evaluated. At 10 wk of age, thigh muscle samples from 6 birds (3 with high FCR and 3 with low FCR values) were selected, and their proteomes were investigated using a label-free proteomic method. Weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was used to screen the key protein modules and pathways. The WGCNA results revealed that FE and meat characteristics significantly correlated with the same protein module. However, the correlation was unfavorable; improving FE may result in a decrease in meat quality through the alteration in biological processes including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, metabolic pathway, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids, pyruvate metabolism, and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum. The hub proteins of the significant module (TNNT1, TNNT3, TNNI2, TNNC2, MYLPF, MYH10, GADPH, PGK1, LDHA, and GPI) were also identified to be associated with energy metabolism, and muscle growth and development. Given that the same proteins and pathways are present in FE and meat characteristics but in opposite directions, selection practices for KR should simultaneously consider both trait groups to maintain the high meat quality of KR while improving FE.

### Keywords
Meat characteristics, Slow-growing chicken

### Affiliations
Suranaree University of Technology
School of Animal Technology and Innovation

### Submitter
Pramin Kaewsatuan

### Lab Head
Dr Amonrat Molee
School of Animal Technology and Innovation


