### Accession
PXD043741

### Title
Proteomics of larval secreted proteins for Leptopilina boulardi and Leptopilina heterotoma

### Description
Identification of larval secreted proteins of Drosophila parasitoids, Leptopilina boulardi (Lb) and Leptopilina heterotoma (Lh).

### Sample Protocol
Venom protein fluid was solubilized in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, 1mM DTT, pH 7.6). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 30 kD) using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The protein suspensions were digested with trypsin (Promega) in 100mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. Peptide fragmentation using C18 Cartridge After the peptides were lyophilized, 0.1% formic acid solution was added to reconstitute, and the peptides were quantified (OD280). The peptide separation was performed using the Easy nLC HPLC liquid system with nanoliter flow rates. The peptides were separated by chromatography and analyzed by mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The original file (raw file) was analyzed by pfind3 (version 3.2). The database search parameters are set as follows: enzyme is Trypsin; missed cleavage sites are set to 2; fixed modification is Carbamidomethyl; dynamic modification is set to Oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larval secreted proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Leptopilina parasitoids

### Affiliations
Institute of Insect Sciences, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Zhi Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Huang
Institute of Insect Sciences, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, China


