### Accession
PXD011522

### Title
Galectin-8 facilitates B cell responses to surface-tethered antigens by promoting antigen extraction at the B cell synapse

### Description
Complete activation of B cells relies on their capacity to extract surface-tethered 35  antigens at the immune synapse by either exerting mechanical forces or promoting 36  their proteolytic degradation through lysosome secretion. Whether antigen extraction 37  can be tuned by local cues originating from the lymphoid microenvironment has not 38  been investigated. We here show that Galectin-8 – an extracellular glycan-binding 39  protein that regulates interactions between cells and matrix proteins – facilitates 40  synapse formation upon BCR recognition of surface-tethered antigens. As a 41  consequence of this, B cell arrest phases are longer in the presence of Galectin-8, 42  which translates in increased antigen extraction and presentation to T lymphocytes in 43  vivo. We further show that Galectin-8 triggers a faster recruitment and secretion of 44  lysosomes at the B cell-antigen contact site, suggesting that enhanced antigen 45  extraction in the presence of Galectin-8 might result from increased antigen 46  proteolysis. Thus, extracellular cues can determine how B cells sense and extract 47  surface-tethered antigens and thereby tune B cell responses in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates from primary spleen B cells (1.2mg total proteins) were incubated with GST beads for 90 min at 4ºC and then incubated with GST-Galectin8 beads for 90 min at 4°C. Beads were then extensively washed and binding partners eluted with 200 mM Lactose in 1x cold PBS. Eluates were adjusted to 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 0.02 % SDS and denatured at 95°C for 5 min and after cooling incubated with 42 U/ml PNGase F (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 37°C to deglycosylate the proteins. Eluated proteins were then precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and separated using NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12 % gels in MOPS buffer (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with coomassie blue. Three plugs for each sample were cut and after destaining steps in-gel trypsin digestion was performed. Proteins from plugs were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated with 20 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 12.5 µg/ml sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Resulting digested peptides from each plugs were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-spray nanoelectrospray ion source and an Easy nano-LC Proxeon 1000 liquid chromatography system (all from Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved by an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column and a PepMap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The solvent gradient consisted of 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) over 98 minutes for a total gradient time of 2 hours. The orbitrap cell analyzed the peptides in full ion scan mode, with the resolution set at 120 000 with a m/z range of 350 - 1550. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 28 % was used for peptide fragmentation with a quadruple isolation width of 1.6 Da. The linear ion trap was employed in top-speed mode in order to acquire the MS/MS data. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 250 ms for MS acquisition and 60 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) and with an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The following modifications were allowed: oxidation (M), carbamidomethylation (Cys), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (N-term of protein), deamidation (Asn, Gln). The SwissProt database (10/2014) with the Mus musculus taxonomy was used. Peptide FDR (False Discovery Rate) were calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Protein were considered as identified if their mascot scores were above 50 and if more than 2 peptides per protein were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Galectin-8, B-lymphocytes, Processing and presentation, Mouse immunization, Immune synapse, Polarity, Antigen extraction

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile  Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology  Av. B. O’Higgins 340. Santiago,  Chile Phone: 56-2-23541843

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Dr María Isabel Yuseff
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile  Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology  Av. B. O’Higgins 340. Santiago,  Chile Phone: 56-2-23541843


