### Accession
PXD027190

### Title
Phosphoproteomics provides novel insights into the response of primary acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells to microtubule depolymerization in G1 phase of the cell cycle

### Description
Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) have been used for the treatment of cancer for many decades and are among the most successful chemotherapeutic agents.  However, their application and effectiveness is limited because of toxicity and resistance as well as a lack of knowledge of molecular mechanisms downstream of microtubule inhibition.  Insight into key pathways that link microtubule disruption to cell death is critical for optimal use of these drugs, for defining biomarkers useful in patient stratification, and for informed design of drug combinations.  Although MTAs characteristically induce death in mitosis, microtubule destabilizing agents such as vincristine also induce death directly in G1 phase in primary acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells.  Because many signaling pathways regulating cell survival and death involve changes in protein expression and phosphorylation, we undertook a comprehensive quantitative proteomic study of G1 phase ALL cells treated with vincristine.  The results revealed distinct alterations associated with c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling, anti-proliferative signaling, the DNA damage response, and cytoskeletal remodeling.  Signals specifically associated with cell death were identified by pre-treatment with the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib, which caused G1 arrest and precluded death induction.  These results provide insight into signaling mechanisms regulating cellular responses to microtubule inhibition, and provide a foundation for a better understanding of the clinical mechanisms of MTAs and for the design of novel drug combinations.

### Sample Protocol
Primary ALL-5 cells were maintained in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium containing 10 µg/mL cholesterol, 6 mg/mL human serum albumin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 2% v/v amphotericin-B/penicillin/streptomycin, 1 µg/mL insulin, 200 µg/mL Fe3+ saturated human APO-transferrin, and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol, as described previously,22, 32 and passaged and utilized up to P20.  Cells in G1 phase of the cell cycle were obtained by centrifugal elutriation using a Beckman JE-5.0 elutriation rotor as previously described with slight modifications.22, 32  Briefly, ALL-5 cells (4-8 x108) were suspended in 25 mL of elutriation buffer (Hank’s buffered salt solution containing 1.6 g/L 2-naphthol-6,8-disulfonic acid dipotassium salt and 2% fetal bovine serum), passed through a 25G needle twice, and introduced into the elutriation chamber at a flow rate of 25 mL/min with a rotor speed of 3,000 rpm.  Rotor speed was reduced to 2,920 rpm to collect the F1 wash fraction and then to 2,620 rpm to collect the F2 fraction containing cells in G1 phase.  The proportion of cells in G1 phase in a typical preparation was 98-99% as determined by DNA content analysis using propidium iodide staining.32   Elutriated G1 phase cells were suspended in growth medium at 1.25 x 106/mL and 8 ml (107 cells) treated either with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or 100 nM VCR for 12 h in duplicate.  The concentration of VCR of 100 nM was previously established as being optimal for inducing death of G1 phase ALL cells.33  In some cases cells were pretreated with the CDK4/6 inhibitor PCB at 1 µM for 72 h prior to treating with vehicle or VCR.   After treatment, cells were washed in phosphate-buffered saline, pelleted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at  80°C.  Biological triplicate samples from the treatment groups were analyzed by high resolution mass spectrometry. Cell pellets were lysed in 0.1 mL of RIPA buffer (Pierce 89900) containing a cocktail of both protease inhibitors (Sigma P8340) and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce A32957). Phosphoproteomics sample preparation followed the same workflow as described in Storey et al.34  Briefly, proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with sequencing grade trypsin/LysC (Promega VA5071) using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP).  The resulting peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo 90113). The bulk of the peptides (90%) were enriched using High-Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo A32993 and A32992, respectively) following the manufacturer’s instructions, while 10% of the peptides were sequenced for a total proteome analysis.  Both enriched and un-enriched labeled peptides were separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions.  Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile, each adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide.  Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 µm resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo).  Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters.  MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.  Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 31.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range.  Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 55.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z. The sample TMT label design is included in Supplemental Table S1.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and TMT MS3 reporter ions quantified by searching the UniprotKB Homo sapiens database (June 2018) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16, Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da, trypsin/P enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, acetyl on protein N-terminus, phosphorylation on STY, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on C.  Protein and peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery.  TMT MS3 corrected reporter ion intensity values were analyzed for changes in total protein using the unenriched lysate samples.  Phospho(STY) modifications were analyzed using the samples enriched for phosphorylated peptides. The enriched and un-enriched samples were multiplexed using two separate TMT10-plex batches, one for the enriched and one for the un-enriched samples. Following data acquisition and database search, the search results were normalized and sample quality verified using ProteiNorm, a user-friendly tool for a systematic evaluation of normalization methods, imputation of missing values, and comparisons of different differential abundance methods.35  The protein and phosphopeptide data were normalized using cyclic loess.36  Linear models were then fitted to the expression data using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma 3.46.0) lmFit function, and differential abundance evaluated using robust empirical Bayes (eBayes) to protect against hyper-variable and hypo-variable proteins/phosphopeptides.34, 37  Proteins and phosphopeptides with an absolute fold-change > 2 and a FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.38  The phosphosites were filtered to retain only peptides with a localization probability > 75%, filter peptides with zero values, and log2 transformed prior to differential abundance analysis with limma. Gene set enrichment analysis for the protein data set was performed using Ensemble of Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (EGSEA) to identify key pathways.39, 40  Modified phosphosite flanking peptides were evaluated using PHOsphosite-X-TRacing Analysis of Causal Kinases (PHOXTRACK) to identify kinases and their substrates.41  The 13-mer phosphosite flanking peptides (+/- 6 amino acids) and corresponding log2 fold-changes obtained for each comparison were used as input.  Kinase activity/enrichment of known kinase substrates was assessed using 50,000 permutations, requiring a minimum number of 3 substrates, unweighted statistics.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) have been used for the treatment of cancer for many decades and are among the most successful chemotherapeutic agents. However, their application and effectiveness are limited because of toxicity and resistance as well as a lack of knowledge of molecular mechanisms downstream of microtubule inhibition. Insights into key pathways that link microtubule disruption to cell death is critical for optimal use of these drugs, for defining biomarkers useful in patient stratification, and for informed design of drug combinations. Although MTAs characteristically induce death in mitosis, microtubule destabilizing agents such as vincristine also induce death directly in G1 phase in primary acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells. Because many signaling pathways regulating cell survival and death involve changes in protein expression and phosphorylation, we undertook a comprehensive quantitative proteomic study of G1 phase ALL cells treated with vincristine. The results revealed distinct alterations associated with c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling, anti-proliferative signaling, the DNA damage response, and cytoskeletal remodeling. Signals specifically associated with cell death were identified by pre-treatment with the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib, which caused G1 arrest and precluded death induction. These results provide insights into signaling mechanisms regulating cellular responses to microtubule inhibition and provide a foundation for a better understanding of the clinical mechanisms of MTAs and for the design of novel drug combinations. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the PRIDE Archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD027190 and 10.6019/PXD027190.

### Keywords
Microtubule-targeting agents; vincristine; microtubules; acute lymphoblastic leukemia; palbociclib; phosphoproteomics; c-jun; c-jun n-terminal kinase; dna damage response

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy C. Chambers
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA


