### Accession
PXD018390

### Title
CIS deficiency intensifies GM-CSF signaling to polarize alternative activated macrophages

### Description
GM-CSF paradoxically possesses ability to differentiate both classically activated macrophages (MØs) with dominant proinflammatory function (M1-like MØs) and alternative activated MØs with strong immunosuppressive function (M2-like MØs). The intrinsic regulatory mechanism responsible for functional polarization of MØs under GM-CSF signalling remains elusive. Here we revealed that cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS), induced by GM-CSF, is a key determinant in controlling MØ polarization. Compared to WT MØs, Cish-/- MØs gained characteristics of alternative activated MØs (M2 MØs), showing high expression of prototypic M2 markers Arginase 1, Tgm2 and YM-1; strong suppression of T cell proliferation; and low production of IL-12 and other proinflammatory cytokines¬¬. Differing from canonical IL-4/STAT6/IRF4 signaling axis of M2 induction, development of M2 MØ characteristics in Cish-/- MØs was associated with intensified STAT5 activation and consequent IRF8 downregulation. Attenuation of GM-CSF signalling via JAK inhibition and IRF8 rescue corrected certain functional defects in Cish-/- MØs. As CIS inhibition in NK and T cells promotes anti-tumour immunity, we showed that CIS deficiency enhanced the development of intra-tumoural M2 MØs and reduced CTL induction within tumour microenvironment with elevated GM-CSF. Overall, we conclude that CIS acts as an intrinsic rheostat to control intense GM-CSF signalling in order to maintain proinflammatory functions of MØs. Targeting CIS as a checkpoint in cancer immunotherapy should consider its role in regulating myeloid cell function.

### Sample Protocol
Primary myeloid cells were harvested from CIS KO and WT mice (1- 1.5 million/replicate, n= 4) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the SP3 protocol. On bead enzymatic digest (Trypsin/LysC) was performed for 1 hour followed by C18 stage tip clean up. Peptides were analysed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q-Exactive HF coupled to a Easy-nLC 1000 system.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (October 2016). "Match between runs" and LFQ quantification were selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2. Statistical analyses were performed using LFQAnalyst (https://bioinformatics.erc.monash.edu/apps/LFQ-Analyst/) whereby the LFQ intensity values were used for protein quantification. Missing values were replaced by values drawn from a normal distribution of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 for each sample (Perseus-type). Protein-wise linear models combined with empirical Bayes statistics were used for differential expression analysis using Bioconductor package Limma whereby the adjusted p-value cutoff was set at 0.05 and log2 fold change cutoff set at 1. The Benjamini-Hochberg method of FDR correction was used.

### Publication Abstract
The cytokine granulocyte-macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) possesses the capacity to differentiate monocytes into macrophages (M&#xd8;s) with opposing functions, namely, proinflammatory M1-like M&#xd8;s and immunosuppressive M2-like M&#xd8;s. Despite the importance of these opposing biological outcomes, the intrinsic mechanism that regulates the functional polarization of M&#xd8;s under GM-CSF signaling remains elusive. Here, we showed that GM-CSF-induced M&#xd8; polarization resulted in the expression of cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CIS) and that CIS deficiency skewed the differentiation of monocytes toward immunosuppressive M2-like M&#xd8;s. CIS deficiency resulted in hyperactivation of the JAK-STAT5 signaling pathway, consequently promoting downregulation of the transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 8 (IRF8). Loss- and gain-of-function approaches highlighted IRF8 as a critical regulator of the M1-like polarization program. In vivo, CIS deficiency induced the differentiation of M2-like macrophages, which promoted strong Th2 immune responses characterized by the development of severe experimental asthma. Collectively, our results reveal a CIS-modulated mechanism that clarifies the opposing actions of GM-CSF in M&#xd8; differentiation and uncovers the role of GM-CSF in controlling allergic inflammation.

### Keywords
Gm-csf, Macrophage polarization, Tumour immunity, Cis

### Affiliations
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow Lew Laboratory Immunology Division The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Yifan Zhan
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow Lew Laboratory Immunology Division The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia


