### Accession
PXD042774

### Title
DIA/SWATH-MS analysis of Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1 collected at four time points of batch culture growth

### Description
Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) is a mass spectrometry-based method to reliably identify and reproducibly quantify large fractions of a target proteome. The peptide-centric data analysis strategy employed in DIA requires a priori generated spectral assay libraries. Such assay libraries allow to extract quantitative data in a targeted approach and have been generated for human, mouse, zebrafish, E. coli and few other organisms. However, a spectral assay library for the extreme halophilic archaeon Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1, a model organism that contributed to several notable discoveries, is not publicly available yet. Here, we report a comprehensive spectral assay library to measure 2,563 of 2,646 annotated H. salinarum NRC-1 proteins. We demonstrate the utility of this library by measuring global protein abundances over time under standard growth conditions. The H. salinarum NRC-1 library includes 21,074 distinct peptides representing 97% of the predicted proteome and provides a new, valuable resource to confidently measure and quantify any protein of this archaeon.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture H. salinarum sp. NRC-1 (ATCC700922) was cultured in nutrient-rich complex medium: 250 g/L NaCl, 20 g/L MgSO4•7H2O, 3 g/L sodium citrate, 2 g/L KCl and 10 g/L peptone. Cultures were grown in unbaffled flasks with 40% of the flask volume occupied by the culture and illuminated at ~20 μmol/m2/s in Innova9400 incubators (New Brunswick). Cultures for the time-course analysis were inoculated to a starting optical density OD600 0.02 with starter culture of OD600 0.5 derived from a single colony. Cultures were grown in triplicate and samples harvested at four time points: early exponential growth phase (OD600 0.2; 14.3 h; TP1), mid- exponential growth phase (OD600 0.5; 21.5 h; TP2), late exponential growth phase (OD600 0.8; 28.8 h; TP3), and stationary phase (40.8 h; TP4). The final time point was selected to be 12 hours past the log-stationary transition since OD600 readings are not representative of cell growth in H. salinarum NRC-1 in stationary phase. Cells at each time point were collected by centrifugation (8,000 x g, 2 min, 4 °C) for proteome analysis and RNA sequencing.  Sample preparation Cell pellets were resuspended in 750 µL Milli-Q water and disrupted at 4 °C using three 2.8 mm ceramic beads (Mo Bio Laboratories) and a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Corp) at 6500 rpm for 3 x 30 s followed by 6,800 rpm for 2 x 30 s, resting for 1 min between cycles. The protein content was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) (Thermo-Fisher). Proteins were reduced with 5mM Dithiothreitol (DDT, 45 min, 37 °C), alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, 30 min, room temperature, darkness), followed by quenching of unreacted IAM with 5 mM DTT (15 min, room temperature, darkness). Samples were diluted 1:1 with 125 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio at 37 °C for 16 h. The digest was dried under centrifugal evaporation (Savant, Thermo-Fisher).  DIA/SWATH acquisition of time-course samples DIA/SWATH was performed on a TripleTOF® 5600+ equipped with a Nanospray-III® Source (Sciex) and an Ekspert™ nanoLC 425 with cHiPLC® system operated in trap-elute mode (Eksigent). Samples were loaded on a cHiPLC trap (200 µm x 500 µm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) and washed for 10 minutes at 2 µL/min. Peptides were eluted on a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) with 0.1% formic acid in water (A), 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) (v/v) using a gradient from 3% to 33% B in 120 min, 33%-63% B from 120-128 min and 63%-83% B from 128-132 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. DIA/SWATH data were collected with a MS/MSALL SWATH™ acquisition method using 100 variable acquisition windows, each with a 1 Da overlap with the previous window. Q1 was scanned from 400-1,250 Da and MS/MS spectra were acquired from 100-1,700 Da with an accumulation time of 29 msec per SWATH window. A TOF-MS scan was acquired with 250 msec accumulation time for a total cycle time of 3.2 sec.

### Data Protocol
DIA/SWATH data analysis with Spectronaut DIA/SWATH data were processed with Spectronaut (version 14.10.201222.47784, Biognosys) and the developed SWATH 100 variable window assay library (HsalinarumNRC1_VNG_100vw_pv.txt). Raw data files (.wiff) were converted to HTRMS format with the Spectronaut HTRMS converter (version 12.0.20491.2.35869). Default settings were used for the targeted data extraction. Briefly, data extraction mass tolerance (MS1 and MS2) was set to dynamic with a correction factor of 1, dynamic extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) RT window was enabled with a correction factor of 1 and local (non-linear) RT regression. Decoy assays were dynamically generated using the scrambled decoy method and library size fraction set to 1. Identification was performed using the normal distribution estimator with precursor and protein identification results with a q-value (FDR) cutoff of <0.01. For quantification, interference correction was enabled, MS2 ion peak areas of quantified peptides were summed to estimate the protein peak areas, and area under the curve within integration boundaries as quantity type selected. Identified precursor quantities were normalized using the global normalization function (median) built-in Spectronaut. In condition setup, the four time points sampled in this study were defined as four conditions.   DIA/SWATH data analysis with OneOmics DIA/SWATH data were processed within the OneOmics CloudOS environment (Sciex, https://multiomics.beta.sciex.com/sessions/sign_in). Study design (four time points, three biological replicates, three technical replicates) was defined in Experiment Manager. Extractor and Assembler were run with the following settings: 99% confidence filter, 999 peptides per protein, six transitions per peptide, RT calibration protein, 75 ppm XIC extraction width, ppm as XIC extraction units. A confidence filter of ≥ 75% (statistically significant differentially expressed proteins) and most likely ratio (MLR) weight of ≥0.2 as measure of reproducibility41 were applied to report protein expression changes. P-values were determined within the OneOmics software environment by performing a t-test on the normalized weighted-average peptide areas for each protein across all samples in an experimental group. Abundance changes are reported relative to time point one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Data-dependent acquisition, Spectral assay library, Swath, Halobacterium salinarum nrc-1, Dia, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Ulrike Kusebauch

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L.
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA


