### Accession
PXD017496

### Title
Global and site-specific effect of phosphorylation on protein turnover

### Description
The effects of specific modification types and sites on protein lifetime have not been illustrated in large scale. We describe a proteomic method, DeltaSILAC, to quantify the impact of site-specific phosphorylation on the turnover of thousands of proteins in live cells. Being configured on the accurate and reproducible mass spectrometry, the pulse labeling approach using stable isotope-labeled amino acids in cells (pSILAC), phosphoproteomics, as well as a novel peptide-level matching strategy, our DeltaSILAC profiling revealed a global, unexpected delaying effect of many phosphosites on protein turnover. We further found that phosphorylated sites accelerating protein turnover are functionally selected for cell fitness, enriched in Cyclin-dependent kinase substrates, and evolutionarily conserved, whereas the Glutamic acids surrounding phosphosites significantly delay protein turnover. Our investigation provides a generalizable approach and a rich resource for prioritizing the effects of phosphorylation sites on protein lifetime in the context of cell signaling and disease biology.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free and labelled cells of HeLa cells including HeLa_7 and HeLa_8, SW948, RKO, and PC12 cells were harvested and digested, mainly as previously described. Cells were washed three times by precooled PBS, harvested, and snap frozen by liquid nitrogen. The cell pellets were immediately lysed by adding 10 M urea containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and Halt™ Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermo) and stored in -80°C for further analysis. After the harvest of all the dishes, samples of HeLa_7 and HeLa_8, as well as samples from SW948 and RKO were processed for tryptic digestion. The cell pellets were  ultrasonically lysed by sonication at 4 °C for 2 min using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), and then centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 1 hour to remove the insoluble material. A total of 700 μg supernatant proteins (determined by BioRad Bradford assay) were transferred to clean EP tubes. The supernatant protein mixtures were reduced by 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 37 °C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 45 min at room temperature Then five volumes of precooled precipitation solution containing 50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid were added to the protein mixture and kept at −20 °C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 18,000×g for 40 min. The precipitated proteins were washed with 100% acetone and 70% ethanol with centrifugation at 18,000×g, 4°C for 40 min respectively. All the samples were added with 300 μL 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:20 overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the peptide mixture was acidified with formic acid and then desalted with C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC). The amount of the final peptides was determined by Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). About 5% of the total peptide digest were kept for total proteomic analysis. From the same peptide digest above, 95% of peptides per sample was used for phosphoproteomic analysis. The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992) according to the kit instructions, as described previously. Briefly, the resins of one spin column in the kit were divided into 5 equal aliquots, each used for one sample. The peptide-resin mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature and then transferred into the filter tip (TF-20-L-R-S, Axygen). The supernatant was removed after centrifugation. Then the resins adsorbed with phosphopeptides were washed sequentially with 200 µL × 3 washing buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 200 µL × 3 H2O to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. The phosphopeptides were eluted off the resins by 100 µL × 2 elution buffer. All centrifugation steps above were conducted at 500 g, 30sec. The eluates were collected for speed-vac and dried for mass spectrometry analysis. LC separation was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75 µm × 50 cm length) using C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A 120-min measurement with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 37% and corresponding buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) during the gradient was used to elute peptides from the LC.  The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min with the temperature controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany).   The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was calibrated using Tune (version 3.0) instrument control software. Spray voltage was set to 2,000 V and heating capillary temperature at 275 °C. All the DIA-MS methods consisted of one MS1 scan and 40 MS2 scans of variable isolated windows. This schema is comprised of 350~373, 372~391, 390~407, 406~421, 420~434, 433~447, 446~459, 458~470, 469~482, 481~494, 493~506, 505~517, 516~529, 528~541, 540~553, 552~564, 563~576, 575~588, 587~602, 601~614, 613~626, 625~641, 640~655, 654~669, 668~683, 682~698, 697~714, 713~732, 731~751, 750~771, 770~792, 791~815, 814~839, 838~868, 867~899, 898~939, 938~983, 982~1044,1043~1127, 1126~1650 m/z, with 1 m/z overlapping between windows. The MS1 scan range is 350 – 1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution is 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 with the MS2 scan range 200 – 1800 m/z and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 5.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data analyses were performed using Spectronaut v13. For both proteomic and phosphoprotemic measurements, the hybrid assay libraries were respectively generated, which were based on both DIA measurements as well as data dependent acquisitions (DDA) on relevant samples method described previously43), as well as the optimized pSILAC-DIA workflow. To generate the library for pSILAC DIA-MS datasets, the default settings for Pulsar search of Spectronaut was used with modification in the Labeling setting: a) “Labelling Applied” option was enabled, b) SILAC labels (“Arg10” and “Lys8”) were specified in the second channel. c) The complete H/L labeling of the whole library was ensured by selecting the “In-Silico Generate Missing Channels” option in the Workflow settings. d) Importantly, for phosphoproteomic datasets the possibility of Phosphorylation at S/T/Y was enabled during database searching (as a variable modification), together with Oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The final spectral libraries (HeLa proteome library containing 179,199 peptide precursor assays for 8,040 protein groups, HeLa phosphoproteome library containing 139, 117 peptide precursor assays for 7,758 protein groups, CRC proteome library containing 78,763 peptide precursor assays for 6,593 protein groups, and CRC phosphoproteome library containing 56,056 peptide precursor assays for 4,859 protein groups) were all made public through PRIDE.    For the targeted data extraction and subsequent identification and quantification for pSILAC datasets, the Inverted Spike-In (ISW) workflow was used, as described previously. This means, the “Spike-In” workflow was selected in Multi-Channel Workflow Definition and both “Inverted” and “Reference based Identification” options were enabled. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoff (Qvalue) were controlled at 1% and the data matrix was strictly filtered by Qvalue. The “minor peptide group” was defined as Modified Sequences. In particular, the PTM localization option in Spectronaut v13 was enabled to locate phosphorylation sites48, with the probability score cutoff >0.75, resulting Class-I peptides to be identified and quantified. All the other settings in Spectronaut are kept as Default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell line, Phosphoproteomics, Turnover, Dia, Lumos

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University School of Medicine


