### Accession
PXD006605

### Title
Insights In The Molecular Regulation Of Monolignol-derived Product Biosynthesis In The Growing Hemp Hypocotyl

### Description
Lignin and lignans are both deriving from the monolignol pathway. Despite the similarity of their building blocks, they fulfil different functions in planta. Lignin strengthens the tissues of the plant, while lignans are involved in plant defence and growth regulation. Their biosyntheses are tuned both spatially and temporally to suit the development of the plant (water conduction, reaction to stresses).  It was previously shown that the growing hemp hypocotyl is a valid system to study secondary growth and the molecular events accompanying lignification. The present work confirms the validity of this system, by using it to study the regulation of lignin and lignan biosyntheses.  Microscopic observations, lignin analysis, proteomics, together with targeted RT-qPCR and in situ laccase and peroxidase activity assays were carried out to understand the dynamics of lignan/lignin synthesis during the development of the hemp hypocotyl. Based on phylogenetic analysis and targeted gene expression, we suggest a role for the hemp dirigent and dirigent-like proteins.  The transdisciplinary approach adopted resulted in the gene- and protein-level quantification of the main enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of monolignols and their oxidative coupling (laccases and class III peroxidases), in lignin deposition (dirigent-like proteins) and in the determination of the stereoconformation of lignans (dirigent proteins). Our work sheds light on how, in the growing hemp hypocotyl, the provision of the precursors needed to synthesize the aromatic biopolymers lignin and lignans is regulated at the transcriptional and proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Five biological replicates using both gel-based and gel-free methods. 300 mg of material was treated with ice-cold extraction buffer (TCA 20%, DTT 0.1% in acetone) and allowed to precipitate overnight at -20°C. After centrifugation (30,000g; 45 min at 4°C), the pellet was washed three times in ice-cold acetone and dried. The dried extract was solubilised in 500 µl labelling buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 30mM Tris)after centrifugation (15,000g, 15 min), the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and pH was adjusted at 8.5 with sodium hydroxide (50mM). Protein concentration was determined using the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare) with BSA as standard. Gel-based proteome study. 50 µg of protein were labelled with Cy-dyes and gel ran as adviced by the manusfacturor. Gel images were analysed with the DeCyderTM software (GE Healthcare, v. 7.0.8.53). Spots were considered as significantly different when detected on at least 75% of analysed gel images, protein abundance with a minimum fold change of 1.5 with a Student’s t-test p-value below 0.05.  Gel-free proteome study. 25 μg of proteins were loaded in a CriterionTM XT precast 1D gel 4-12% Bis-Tris (1.0 mm X 12 wells, Bio-Rad). After denaturation of the sample, migration was performed at 200V during 8 min. The gel was stained with Instant Blue (Gentaur BVBA) for 1 hour. Bands were excised and cut into 1-2 mm cubes at 4°C. The proteins in each band were subsequently reduced, alkylated, de-stained and digested with trypsin (5 ng/µl in NH4HCO3 50 mM, 30 min on ice and 37°C overnight). Peptides were extracted from the gel with ACN 50%/TFA 0.1%, dried with a Speedvac and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Peptides were analysed with a NanoLC-2D System (Eksigent) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ MS (AB Sciex). After desalting and enrichment (C18 PepMapTM, 5 μm, 5 mm * 300 μm, Thermo scientific), the peptides were separated with a C18 reverse phase column (PepMapTM 100, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm, Thermo scientific) using a linear binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were eluted from 5% to 55% solvent B over 40 min, afterwards eluent B increased to 100% to wash the column and the column was re-equilibrated. The LC was coupled to the mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III source. CID fragmentations for MS/MS spectra acquisitions used the automatically adjusted system of rolling collision energy voltage. A full MS scan was performed (scan range: 300–1250 m/z, accumulation time: 250 ms) and the 20 most intense precursors selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
gel-based experiment: MALDI MS and MS/MS spectra were searched with MASCOT against our in-house hemp transcriptome database (170,598 sequences; 64,508,806 residues), and with the NCBI protein database Viridiplantae, with the following parameters: fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: dioxidation (W), oxidation (HW), oxidation (M), Trp→kynurenin (W); mass values: monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance: ± 100 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.5 Da and Max number of missed cleavages: 2. Individual ions scores greater than 42 indicate identity or extensive homology (p<0.05), protein scores greater than 65 are significant (p<0.05).  The CID spectra was analysed with Mascot-Daemon using the hemp database as for gel-based proteomics using the following parameters: 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy precursor: 20 ppm, mass accuracy fragments: ± 0.3 Da, fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term). Only the contigs where at least one time point has 3 (out of 5) or more than 1 spectral count were considered for further analysis. This filter being applied, a value of 0.5 was added to all the spectral count to compensate for null values and allowing logarithmic transformation (George et al. 2015). The relative quantities of the proteins have been calculated using the NSAF. NSAF = (100*SpC/MW)/Σ(SpC/MW)N, where SpC = Spectral Counts, MW = Protein molecular weight in Da and N = Total Number of Proteins (Fanutza et al. 2015). The Independent Component Analysis (ICA) has been calculated with MetaGeneAlyse (Daub et al. 2003) using the NSAF values. Student’s T-tests on the fold-change between the time-points have been calculated with ln-transformed values based on the five biological replicates (Supplementary Table S3). Finally, the list of the differentially abundant proteins was obtained using the same parameters as for 2D-DiGE (fold-change (NSAF)>1.5 and Student’s t-test p-value below 0.05). The NSAF values have been displayed using PermutMatrix (Caraux and Pinloche, 2005) with the following parameters: dissimilarity assessed by Pearson distance, clustering in complete linkage, seriation and tree seriation in multiple-fragment heuristic (MF), rows normalized by Z-score scaling.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lignin, Cannabis sativa, Lignan, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Luxemburg Institute of Science and Technology
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST)
Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN)

### Submitter
kjell sergeant

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-François Hausman
Luxemburg Institute of Science and Technology


