### Accession
PXD028736

### Title
Solvent Precipitation SP3 (SP4) enhances recovery for proteomics sample preparation without magnetic beads

### Description
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture proteins, with subsequently washes allowing contaminant removal. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilisation onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and experiences a drop-off in protein recovery at higher protein inputs. Magnetic beads may also contaminate samples and instruments, and become costly for larger scale protein preparations. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3, omitting magnetic beads and employing brief centrifugation—either with or without low-cost inert glass beads—as the means of aggregated protein capture. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1 — 5000 µg preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein R2 0.99 (SP4) vs. 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling (n=9,076) also demonstrated improved recovery by SP4 and a significant enrichment of membrane and low-solubility proteins vs. SP3. The effectiveness of SP4 was verified in three other labs, each confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterisation over SP3. This work suggests that protein precipitation is the primary mechanism of SP3, and reliance on magnetic beads presents protein losses, especially at higher concentrations and amongst hydrophobic proteins. SP4 represents an efficient and effective alternative to SP3, provides the option to omit beads entirely, and offers virtually unlimited scalability of input and volume—all whilst retaining the speed and universality of SP3.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Experiment 1 Treatment Cell lysate was reduced with DTT (5 mM, 30 min, 25 C) and then treated with iodoacetamide (5 mM, 30 min, 25 C in the dark).  Proteins were recovered by one of the four methods: 1)Acetone Precipitation, 2) Seramag SP3 beads, 3) ReSyn HILIC beads, 4) Glass beads.  Methods are described in detail in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Assuming 100% recovery, 1 µg of each peptide mixture was added to 200 L of 0.1% formic acid on a prepared Evotip and run on an Evosep1 LC connected to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instrument using 44 min LCMS gradient in DDA mode as described: The transfer capillary set to 300 C and 2.2kV applied to the nanospray needle (Evosep).  MS1 data was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60k, with a max injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 1e6, in positive ion mode, with profile spectra, over the mass range 375-1200 m/z.  A charge state inclusion of precursors with 2-6+ charges was applied with the MIPS mode (Peptide) active, a dynamic exclusion of 15 s, intensity threshold of 5e4, and isolation carried out in the quadrupole with a width of 1.4 Da.  For fragmentation, HCD energy of 32% was applied and MS2 were acquired in the Orbitrap with 15k resolution, max injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 1e6 in centroid mode. Data Analysis (Both Experiments) For sample-specific spectral library generation, data was acquired from samples from each condition in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The data were searched against the human Uniprot database using the Pulsar search engine (Biognosys AG). The following modifications were included in the search: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. Protein Group, Peptide and Precursor numbers were reported based on the library generated by the search

### Publication Abstract
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture protein aggregates, with subsequent washes removing contaminants. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilization onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and exhibits losses and greater costs at higher protein inputs. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3 protein cleanup, capturing acetonitrile-induced protein aggregates by brief centrifugation rather than magnetism&#x2500;with optional low-cost inert glass beads to simplify handling. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1-5000 &#x3bc;g preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein <i>R</i><sup>2</sup> 0.99 (SP4) <i>vs</i> 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling revealed that SP4 yielded a greater recovery of low-solubility and transmembrane proteins than SP3, benefits to aggregating protein using 80 <i>vs</i> 50% organic solvent, and equivalent recovery by SP4 and S-Trap. SP4 was verified in three other labs across eight sample types and five lysis buffers&#x2500;all confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterization <i>vs</i> SP3. With near-identical recovery, this work further illustrates protein precipitation as the primary mechanism of SP3 protein cleanup and identifies that magnetic capture risks losses, especially at higher protein concentrations and among more hydrophobic proteins. SP4 offers a minimalistic approach to protein cleanup that provides cost-effective input scalability, the option to omit beads entirely, and suggests important considerations for SP3 applications&#x2500;all while retaining the speed and compatibility of SP3.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Solvent precipitation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Babraham Institute Cambridge CB22 3AT

### Submitter
George Biggs

### Lab Head
Dr Rahul Samant
Babraham Institute Cambridge CB22 3AT


