### Accession
PXD004434

### Title
Human milk oligosaccharides and infant fecal oligosaccharides

### Description
In this study, we quantitated the disappearance of intact HMOs and characterized the glycan digestion products in the gut that are produced by the action of microbial enzymes on HMOs and glycoconjugates from breast milk. Oligosaccharides from fecal samples of exclusively breast-fed infants were extracted and profiled using nanoLC-MS. Intact HMOs were found in the fecal samples, additionally, other oligosaccharides were found corresponding to degraded HMOs and non-HMO based compounds. The latter compounds were fragments of N-glycans released through the cleavage of the linkage to the asparagine residue and through cleavage of the chitobiose core of the N-glycan.

### Sample Protocol
Breast milk sample was defatted, proteins precipitated, glycans reduced, then solid phase extraction clean up with graphitized carbon cartridges. Fecal samples were homogenized overnight, then centrifuged and supernatant was aliquotted out. Samples had proteins removed via precipiation, glycans were reduced, then SPE clean up with C8 and graphitized carbon cartridges. Analysis was performed on Agilent nanoHPLC-chip/TOF and nanoHPLC-chip/Q-TOF instruments, with solvents A1: 3% ACN in 0.1% formic acid and B1: 90% ACN in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Agilent MassHunter versions B.03.01 and B.06.00. Glycans were identified using the Find Compounds by Molecular Feature function to within 20 ppm of theoretical masses. Abundances were extracted as volume (ion counts) and structures were identified by matching accurate mass and retention time to previously developed annotated HMO libraries. Tandem MS data was annotated by hand and using an in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Glycans in breast milk are abundant and found as either free oligosaccharides or conjugated to proteins and lipids. Free human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) function as prebiotics by stimulating the growth of beneficial bacteria while preventing the binding of harmful bacteria to intestinal epithelial cells. Bacteria have adapted to the glycan-rich environment of the gut by developing enzymes that catabolize glycans. The decrease in HMOs and the increase in glycan digestion products give indications of the active enzymes in the microbial population. In this study, we quantitated the disappearance of intact HMOs and characterized the glycan digestion products in the gut that are produced by the action of microbial enzymes on HMOs and glycoconjugates from breast milk. Oligosaccharides from fecal samples of exclusively breast-fed infants were extracted and profiled using nanoLC-MS. Intact HMOs were found in the fecal samples, additionally, other oligosaccharides were found corresponding to degraded HMOs and non-HMO based compounds. The latter compounds were fragments of N-glycans released through the cleavage of the linkage to the asparagine residue and through cleavage of the chitobiose core of the N-glycan. Marker gene sequencing of the fecal samples revealed bifidobacteria as the dominant inhabitants of the infant gastrointestinal tracts. A glycosidase from Bifidobacterium longum subsp. longum was then expressed to digest HMOs in vitro, which showed that the digested oligosaccharides in feces corresponded to the action of glycosidases on HMOs. Similar expression of endoglycosidases also showed that N-glycans were released by bacterial enzymes. Although bifidobacteria may dominate the gut, it is possible that specific minority species are also responsible for the major products observed in feces. Nonetheless, the enzymatic activity correlated well with the known glycosidases in the respective bacteria, suggesting a direct relationship between microbial abundances and catabolic activity.

### Keywords
Oligosaccharide, Liquid chromatography, Feces, Mass spectrometry, Milk

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, University of California, Davis, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Jasmine Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Carlito B. Lebrilla
Chemistry Department, University of California, Davis, USA


