### Accession
PXD004742

### Title
Arabidopsis rosettes proteome in response to LCO and Th17 under salt stress- LC-MS/MS

### Description
Lipo-chitooligosaccharide (LCO) and thuricin 17 (Th17) are two bacterial compounds that have been shown to positively influence plant growth of both legumes and non-legumes.   Arabidopsis thaliana responded positively to treatment with the bacterial signal compounds LCO and Th17 in the presence of salt stress (up to 250 mM NaCl).  Shotgun proteomics of unstressed and 250 mM NaCl stressed A. thaliana rosettes (7 days post stress) in combination with the LCO and Th17 revealed many known, putative, hypothetical and unknown proteins.  Overall, carbon and energy metabolic pathways were affected under both unstressed and salt stressed conditions when treated with these signals.  PEP carboxylase, Rubisco-oxygenase large subunit, pyruvate kinase, and proteins of photosystem I and II were some of the noteworthy proteins enhanced by the signals, along with other stress related proteins.  These findings suggest that the proteome of A. thaliana rosettes is altered by the bacterial signals tested, and more so under salt stress, thereby imparting a positive effect on plant growth under high salt stress.  The roles of the identified proteins are discussed here in relation to salt stress adaptation, which, when translated to field grown crops can be a crucial component and of significant importance in agriculture and global food production.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis, the rosettes sampled at 24 h after treatment (from control, 10-6 M LCO and 10-9 M Th17) comprised the unstressed group. Plants from 7 days of salt stress at 250 mM NaCl in combination with 10-6 M LCO and 10-9 M Th17 treatments were sampled as the salt stressed group. The samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 °C until protein extraction. Total proteins from the samples were extracted using a protein extraction kit (Sigma-Aldrich, PE-2305, St. Louis, MO, USA).  The total protein extracts were then digested with trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS using LTQ-Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped, and all MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02). Mascot was set up to search the Arabidopsis thaliana database (unknown version, 80416 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR), was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability, as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Scaffold 4 was used to analyze the proteomics data for fold change and Fisher’s exact test of the identified proteins, after subjecting the quantitative value of the spectra to the embedded normalization.  The FASTA file generated was analyzed using Blast2GO-Pro 3.1.3, for the functional annotation and analysis of the protein sequences.  Apart from these, Enzyme code (EC), KEGG maps and InterPro motifs were queried directly using the InterProScan web service.

### Publication Abstract
Plants, being sessile organisms, are exposed to widely varying environmental conditions throughout their life cycle. Compatible plant-microbe interactions favor plant growth and development, and help plants deal with these environmental challenges. Microorganisms produce a diverse range of elicitor molecules to establish symbiotic relationships with the plants they associate with, in a given ecological niche. Lipo-chitooligosaccharide (LCO) and Thuricin 17 (Th17) are two such compounds shown to positively influence plant growth of both legumes and non-legumes. Arabidopsis thaliana responded positively to treatment with the bacterial signal compounds LCO and Th17 in the presence of salt stress (up to 250 mM NaCl). Shotgun proteomics of unstressed and 250 mM NaCl stressed A. thaliana rosettes (7 days post stress) in combination with the LCO and Th17 revealed many known, putative, hypothetical, and unknown proteins. Overall, carbon and energy metabolic pathways were affected under both unstressed and salt stressed conditions when treated with these signals. PEP carboxylase, Rubisco-oxygenase large subunit, pyruvate kinase, and proteins of photosystems I and II were some of the noteworthy proteins enhanced by the signals, along with other stress related proteins. These findings suggest that the proteome of A. thaliana rosettes is altered by the bacterial signals tested, and more so under salt stress, thereby imparting a positive effect on plant growth under high salt stress. The roles of the identified proteins are discussed here in relation to salt stress adaptation, which, when translated to field grown crops can be a crucial component and of significant importance in agriculture and global food production. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004742.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Thuricin17, Salt stress, Lc-ms/ms, Lipo-chitooligosaccharide

### Affiliations
James McGill Professor Director and CEO, BioFuelNet Canada Director, McGill Network for Innovation in Biofuels and Bioproducts Director, Eastern Canadian Oilseeds Development Initiative Plant Science Department, McGill University 21111 Lakeshore Road Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Quebec Canada  H9X3V9
McGill University

### Submitter
Sowmyalakshmi Subramanian

### Lab Head
Dr Donald Lawrence Smith
James McGill Professor Director and CEO, BioFuelNet Canada Director, McGill Network for Innovation in Biofuels and Bioproducts Director, Eastern Canadian Oilseeds Development Initiative Plant Science Department, McGill University 21111 Lakeshore Road Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Quebec Canada  H9X3V9


