### Accession
PXD010018

### Title
Cherry Adapted Plum Pox Virus (PPV) CR Isolate Alters the Abundance of Proteins Involved in Photosynthesis and Stress-response of the Experimental Herbaceous Host Nicotiana benthamiana More Aggressively than the Mild PPV-C Isolate

### Description
Plum pox virus (PPV, family Potyviridae) is one of the most important viral pathogens of Prunus spp. causing considerable damage to stone-fruit industry worldwide each year. Among the PPV strains identified so far, only PPV-C and PPV-CR are able to infect cherries under natural conditions. Herein, we evaluated the impact of strains differing by the pathogenic potential on herbaceous host Nicotiana benthamiana. At first glance, a faster accumulation of PPV capsid protein was noticed by semi-quantitative DAS-ELISA on tobacco leaves infected by PPV-CR (the RU-30sc isolate) in contrast to PPV-C (BY-101 isolate). This result was correlated perfectly with observed phenotypic symptoms. To assess the host response to infection more deeply, a comprehensive proteomic profiling was performed using reverse phase UHPLC followed by label-free mass spectrometry quantification. Thirty-one unique plant proteins were identified as significantly altered due to the infection. Precise evaluation of particular amount shifts of identified proteins in relation to infection has revealed that the aggressive PPV-CR isolate has a stronger influence on the abundance of photosynthesis-related proteins, mainly from Calvin cycle, as the mild PPV-C. This observation was accompanied by a significant reduction of photosynthetic pigments extracted from the leaves of PPV-CR infected plants. Shifts in the abundance of remaining identified proteins, indicates activation of repair mechanism, stimulation of photosynthetic capacity, and modifications in amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism to affect plant growth and initiate energy formation via gluconeogenesis. Furthermore, we speculate that accumulation of H2O2, in PPV-CR infected leaves may activate glutathione synthesis, which plays a crucial role in further plant defense and development.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves for proteome analysis were harvested at 15 dpi in 3 biological replicates. They were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -800C until protein extraction. Each replicate consisted leaves from 3 plants (~ 0.9 g fresh weight/replicate). Leaves were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and a pestle. Then, the powder was subjected to a phenol extraction/ammonium acetate precipitation 35. Briefly, homogenization buffer (0.2 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 20 mM EDTA, 0.7 M sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, fresh 2 mM PMSF and 1% β-mercaptoethanol) was added to the powder and incubated for 10 min at 40C with occasional mixing. Upon addition of Tris-buffered phenol pH 8.0 in ratio 1:1, the mixture was shaken 30 min at 40C. Phases were separated by centrifugation, and the aqueous phase was re-extracted with fresh Tris-buffered phenol under the same conditions. Upper phenol layer from both extractions was collected and subjected to back-extraction with homogenization buffer. Proteins from final phenol phase were precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol at -200C. After centrifugation for 30 min at 40C, 7690 x g precipitated proteins were washed consecutively with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol (2 times), 80% acetone (2 times) and 70% ethanol (1 time). Later, the extracted proteins were dissolved in the sample buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at RT for an hour with agitation. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 16 100 x g for 20 min at RT. The supernatant was divided into aliquots containing 100 µg of proteins, their concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. For prolonged storage, proteins were kept at -800C as precipitates in 80% acetone. Aliquots of purified complex peptide mixtures (1 μg) were separated in technical triplicate, using nanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters). Samples were loaded onto the Symmetry C18 trap column (20 mm length, 180 μm diameter, 5 μm particles size). After 3 min of desalting/concentration by 1% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate 10 μL·min−1, peptides were introduced to the BEH130 C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 μm diameter, 1.7 μm particle size). For the thorough separation, a 60 min gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was used, at a flow rate 300 nL·min−1. The column outlet was connected to the PicoTip emitter (360 μm outer diameter, 20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip diameter) and samples were nanosprayed (3.4 kV capillary voltage) to the quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer Q-TOF Premier (Waters). The instrument was controlled by MassLynx 4.1 software (Waters). Spectra were recorded in the data-independent MSE mode. It uses alternate scans at low (4 eV) and high (20-40 eV ramp) collision energies to obtain full-scan mass data for both precursors and fragments run. Ions with 50-1950 m·z−1 were detected in both channels, although quadrupole mass profile settings allowed efficient deflection of masses <400 m·z−1 in the low energy mode, enabling filtering of contaminating ions. The spectral acquisition scan rate was 1.2 s, with a 0.05 s inter-scan delay. The external mass calibrant Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B (500 fmol·mL−1) was infused through the reference line at a flow rate 500 nL·min−1. It was measured every 30 s at collision energy 22 eV and employed for mass correction.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done in Progenesis QI (Waters). For the peak peaking the following thresholds were applied: low energy 140 counts and high energy 30 counts. Precursors and fragment ions were coupled, using correlations of chromatographic elution profiles in low/high energy traces. Then, peaks retention times were aligned across all chromatograms. Peak intensities were normalized to all ions, assuming the majority of signals, likely peptides, are unaffected by experimental conditions. The label-free quantification relied on measurement of peak areas of intact peptides. For the protein identification ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0.3, Apex3D algorithm v. 2.128.5.0, 64 bit, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) search algorithm was used. Reference sequence file contained 56096 entries, including draft proteome of N. benthamiana from solgenomics.net, supplemented with Plum pox virus sequences from UniProt, both downloaded in February 2015. Workflow parameters for the protein identification searches were one possible missed cleavage utilizing trypsin as the protease, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of Cys, possible modifications of oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn/Gln. The software automatically determined peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances. Protein identifications were limited to less than 4% false discovery rate against the randomized database, which was applied at the individual peptide level. Proteins that were ascertained with two peptides with a peptide score equal or above 6.2 were accepted in addition to filtering at 95% identification confidence threshold and mass accuracy below 25 ppm. Protein grouping feature was then applied to show hits with unique peptides. Their ratio was used for relative quantification. We considered as differentially abundant only those proteins which have at least 1.4-fold change and ANOVA p-value lower than 0.05. Values have been presented as means ± SD of three replicates. When ANOVA of three groups showed statistically significant changes, post-hoc Fisher´s least significant difference (LSD) test was applied. We used this procedure for the processing of proteomic data as well as statistics on pigments, hydrogen peroxide, and glutathione data.

### Publication Abstract
Plum pox virus (PPV, family Potyviridae) is one of the most important viral pathogens of Prunus spp. causing considerable damage to stone-fruit industry worldwide. Among the PPV strains identified so far, only PPV-C, PPV-CR, and PPV-CV are able to infect cherries under natural conditions. Herein, we evaluated the pathogenic potential of two viral isolates in herbaceous host Nicotiana benthamiana. Significantly higher accumulation of PPV capsid protein in tobacco leaves infected with PPV-CR (RU-30sc isolate) was detected in contrast to PPV-C (BY-101 isolate). This result correlated well with the symptoms observed in the infected plants. To further explore the host response upon viral infection at the molecular level, a comprehensive proteomic profiling was performed. Using reverse-phase ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography followed by label-free mass spectrometry quantification, we identified 38 unique plant proteins as significantly altered due to the infection. Notably, the abundances of photosynthesis-related proteins, mainly from the Calvin-Benson cycle, were found more aggressively affected in plants infected with PPV-CR isolate than those of PPV-C. This observation was accompanied by a significant reduction in the amount of photosynthetic pigments extracted from the leaves of PPV-CR infected plants. Shifts in the abundance of proteins that are involved in stimulation of photosynthetic capacity, modification of amino acid, and carbohydrate metabolism may affect plant growth and initiate energy formation via gluconeogenesis in PPV infected N. benthamiana. Furthermore, we suggest that the higher accumulation of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in PPV-CR infected leaves plays a crucial role in plant defense and development by activating the glutathione synthesis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Antioxidants, Tobacco, Sharka, Ppv, Photosynthesis, Label-free quantification, Compatible interaction

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Slavomira Novakova
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences


