### Accession
PXD024689

### Title
Analysis of barley chromosomal proteome: a multiapproach exploration of flow cytometry-sorted mitotic chromosomes

### Description
Proteins contribute to the structure of chromatin and regulate its functions. The basic building block of chromatin in eukaryotes is the nucleosome containing histones. Structural maintenance of chromosomes complexes perform the assembly of genomic DNA into the higher organizational structures of interphase chromatin as well as the compact arrangement of dividing chromosomes. Here, proteins were extracted from flow cytometry-sorted barley mitotic chromosomes after a nuclease treatment to remove DNA. Peptides from tryptic protein digests were fractionated either on a cation exchanger or reversed-phase microgradient system prior to liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Nuclear and chromosomal proteins (almost 900 identifications) were then classified based on a combination of software prediction results, available database localization information, sequence homology, and domain representation. The degree of enrichment of the chromosome samples by chromosomal proteins was evaluated by comparing the results with controls (depleted flow cytometric fraction and initial cell lyzate). A biological context evaluation indicated the presence of several groups of abundant proteins including histone variants, topoisomerase 2, PARP2, Condensin complex subunits, and many proteins with chromatin-related functions. Interestingly, nucleolar proteins were found as wells as proteins documenting processes related to replication, transcription and DNA repair in barley mitotic chromosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Mitotic barley (Hordeum vulgare, cultivar Morex) chromosomes (10 million) fixed by formaldehyde were collected by flow cytometry, incubated in a Tris-based buffer at 70 °C for 9 h and mixed with 50 μl of the same buffer additionally containing 8 M urea and 10 mM DTT. Then, a selected nuclease was added to cleave DNA and the sample was incubated at an optimal temperature for 18/24h. Further processing of the released proteins comprised a selected combination of the following steps: precipitation by acetone, SDS-PAGE separation, in-gel or in-solution digestion with trypsin. The resultant peptides were first fractionated using SCX-StageTips or by reversed-phase chromatography in a microgradient device or directly purified using C18-StageTips. Nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) analyses were performed on a maXis UHR-Q-TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonik) and connected to a Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatograph (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). The MS analysis was carried out in a data-dependent acquisition mode using the top 5 precursors and CID method for peptide identification. The settings of the MS analyzer were as follows: Source (capillary voltage 1,750 V, dry gas 1.5 l/min, dry temperature 180 °C); MS/MS mode (auto MS/MS, 5 precursor ions, switch threshold from MS to MSMS mode 1,000 cts, active exclusion after 1 spectra for 9 s, excluded mass range of precursors 50–350 amu); Mass range 50–2,500 amu with MS time acquisition 1 s, and MS/MS time acquisition 0.6–2.0 s according to precursor intensity.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into MGF-formatted files and processed for database searches using PEAKS Studio 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada). The search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragments - 50 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; enzyme - trypsin (semispecific); the number of missed cleavages – 2; allowed modifications per peptide – up to 3; variable peptide modifications – Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, protein N-terminal acetylation; fixed peptide modification – Cys carbamidomethylation. The sequence databases used were barley (Hordeum vulgare) proteome database downloaded from the UniProtKB (11/10/2019, Proteome ID UP000011116, 189799 entries) and cRAP contaminant database (downloaded from https://thegpm.org/cRAP/ on 04/03/2019). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1 % as a positivity threshold for the peptide-spectrum match plus peptide and protein sequence matches. At least one unique peptide was required for positive protein identification and only the first identification (ID) with the highest –logP score for each protein group was used for the subsequent data evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flow cytometry, Barley, Chromatin, Prediction, Proteomics, Chromosome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Palacky University, Olomouc
Department of Protein Biochemistry and Proteomics, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, Šlechtitelů 27, Olomouc, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Ivo Chamrad

### Lab Head
Dr Marek Sebela
Department of Protein Biochemistry and Proteomics, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, Šlechtitelů 27, Olomouc, Czech Republic


