### Accession
PXD036009

### Title
N7-methylguanosine methylation of tRNAs regulates survival to stress in cancer

### Description
Combining transcriptome-wide approaches to detect m7G RNA methylation, in vitro functional assays and Mettl1 knockout mouse models, we provide evidence that guanosine-7 tRNA methylation is required to protect tRNAs from cleavage in response to stress, leading to impaired regulation of protein synthesis. Loss of METTL1 and tRNA methylation sensitises cancer cells to stress, reducing tumour growth and increasing cytotoxic responses to convectional cancer treatments in vitro and in vivo. Our study uncovers the role of m7G methylation of tRNAs in stress responses and highlights the potential of targeting METTL1 to sensitise cancer cells to therapy.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome composition was analysed for of DU145 cells silenced for METTL1. Cells infected for shRNA METTL1-1 were induced for 72 hours with 0.1 g/mL of doxycycline.  Non-induced cells were used as control. Cells were lysed in 2M thiourea, 7M Urea, 4% Chaps, 200mM DTT, and extracts were cleared by centrifugation. Samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature under agitation and digested following the FASP protocol described1. A trypsin:protein 1:10 ratio was added and incubated over night at 37oC. Samples were diluted in ammonium bicarbonate to 1.5 M urea and same trypsin ratio and conditions as described above was added. Resulting peptides from both strategies were concentrated in a speed-vac, and desalted using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analysed in a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online either to a nano Elute (Bruker) or EvoSep ONE liquid chromatograph (EvoSep).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS X software (Bioinformatics Solutions) was used under default settings for protein identification and quantification. Searches were carried out against a human protein entry database (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Proteins with one peptide at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Intensity data was loaded onto Perseus platform3 and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation).

### Publication Abstract
Tumour progression and therapy tolerance are highly regulated and complex processes largely dependent on the plasticity of cancer cells and their capacity to respond to stress. The higher plasticity of cancer cells highlights the need for identifying targetable molecular pathways that challenge cancer cell survival. Here, we show that N<sup>7</sup>-guanosine methylation (m<sup>7</sup>G) of tRNAs, mediated by METTL1, regulates survival to stress conditions in cancer cells. Mechanistically, we find that m<sup>7</sup>G in tRNAs protects them from stress-induced cleavage and processing into 5' tRNA fragments. Our analyses reveal that the loss of tRNA m<sup>7</sup>G methylation activates stress response pathways, sensitising cancer cells to stress. Furthermore, we find that the loss of METTL1 reduces tumour growth and increases cytotoxic stress in vivo. Our study uncovers the role of m<sup>7</sup>G methylation of tRNAs in stress responses and highlights the potential of targeting METTL1 to sensitise cancer cells to chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Senescence, Synthetic lethality., Trna fragments, Cytotoxic stress, Autophagy, Prostate cancer, Survival, Epitranscriptome, 7-methylguanosine

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service Bizakia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 (Spain)
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service Bizakia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 (Spain)


