### Accession
PXD007845

### Title
HEK293T LC-MS/MS

### Description
Leucine plays crucial roles in protein proteolytic autophagy process, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we combined in vitro reconstitution with comparative proteomics technology to identify the potential regulators for leucine-mediated autophagy pathway. We established a in vitro cell-free systems to mimic the activation of autophagy by monitoring the translocation of readout protein ATG14 to the autophagosome membrane. Based on the system, we further screened the potential regulators involved in the leucine-mediated autophagy pathway using comparative proteomics strategy.

### Sample Protocol
The prepared CAFs (P20) were incubated with ATG14-Flag, amino acids-deprived S100(-), Buffer Q, with (+Leu) or without (Control) 50 mM leucine supplementation. Each sample was in a final volume of 100 µl. After incubation for 30 min at 37 °C, the reaction tubes were transferred on ice to terminate the reaction, and then centrifuged (17,800 g) to separate the CLFs or CAFs from soluble proteins. The resulting supernatants and pellets were applied to proteomics analysis.  Prepared samples were freeze-dried and dissolved with L3 dissolution buffer and cold acetone containing 10 mM DTT for 2 h. After centrifugation (13,000 rpm) for 20 min at 15 °C, the precipitates were collected and mixed with 800 μl cold acetone containing 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C to break the disulfide bonds of proteins. After another centrifugation (13,000 rpm) for 20 min at 15 °C, the precipitates were collected and dried. For each sample, 100 μg protein was dissolved with dissolution buffer in a final volume of 500 μl, and then diluted with 500 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3. After being reduced and alkylated, the samples were digested by adding 2 μg trypsin for incubation overnight at 37 °C. After incubation, equal volume of 0.1% FA was added for acidizing and the peptides were passed through a Strata-X C18 pillar for three times, washed with 0.1% FA plus 5% ACN twice, and eluted with 1 ml 0.1% FA plus 80% ACN. The eluted peptides were dried with a vacuum concentration meter, and re-dissolved in 20 μl 0.5 M TEAB for labeling.    Samples were labeled with the iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex U.K. Limited) below: supernatant in Control (S1), 113; pellet in Control (P1), 114; supernatant in +Leu (S2), 115; pellet in +Leu (P2), 116. All of the labeled samples were mixed with equal amounts, and then fractionated using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Durashell C18 5 be 100Å; 250mm × 4.6mm) (Thermo DINOEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS). LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on an AB SCIEX nanoLC-MS/MS (Triple TOF 5600 plus) system. Samples were chromatographed using a 120-min gradient from 2-35% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) after direct injection onto a 20-cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed to 20 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3-µm 200-Å stationary phase. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 360-1,460 m/z for 250 ms. The 20 most intense precursors with charge state 2-5 were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50-2,000 m/z for 100 ms; precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software v4.5 for analysis. For protein identification, the Paragon algorithm integrated into ProteinPilot was employed for searching against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database. The parameters were set as follows: the instrument was TripleTOF 5600, iTRAQ quantification, cysteine modified with iodoacetamide; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, trypsin digestion, the quantitate, bias correction and background correction were checked for protein quantification and normalization. For false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate FDR using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software) algorithm. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide and unused value more than 1.3 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293t, Cell-free system, Leucine, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Animal Sciences & Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Guokai Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Xianghua Yan
College of Animal Sciences & Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University


