### Accession
PXD027117

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 under exposure to artificial sweeteners

### Description
The goals of this project are to use a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) to detect bacterial proteomic profiles of Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 and their quantitative protein responses under exposure to 30 mg/L of artificial sweeteners (saccharine, sucralose, aspartame, and acesulfame potassium). The control group without artificial sweeteners exposure was also set up for comparison. Each treatment was conducted in biological triplicate. By comparing the proteomic profiles of artificial sweeteners-treated groups and control group, the effects of artificial sweeteners on bacterial translational levels can be revealed.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected by centrifuging at 8000 × g for 5 min and were washed by PBS twice. This is followed by resuspending cell pellets in 0.5 mL PBS solution. Afterwards, the samples were stored in freezer at -80℃ before analysis. The prepared bacterial cells were lysed by with 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and were thoroughly sonicated to remove DNA residues. This was followed by addition of dithiothreitol (20 mM, final concentration) in order to reduce disulfides. The samples were heated at 70℃ for 60 min and were cooled down to room temperature. After that, the samples were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) in the dark for 30 min. The alkylated samples were treated with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and six volumes of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final concentration of ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.1).  The protein solution was then loaded on the S-Trap filter and was centrifuged at 4,000 × g until all solution passed through. The S-Trap filter was washed with 150 μL of S-Trap binding buffer for three times. Samples on the S-Trap filter were digested with 1 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin at 47℃ for 1 h (avoid any bubbles on the filter). The digested peptides were then eluted with 40 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% aqueous formic acid, 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, respectively, and were lyophilized before resuspended in 20 µL of 5% acetonitrile. Analysis was performed by a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive TM H-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific TM).

### Data Protocol
Raw sequencing data were processed by applying Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) towards the database of E. coli MG1655 (received from Uniprot on 12th of July 2019). Abundance ratios of each protein between experimental and the control sample were calculated. A stringency cut-off of false discovery rate (FDR, q value) less than 0.01 was applied to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels.

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance has emerged as a global threat to human health. Natural transformation is an important pathway for horizontal gene transfer, which facilitates the dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) among bacteria. Although it is suspected that artificial sweeteners could exert antimicrobial effects, little is known whether artificial sweeteners would also affect horizontal transfer of ARGs via transformation. Here we demonstrate that four commonly used artificial sweeteners (saccharin, sucralose, aspartame, and acesulfame potassium) promote transfer of ARGs via natural transformation in Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, a model organism for studying competence and transformation. Such phenomenon was also found in a Gram-positive human pathogen Bacillus subtilis and mice faecal microbiome. We reveal that exposure to these sweeteners increases cell envelope permeability and results in an upregulation of genes encoding DNA uptake and translocation (Com) machinery. In addition, we find that artificial sweeteners induce an increase in plasmid persistence in transformants. We propose a mathematical model established to predict the long-term effects on transformation dynamics under exposure to these sweeteners. Collectively, our findings offer insights into natural transformation promoted by artificial sweeteners and highlight the need to evaluate these environmental contaminants for their antibiotic-like side effects.

### Keywords
Artificial sweeteners, Transformation, Competence, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia


