### Accession
PXD006643

### Title
Integrative genomic and proteomic analysis of response of Lactobacillus casei str.  Zhang to glucose limitation

### Description
Nutrient starvation is an important survival challenge for bacteria during industrial production of functional foods. Lactobacilli are increasingly being used as probiotics in functional foods. As next-generation sequencing technology has greatly advanced, we performed integrative proteomic and genomic analysis to investigate the response of Lactobacillus casei Zhang to a glucose-restricted environment. L. casei Zhang strains were permitted to evolve in glucose-limited or normal medium from a common ancestor over a 3-year period, and they were sampled after 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000, 6000, 7000, and 8000 generations and subjected to proteomic and genomic analyses. Genomic resequencing data revealed different point mutations and other mutational events in each generation of L. casei Zhang under glucose limitation stress. The proteins expressed differentially under glucose limitation were found to be significantly related to fructose and mannose metabolism, carbohydrate metabolic processes, lyase activity, and amino acid-transporting ATPase activity. The integrative proteomic and genomic analysis revealed that the mutations protected L. casei Zhang against glucose starvation by regulating other cellular carbohydrate, fatty acid, and amino acid catabolism; phosphoenolpyruvate system pathway activation; glycogen synthesis; ATP consumption; pyruvate metabolism; and general stress response protein expression. The results help reveal the mechanisms of adapting to glucose starvation and provide new strategies for enhancing the industrial utility of L. casei Zhang.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and culture conditions The baseline strain L. casei Zhang for experimental evolution was obtained from the Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, China. It has been deposited in the China General Microbiological Culture Collection Center with the deposit number CGMCC No. 1697. For propagation, L. casei Zhang was grown in de Mann-Rogosa-Sharpe (MRS) broth at 37°C. Experimental design and statistical rationale     Proteomic profiling of L. casei Zhang evolved in glucose-limited medium (medium L) or normal medium (medium N) was performed on day 1 and after 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000, 6000, 7000, and 8000 generations. The day 1 expression profiles (Ancestor-N-P1 or Ancestor-L-P1) were used as the baseline profiles for each evolved population. TMT quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using a high-resolution mass spectrometer. Data screening was performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.01 to obtain highly viable qualitative results. Genomic re-sequencing was also conducted followed by data filtering and variant calling. Experimental evolution The laboratory evolution experiments were based on the standard protocol reported previously

### Data Protocol
TMT quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using a high-resolution mass spectrometer, Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific), to obtain the original map file (.raw file). Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software [20] (Thermo Scientific) was used to convert the original map file generated by Q Exactive into an .mgf file, and the data were submitted to the MASCOT2.2 server for database retrieval via built-in software tools. Then, using Proteome Discoverer 1.4, the library file (.Dat file) on the MASCOT server was introduced back to the software, followed by data screening with a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.01 to obtain highly viable qualitative results.  The protein sequence was qualitatively analyzed by combining the protein database NCBI_Lactobacillus_casei_Zhang_5461_20160928.fasta (total number of sequences: 5461; download time: 2016-09-28). Mascot 2.2 was used for database searching and quantitative analysis. In the quantitative analysis process, Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used to extract the ion peak intensity of the peptide, and the quantitative values were normalized [NCBI refseq protein ID and GI conversion were performed using the NCBI online tool; according to the refseq protein ID, uniprot was used to obtain Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation and the corresponding gene symbol]. According to the GenBank file at https://www.ncbi.nhm/niuccore/NC_021224.2, the NCBI refseq protein ID information for the gene locus tag was obtained, which can associate the protein data with the re-sequenced genome data. For the convenience of gene annotation, the corresponding Entrez gene IDs of the proteins were used for further bioinformatics analysis. First, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed for bacteria grown in medium N (N group) and medium L (L group) to screen for proteins with larger intergroup differences than intragroup differences. The significantly differentially expressed proteins between the N and L groups of the same generation were screened using a t-test, and FDR < 0.05 was the threshold of screening. The L group-specific proteins were illustrated using a Venn diagram. To obtain an overview of the biological functions of the proteins, GO analysis [19] was performed using the software program Blast2GO [18], and KEGG annotation was performed using the KEGG database (http://geneontology.org/) [21]. The hypergeometric test method was used to perform GO and KEGG enrichment analysis of differentially expressed proteins using R language. Enrichment results with FDR < 0.05 were considered significant. Genomic re-sequencing, assembly, and annotation Genomic DNA isolated from each sample of each generation was used to generate the genomic DNA library using the Illumina TruSeq™ DNA Sample Prep Kit [22] following the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). L. casei Zhang generations 1000 and 2000 in the L and N groups were sequenced using the Illumina Miseq platform [23], and the other generations were sequenced using the Illumina Hiseq platform [24]. Sequencing assembly referred to ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/bacteria/release-33/fasta/bacteria_14_collection/lactobacillus_casei_str_zhang/dna/Lactobacillus_casei_str_zhang.ASM1924v3.dna.chromosome.Chromosome.fa.gz. Genome annotation was performed using ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/bacteria/release-33/gff3/bacteria_14_collection/lactobacillus_casei_str_zhang/Lactobacillus_casei_str_zhang.ASM1924v3.33.chromosome.Chromosome.gff3.gz.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient starvation is an important survival challenge for bacteria during industrial production of functional foods. As next-generation sequencing technology has greatly advanced, we performed proteomic and genomic analysis to investigate the response of Lactobacillus casei Zhang to a glucose-restricted environment. L. casei Zhang strains were permitted to evolve in glucose-restricted or normal medium from a common ancestor over a 3 year period, and they were sampled at 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000, 6000, 7000, and 8000 generations and subjected to proteomic and genomic analyses. Genomic resequencing data revealed different point mutations and other mutational events in each selected generation of L. casei Zhang under glucose restriction stress. The differentially expressed proteins induced by glucose restriction were mostly related to fructose and mannose metabolism, carbohydrate metabolic processes, lyase activity, and amino-acid-transporting ATPase activity. Integrative proteomic and genomic analysis revealed that the mutations protected L. casei Zhang against glucose starvation by regulating other cellular carbohydrate, fatty acid, and amino acid catabolism; phosphoenolpyruvate system pathway activation; glycogen synthesis; ATP consumption; pyruvate metabolism; and general stress-response protein expression. The results help reveal the mechanisms of adapting to glucose starvation and provide new strategies for enhancing the industrial utility of L. casei Zhang.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus casei str.  zhang ;lace of glucose

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University.

### Submitter
Jie Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Jie Yu
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University.


