### Accession
PXD045145

### Title
Highly contractile 3D tissue engineered skeletal muscles from human iPSCs reveal similarities with primary myoblast-derived tissues

### Description
Skeletal muscle research is transitioning towards 3D tissue engineered in vitro models reproducing muscle’s native architecture and supporting measurement of functionality. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) offer high yields of cells for differentiation. It has been difficult to differentiate high quality, pure 3D muscle tissues from hiPSCs that show contractile properties comparable to primary myoblast-derived tissues. Here, we present a transgene-free method for the generation of purified, expandable myogenic progenitors (MPs) from hiPSCs grown under feeder-free conditions. We defined a protocol with optimal hydrogel and medium conditions that allowed production of highly contractile 3D tissue engineered skeletal muscles with forces similar to primary myoblast-derived tissues. Gene expression and proteomic analysis between hiPSC-derived and primary myoblast-derived 3D tissues revealed a similar expression profile of proteins involved in myogenic differentiation and sarcomere function. The protocol should be generally applicable for the study of personalized human skeletal muscle tissue in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
3D-TESMs generated in Ecoflex Replica-based chambers were used for proteomic analysis. For analyses, three 3D-TESMs per biological replica were pooled. Three biological replicas were used per cell line and differentiated for 0 or 7 days. After culturing, all 3D-TESMs were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. As a negative control, three cell-free tissues were included containing only fibrinogen, thrombin and Matrigel and were snap-frozen after 30 minutes of polymerization. Tissues were resuspended in 50 µL urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES/KOH pH 8.0) and sonicated for complete disruption. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP and 15 mM CAA at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) at an enzyme_substrate ratio of 1:100 for 3 hours, diluted with three sample volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and further digested with Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at an enzyme_substrate ratio of 1:100 at room temperature overnight. Proteases were inactivated by adding formic acid to 1% and undigested proteins were removed by centrifugation (20,000 x g, RT, 10 min). Peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips.  Proteomics data were acquired on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS PRO device, coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 50 cm column packed in-house with C18 Poroshell beads (2.7 μm, Agilent). A two-hour gradient within a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (buffer B) was used. Buffer B was increased from 4% to 35% within 98 minutes and further to 55% within 12 minutes. The gradient was ramped up to 95% buffer B within 4 minutes and maintained for 6 minutes to elute any remaining peptides. Full MS scans from 350-1400 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target of 1.2E7 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC target of 1.5E6 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. A total of 12, 10 and 8 fragmentation scans were acquired at FAIMS compensation voltages of -50 V, -65 V and -80 V, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14) using implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Peptides and proteins were identified using human Uniprot database (FASTA file downloaded 13/9/2019) with common contaminants. All parameters were set to default values and Trypsin/P was chosen as protease. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered a fixed modification. The “match between runs” algorithm was enabled, and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed based on proteotypic peptide intensities. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v. 1.6.15) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were filtered and LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Data were normalized by column-wise median subtraction and two-sided t-tests were performed to identify differentially expressed proteins. Permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) estimation was performed with a Fudge factor (S0) of 0.1 and 500 permutations. The FDR cutoff was set to 0.05. Identified protein groups were annotated with Gene Ontology terms for Cellular Component, Molecular Function and Biological Process. Graphical visualization was done in Instant Clue.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle research is transitioning toward 3D tissue engineered in&#xa0;vitro models reproducing muscle's native architecture and supporting measurement of functionality. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) offer high yields of cells for differentiation. It has been difficult to differentiate high-quality, pure 3D muscle tissues from hiPSCs that show contractile properties comparable to primary myoblast-derived tissues. Here, we present a transgene-free method for the generation of purified, expandable myogenic progenitors (MPs) from hiPSCs grown under feeder-free conditions. We defined a protocol with optimal hydrogel and medium conditions that allowed production of highly contractile 3D tissue engineered skeletal muscles with forces similar to primary myoblast-derived tissues. Gene expression and proteomic analysis between hiPSC-derived and primary myoblast-derived 3D tissues revealed a similar expression profile of proteins involved in myogenic differentiation and sarcomere function. The protocol should be generally applicable for the study of personalized human skeletal muscle tissue in health and disease.

### Keywords
Myongeic differentiation, Hipsc, 3d tissue

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr W. W. M. Pim Pijnappel
Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, Netherlands


