### Accession
PXD010035

### Title
Glycoproteome of Human lung cancer cell by LC-MSMS

### Description
We demonstrate the utility of lectin-magnetic nanoprobe coupled with Orbitrap HCD-CID-MS/MS for complementary glycotope-specific enrichment and site-specific glycosylation analysis of the glycoproteome. Using non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells as model, this approach allowed us to compare the glycosylation profiles of the drug resistant cell, PC9, and its resistant derivative, PC9-IR. The complementary enrichment allowed broader targeting of different glycoforms; using Byonic software, confident identification of a total of 2767 and 2290 non-redundant intact glycopeptides was achieved for PC9-IR and PC9, respectively. This also enabled glycan profiling of the onco-protein EGFR, without immunoprecipitation. Moreover, the glycan specificity afforded by the lectin@MNP allowed as to observe increased terminal and core fucosylation in EGFR from PC9-IR, which demonstrates the potential for protein glycosylation alterations in the resistant cell line. The multi-lectin nanoprobe-based affinity mass spectrometry presents a new method for large-scale glycoproteomic profiling of different sample types without prior fractionation or immunoprecipitation.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were extracted from two lung cancer cell line. Using 3 types of lectin@MNP, the glycopeptides were enriched and desalted by C18 ziptip. Intact glycopeptide and de-glycosylated peptide by PNGase F were analyzed by Orbitrap Velos MS, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from de-glycosylated peptide analysis were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and searched by Mascot and SEQUEST searching engine with SwissProt human database. The intact glycopeptides were identified by Byonic software.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the functional role of glycosylation-mediated pathogenesis requires deep characterization of glycoproteome, which remains extremely challenging due to the inherently complex nature of glycoproteins. We demonstrate the utility of lectin-magnetic nanoprobe (MNP@lectin) coupled to Orbitrap HCD-CID-MS/MS for complementary glycotope-specific enrichment and site-specific glycosylation analysis of the glycoproteome. By three nanoprobes, MNP@ConA, MNP@AAL, and MNP@SNA, our results revealed the first large-scale glycoproteome of nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with 2290 and 2767 nonredundant glycopeptides confidently identified (Byonic score &#x2265;100) in EGFR-TKI-sensitive PC9 and -resistant PC9-IR cells, respectively, especially with more fucosylated and sialylated glycopeptides in PC9-IR cells. The complementary enrichment was demonstrated with only five glycopeptides commonly enriched in three MNP@lectins. Glycotope specificity of 79 and 62% for enrichment was achieved using MNP@AAL and MNP@SNA, respectively. Label-free quantitation revealed predominant fucosylation in PC9-IR cells, suggesting its potential role associated with NSCLC resistance. Moreover, without immunoprecipitation, this multilectin nanoprobe allows the sensitive identification of 51 glycopeptides from 10 of 12 reported sites from onco-protein EGFR. Our results not only demonstrated a sensitive approach to study the vastly under-represented N-glycoprotome but also may pave the way for a glycoproteomic atlas to further explore the site-specific function of glycoproteins associated with drug resistance in NSCLC.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Glycoproteom, Lung cancer cell

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


