### Accession
PXD024546

### Title
Proteomic analysis of polysomes isolated from human cells infected with polio, zika or dengue viruses

### Description
Viral pathogens are an ongoing threat to public health worldwide. Dissecting their dependence on host biosynthetic pathways could lead to effective antiviral therapies. To define how entero- and flaviviruses redirect host ribosomes to synthesize viral proteins and disable host protein production, we performed proteomic analysis of lysates and isolated polysomes from human Huh7 cells infected with either polio, zika or dengue viruses. We find that infection remodels polysome composition along similar principles, without major changes to core ribosome stoichiometry. These viruses use different strategies to evictfrom polysomes a common set of translation initiation and RNA surveillance factors while recruiting host machineries specifically required for viral biogenesis. We also find that both zika and dengue utilize the collagen prolyl-hydroxylation machinery to mediate co-translational modification of conserved prolines in the viral polyprotein. Our findings show how RNA viruses co-opt polysome modularity and establish a powerful strategy to identify targets for selective antiviral interventions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell lysates or isolated polysomes using methanol-chloroform precipitation. Pellets were air dried and resuspendedin 8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.5) and 2-4 µg total protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation by incubation with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature followed by 55 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature, in the dark. The samples were then incubated with 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio of sequencing-grade trypsin overnight at 37oC. Peptides were dried, desalted with C18 Ziptips and resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid in water. LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted using Velos Pro Elite Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to a nanoAcquity UPLC system through an EASY-Spray nanoESI ion source. Peptides were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (75µm x 15 cm column packed with 3µm PepMap C18 resin) 2% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 20 min at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. Peptides were separated at 400 nL/min using a gradient from 2% to 25% B over 220 min followed by a second gradient from 25% to 37% B over 8 minutes and then a column wash at 75% B and reequilibration at 2% B. Precursor scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (300-1800 m/z, resolution: 60,000@400 m/z, AGC target: 2e6). The top 6 most intense, doubly charged or higher ions were isolated (4 m/z isolation window), subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation (27.5 NCE), and the product ions measured in the Orbitrap analyzer (15,000@400 m/z, AGC target: 9e4).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0. MS/MS spectra searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine against the forward and reverse human Uniprotdatabase (downloaded August 28, 2017), as well as viral amino acid sequences P03300 (polio), AMC13911.1 (zika) and P29991 (dengue). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For proline hydroxylation studies, proline hydroxylation (+15.9949 Da) was added as a variable modification. Parent peptides and fragment ions were searched with maximal mass deviation of 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Mass recalibration was performed with a window of 20 ppm. Maximum allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was <0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels, based on a standard target-decoy database approach. The "calculate peak properties" and "match between runs" options were enabled. When proteins could not be distinguished based on identified peptides, they were merged into a single protein group. All statistical tests were performed with Perseus version 1.6.7.0 using either ProteinGroups, Peptides or HydroxyprolineSites output tables from MaxQuant. Potential contaminants, proteins identified in the reverse dataset and proteins only identified by sitewere filtered out. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used to estimate absolute protein abundance. Data was log2 transformed, divided into core ribosome and nonribosomal sets, and median adjusted. ANOVA with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.01 was used to detect statistically significant differences between grouped replicates. Hierarchical clustering was performed using a Euclidean distance approach after filtering for proteins detected in 3 of 3 replicates in at least once condition.

### Publication Abstract
Viral pathogens are an ongoing threat to public health worldwide. Analysing their dependence on host biosynthetic pathways could lead to effective antiviral therapies<sup>1</sup>. Here we integrate proteomic analyses of polysomes with functional genomics and pharmacological interventions to define how enteroviruses and flaviviruses remodel host polysomes to synthesize viral proteins and disable host protein production. We find that infection with polio, dengue or Zika virus markedly modifies polysome composition, without major changes to core ribosome stoichiometry. These viruses use different strategies to evict a common set of translation initiation and RNA surveillance factors from polysomes while recruiting host machineries that are specifically required for viral biogenesis. Targeting these specialized viral polysomes could provide a new approach for antiviral interventions. For example, we find that both Zika and dengue use the collagen proline hydroxylation machinery to mediate cotranslational modification of conserved proline residues in the viral polyprotein. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of proline hydroxylation impairs nascent viral polyprotein folding and induces its aggregation and degradation. Notably, such interventions prevent viral polysome remodelling and lower virus production. Our findings delineate the modular nature of polysome specialization at the virus-host interface and establish a powerful strategy to identify targets for selective antiviral interventions.

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Translation, Proteostasis, Protein synthesis, Protein folding, Ribosomes, Lc-ms/ms, Viruses, Polysomes

### Affiliations
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub
Department of Microbiology and Immunology University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) USA

### Submitter
Ranen Aviner

### Lab Head
Dr Raul Andino
Department of Microbiology and Immunology University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) USA


