### Accession
PXD030978

### Title
GATD3A, a mitochondrial deglycase with evolutionary origins from gammaproteobacteria, restricts the formation of advanced glycation endproducts

### Description
Functional complexity of the eukaryotic mitochondrial proteome is augmented by independent gene acquisition from bacteria since its endosymbiotic origins. Mammalian homologs of many ancestral mitochondrial proteins have uncharacterized catalytic activities. Recent forward genetics approaches have attributed functions to proteins in established metabolic pathways limiting the possibility of identifying novel biology which may be relevant to human disease. We undertook a bottom-up biochemistry approach to identify evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial proteins with catalytic potential. Here, we identify a Parkinson-associated DJ-1/PARK7-like protein – glutamine amidotransferase-like class 1 domain containing 3A (GATD3A), with evolutionary origins from gammaproteobacteria. We demonstrate that GATD3A localizes to the mitochondrial matrix and functions as a deglycase. Through its amidolysis domain, GATD3A removes non-enzymatic chemical modifications produced during the Maillard reaction between dicarbonyls and amines of nucleotides and amino acids. GATD3A interacts with factors involved in mitochondrial mRNA processing and translation, suggestive of a role in maintaining integrity of important biomolecules through its deglycase activity. The loss of GATD3A in mice is associated with accumulation of advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and altered mitochondrial dynamics. An evolutionary perspective helped us prioritize a previously uncharacterized but predicted mitochondrial protein GATD3A, which mediates the removal of early glycation intermediates. GATD3A restricts the formation of AGEs in mitochondria and is a relevant target for diseases where AGE deposition is a pathological hallmark. This dataset consists of peptides identified following in-gel digestions of bands observed following FPLC purification of recombinant human GATD3A.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation:  For identification of co-eluting proteins following FPLC, samples were run on SDS-PAGE, and stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Bands of interest were excised, and gel pieces were destained using destaining solution (10% glacial acetic acid, 50% methanol, 40% Milli-Q H2O). The excised gel bands were subjected to previously published trypsin digestion methods with minor modifications [62]. Post reduction and alkylation steps, the dried gel bands were rehydrated in a 12.5 ng/uL trypsin solution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/0.05% AALS (Anionic Acid Labile Surfactant, Protea), overnight digestion at 37C, pH 7.8. Digests were collected, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%, agitating for 15 min at 37C for surfactant degradation and dried down. The resulting peptide mixture was concentrated and desalted with C18 Zip-tips (Millipore Sigma), following the company's protocol.  Mass spectrometry analysis:  Separation was achieved by 4–30% linear gradient of acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid for 65 min. An electrospray voltage of 1.9 kV was applied to the eluent via the EASY-Spray column electrode. The Orbitrap Lumos was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode. Full scan MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with a normal precursor mass range of 375–1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120k. The automatic gain control (AGC) target and maximum accumulation time settings were set to 4 x 105 and 50 ms, respectively. MS2 was triggered by selecting the most intense precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 2.5 x 104 for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation with an AGC target and maximum accumulation time settings of 5 x 104 and 50 ms, respectively. Mass ﬁltering was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the Orbitrap and a collision energy of 35% at a resolution of 15k. To improve the spectral acquisition rate, parallelizable time was activated. The number of MS2 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software, using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) search node. All peak lists were searched in parallel against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein databases Homo sapiens (20,316 sequences, released 2018_11) and Escherichia coli strain K12 (4418 sequences, released 2018_11) concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences. The following search parameters were set for MS1 tolerance of 10ppm; orbitrap-detected MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids; fixed modification of Cys (carbamidomethylation); variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation of Asn, and Gln, and Protein N-terminus Acetyl. Target Decoy was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide spectrum matches, set to a p-value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fplc, Molecular evolution, Mitochondria, Glutamine amidotransferase, Advanced glycation endproduct, Park7, Deglycase, Dj-1, In gel digestion, Glycation

### Affiliations
Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Anand Swaroop

### Lab Head
Dr Anand Swaroop
Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.


