### Accession
PXD037396

### Title
Proteome Changes of Diary Calve Rumen Epithelium from Birth to Postweaning

### Description
Rumen epithelium plays a central role in absorbing, transporting, and metabolizing of short-chain fatty acids. For diary calve, the growth of rumen papillae greatly enhances the rumen surface area to absorb nutrients. However, the molecular mechanism underlying diary calve rumen postnatal development remains rarely understood. Here, we firstly performed a shotgun approach and bioinformatics analyses were used to investigate and compare proteomic profiles of Holstein calve rumen epithelium on day 0, 30, 60 and 90 of age. Then,a total of 4372 proteins were identified, in which we found 852, 342, 164 and 95 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between D0 and D30, between D30 and D60, between D60 and D90, respectively. Finally, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses were performed to provide a comprehensive proteomic landscape of diary calve rumen development at tissue level.To conclude, our data indicated that keratinocyte differentiation, mitochondrion formation, the establishment of urea transport and  innate immune system play central roles during rumen epithelium development. BH4 presents an important role in rumen epithelial keratinization. The biological processes of BH4 biosynthesis and molecular function of NADP binding participate in mitochondrial cristae formation. The proposed datasets provide a useful basis for future studies to better comprehend diary calve rumen epithelial development.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and trypsin digestion for label-free proteome  The sample preparation of protein was performed essentially as the procedure described previously (Zheng et al., 2022). Rumen epithelium samples were ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with PASP lysis buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M Urea, pH 8.0), followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4 ℃. The supernatants were collected and quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). 20 μg of the protein sample was loaded to 12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis for quality control and the supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56 ℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide (IAM) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20 ℃ for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the precipitation was collected.  After washing with 1 mL cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5). trypsin and 100 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 ℃ for 4 h. Then trypsin and CaCl2 were added digested overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample, adjusted pH under 3, and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) 3 times, then added elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were collected and lyophilized. LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was then performed according to the procedure described previously (Zhou et al., 2019a). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and B solution (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) were prepared. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL of solution A, centrifuged at 14000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃, and 1 μg of the supernatant was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (4.5 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by using Q ExactiveTM series mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany) at Novogene Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.1 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320 ℃. Full scan range from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control  target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20 s. The raw data of MS detection was named as “.raw”.

### Data Protocol
The all resulting spectra were searched by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The corresponding proteins were matched with ovis aries database. The search parameters are set as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ion was 10 ppm and mass tolerance for product ion was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl was specified as fixed modifications, Oxidation of methionine was specified as dynamic modification, and acetylation was specified as N-Terminal modification. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. To improve the quality of analysis results, the software PD 2.2 further filtered the retrieval results: Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) with a credibility of more than 99% was identified PSMs. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide. The identified PSMs and protein were retained and performed with FDR no more than 1.0%. Principal component analysis (PCA) and volcano plot, which combined fold-change analysis and t-tests, were performed. Proteins with a minimum fold change of 2 (ratio >2 or < 0.5, p<0.05) were considered to be regulated differently between comparisons. Bioinformatics analysis GO functional analysis was conducted using the interproscan program against the non-redundant protein database (including Pfam, PRINTS, ProDom, SMART, ProSite, PANTHER), and the databases of COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) and KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) were used to analyze the protein family and pathway. DPEs were used for Volcanic map analysis, cluster heat map analysis and enrichment analysis of GO, subcellular localization and KEGG. The probable protein-protein interactions were predicted using the STRING-db server(http://string.embl.de/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diary calve, Proteome, Rumen epithelium, Postnatal development

### Affiliations
zhejiang academy of agricultural sciences
198 shiqiao road, hangzhou, zhejiang province, P.R.China

### Submitter
kaizhi zheng

### Lab Head
Dr kaizhi zheng
198 shiqiao road, hangzhou, zhejiang province, P.R.China


