### Accession
PXD016492

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of cardiac biowires, cardiac hypertrophy patient explants, and hypertrophic mouse heart

### Description
we apply and evaluate an integrative mass spectrometry-based tissue profiling strategy that allows for a global quantitative phospho-proteomic survey of normal and disease tissue from human, mouse and OOC-derived specimens.  The applicability and utility of this approach was tested in the context of fibrotic cardiac tissue samples from Biowire OOC specimens versus cardiac tissue surgical explants from hypertrophic patients and a transaortic constriction mouse pressure-overload model. Unique attributes and phosphorylation signatures specific to each tissue source were identified, but the results clearly showed that clinically-actionable biological inferences are generated by leveraging commonalities exhibited across the compendium. To validate the application of the cross-platform analytical framework, proof of principle drug testing was performed for selection of anti-fibrotic compounds targeting one of the identified fibrosis-related kinases, GSK3, consistent with a role as a key mediator of fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Collected tissues were analyzed by LC-MS based phosphoproteomics.  A total of 100 μg of protein from each sample was trypsin-digested. Briefly, each sample was reduced by 2.5 mM DTT for 60 min at room temperature and alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted 10X in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate after which 4 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added before overnight incubation at 37°C. Resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 TopTip (Glygen) as per manufacturer’s instructions, dried to completion by SpeedVac (Thermo), labelled with TMT10-plex reagents as described by manufacturer, and combined following the labelling procedure. The combined sample was again dried to completion by SpeedVac and resuspended in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). HILIC chromatography was performed on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system connected to a 2.0 × 150 mm 5-μm particle TSKgel Amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed employing TiO2-coated Mag Sepharose beads (GE healthcare) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the dried peptide mixture from each HILIC fraction was resuspended in 200 μL of binding buffer (1M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA), incubated with TiO2 beads for 30 min at room temperature before the supernatant was removed. The beads were then washed once with binding buffer and three times with wash buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA); phosphopeptides were eluted in 5% ammonium hydroxide and dried to completion by SpeedVac prior to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and phosphopeptides were directly ionized by an EasySpray ion source (Thermo) into an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). 15 MS2 data-dependent scans were acquired per single MS1 full scan mass spectrum using profile mode with HCD fragmentation.  Resulting RAW files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.1; http://maxquant.org/) with “Reporter ion MS2” 10plex TMT settings using human and mouse protein UNIPROT databases allowing for three missed trypsin cleavage sites and a reporter ion tolerance of 0.01. Variable modifications were set for phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Candidate (phospho)peptide, protein, and phosphorylation site identifications were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate threshold based on searching of the reverse sequence database. MaxQuant search data was analyzed by Perseus (version 1.6.0.7) and Bioconductor packages in R [15,16]. All proteomic and phosphoproteomic data was log2-transformed and quartile normalized by “width adjustment” in Perseus. Identified phosphorylation sites were filtered based on a 0.7 site identification probability and, quantitative values for each site were combined and collapsed only for phosphopeptides carrying the same number of modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cardiovascular, Tmt, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
9Departments of Biochemistry and Biology and the Centre for Network Systems Biology,  Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Uros Kuzmanov

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
9Departments of Biochemistry and Biology and the Centre for Network Systems Biology,  Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States


