### Accession
PXD021305

### Title
The inflammasome-activated cytokine IL-1 is targeted for ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation to limit its inflammatory potential

### Description
Interleukin-1B (IL-1B) is pathologically activated by inflammasome-associated caspase-1 in rare autoinflammatory conditions and in wide-spread diseases. Therefore, IL-1B activity must be fine-tuned to enable anti-microbial responses whilst limiting collateral damage. Here we report that, relative to other inflammasome components, IL-1B is rapidly turned over by the proteasome and this correlates with its decoration by K11-, K63- and K48-linked ubiquitin chains. This IL-1 degradation signal is not only a feature of inflammasome priming but is also triggered upon inflammasome activation. We demonstrate that IL-1 K133 is modified by ubiquitin and forms a salt bridge with IL-1B D129. Loss of IL-1 K133 ubiquitylation, or disruption of the K133:D129 electrostatic interaction, stabilizes IL-1Bprotein levels. Accordingly, IL-1B K133R/K133R mice display increased precursor IL-1Bupon inflammasome priming and increased bioactive IL-1B following inflammasome activation, both in vitro and following LPS injection in vivo. These findings reveal new mechanisms for limiting IL-1B activity and safeguarding against damaging inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were plated in 15 cm petri dishes and grown to 90% confluency. FLAG-IL-1B was transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies). After 48 hours, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with 700 ul of non-denaturing DISC lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 2mM KCL, 1% Triton X-100, Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 uM PR619 and 1 mM NEM) on ice for 30 minutes. Cell lysates were spun at ~13000x g (4uC) and the supernatant collected. A 50 ul slurry of M2 agarose anti-FLAG conjugated beads was added to the clarified cell lysate and rotated overnight at 4OC. Subsequently, anti-FLAG beads were washed 4 times with DISC lysis buffer and bound FLAG-IL-1 eluted 3 times with 50 ul of elution buffer (0.5% SDS and 5mM DTT) at 65OC. Eluted proteins were run on NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies). SYPRO Ruby staining was used to view the purified proteins, in-gel trypsin digestion performed, and digested peptides analyzed by high resolution mass spectrometry as previously described to identify modified IL-1B residues.

### Data Protocol
Raw files consisting of high-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine 59. Extracted peak lists were searched against the reviewed Homo sapiens (UniProt, March 2015) database containing murine IL1 sequence, as well as a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the false discovery rate (FDR) using strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Modifications: Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of Met, phosphorylation (Ser, Thr and Tyr) and ubiquitination (Lys) were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions were 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) is activated by inflammasome-associated caspase-1 in rare autoinflammatory conditions and in a variety of other inflammatory diseases. Therefore, IL-1&#x3b2; activity must be fine-tuned to enable anti-microbial responses whilst limiting collateral damage. Here, we show that precursor IL-1&#x3b2; is rapidly turned over by the proteasome and this correlates with its decoration by K11-linked, K63-linked and K48-linked ubiquitin chains. The ubiquitylation of IL-1&#x3b2; is not just a degradation signal triggered by inflammasome priming and activating stimuli, but also limits IL-1&#x3b2; cleavage by caspase-1. IL-1&#x3b2; K133 is modified by ubiquitin and forms a salt bridge with IL-1&#x3b2; D129. Loss of IL-1&#x3b2; K133 ubiquitylation, or disruption of the K133:D129 electrostatic interaction, stabilizes IL-1&#x3b2;. Accordingly, Il1b<sup>K133R/K133R</sup> mice have increased levels of precursor IL-1&#x3b2; upon inflammasome priming and increased production of bioactive IL-1&#x3b2;, both in vitro and in response to LPS injection. These findings identify mechanisms that can limit IL-1&#x3b2; activity and safeguard against damaging inflammation.

### Keywords
Caspase-8, Ubiquitin, Interleukin-1, Inflammation, Inflammasome, Toll-like receptor, Caspase-1, Proteasome

### Affiliations
WEHI
Laboratory Head Vince Laboratory The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute Victoria, Australia 3052

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr James Vince
Laboratory Head Vince Laboratory The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute Victoria, Australia 3052


