### Accession
PXD022569

### Title
Phytophthora detection in planta

### Description
Phytophthora is arguably one of the most damaging genera of plant pathogens and is recognized as a threat to a broad spectrum of plant species. This pathogen is well suited to transmission via the international plant trade, and globalization has been promoting its spread since the 19th century. Early detection is essential for its effective control and of paramount importance in reducing the economic and ecological impact. The increasing sensitivity of the mass spectrometry-based detection indicates that a protein-based analysis may soon complement routine molecular techniques for pathogen detection. Here, a shotgun proteomics approach was utilized for Phytophthora analysis. The collection of 37 Phytophthora isolates representing 12 different species was screened, and species-specific peptide patterns were identified. Next, Phytophthora proteins were detected in planta, employing model plants S. tuberosum and H. vulgare. Although the evolutionarily conserved sequences represented more than 10% of the host proteome and limited the pathogen detection, the comparison between qPCR and protein data highlighted more than 300 protein markers correlated positively with the amount of P. infestans DNA. Finally, the analysis of P. palmivora response in barley proteome and metabolome revealed significant alterations in primary metabolism, providing the first insight into molecular mechanisms behind this biotic interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Cerna et al., 2017) employing a combination of phenol/acetone/TCA extraction. Digested peptides were measured using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fisher), a qTOF maXis Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker), or the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously (Dufková et al., 2019; Berková et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification, the acquired spectra were searched against the reference Phytophthora (https://www.uniprot.org/) and plant proteomes (https://plants.ensembl.org) databases by Proteome Discoverer 2.2-2.4 (Thermo Fisher), employing Sequest HT, MS Amanda 2.0 (Dorfer et al., 2014) or MSFragger (Kong et al., 2017) with the following parameters: (i) qTOF data (Table S1, S2) - mass tolerance MS1 35 ppm, MS2 0.05 Da; Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Modifications - up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation; (ii) Lumos data (in planta experiments, P. infestans) - mass tolerance MS1 5 ppm, MS2 0.02 Da; Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Modifications - up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation; Met-loss (protein N-terminus); Cys carbamidomethylation; the MS Fragger algorithm was employed exclusively with Lumos data and the default settings for mass-tolerant search (MS1 tolerance 500 Da). The quantitative differences were determined by employing precursor ion quantification by Profile Analysis 2.0 and the spectral counting method (qTOF), and by Minora, followed by normalization and background-based t-test for peptide- and protein-based quantitation. For selected candidate proteins, the corresponding peptide peak areas were manually evaluated in Skyline (Pino et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P. palmivora, P. infestans, Hordeum vulgare, Solanum tuberosum, Proteomics, Phytophthora

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


