### Accession
PXD030697

### Title
Apoptotic auditory brainstem of E13 chick embryo

### Description
We characterized the proteome of the auditory brainstem of a chick embryo on embryonic day 13, when apoptosis occurs in auditory nuclei. We identified caspase substrates by searching the peptidome for peptides C-terminal to caspase-typical cleavage sites.

### Sample Protocol
Eggs from a hybrid flock of White Leghorn males and Rhode Island Red females (AA Lab Eggs) were incubated in a rotating shelf incubator at 37.5°C for 13 days. The portion of the brainstem containing the auditory nuclei was dissected, snap-frozen and stored at -80°C in 3 biological replicates with 2 pooled brainstems in each. The three samples were each disaggregated in 70% formic acid for 72 hours at room temperature with constant shaking and occasional ultrasonication in a cuphorn solicitor. One crystal of cyanogen bromide (CNBr) was added to each sample, followed by overnight incubation in the dark. Samples were evaporated to dryness in a Speedvac vacuum concentrator, then redissolved in 8 M urea, 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; pH 8.0), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, diluted to 6 M urea using 100 mM TEAB, and digested overnight at 37°C with LysC (Promega - R-LysC; enzyme:substrate mass ratio =1:100). Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 0.1 M TEAB, then trypsinized (Promega - Trypsin Gold; enzyme:substrate mass ratio = 1:100). The resulting peptides were isolated using a stacked C18/SCX STAGE tip (Rappsilber et al., 2007) eluting with 54 mM, 73 mM, 100 mM, 130 mM, 176 mM, and 395 mM ammonium acetate in 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid (FA), with a final elution in 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile. Dried elutions were redissolved in 0.1% FA in water. The resulting samples were injected sequentially to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro via an Easy-nLC 1200, developing a gradient from 5 – 23% B (93% CH3CN in water) over 115 min then to 35% B over 20 min, 0.25 microL/min. In each precursor scan (FTMS; 60000 resolution) up to the 15 most intense ions with intensity value of > 2000, excluded +1 charge state and dynamic exclusion (repeat count = 1, repeat duration = 30 sec, exclusion list size = 500, exclusion duration = 40 sec) were selected for MS2 (FTMS; 7500 resolution) via HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data from groups of seven elutions were combined and searched using Mascot 2.7 against the Gallus gallus (taxon ID 9031) UniProt reference proteome plus a database of common contaminants, with allowable charge states of +2 to +4 and allowing CNBr-trypsin cleavage specificity, as an error-tolerant search (which allows semiCNBr-trypsin specificity), and with precursor and product mass tolerances of ± 20 ppm and ± 20 mmu respectively. Data were thresholded at significance (p) < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The auditory brainstem relies on precise circuitry to facilitate sound source localization. In the chick, the development of this specialized circuitry requires non-apoptotic activity of caspase-3, for which we previously identified several hundred proteolytic substrates. Here we tested whether the sequence of the caspase cleavage site differentially encodes proteolytic preference in apoptotic and non-apoptotic contexts. We constructed a consensus sequence for caspase activity in the non-apoptotic chick auditory brainstem comprising the four residues N-terminal to the cleavage site: IX(G/R)D&#x2193; where X represents no significant enrichment and &#x2193; represents the cleavage site. We identified GO terms significantly enriched among caspase substrates containing motifs found in the above consensus sequence. (G/R)D&#x2193; was associated with the term "Structural Constituent of Cytoskeleton" (SCoC), suggesting that SCoC proteins may be specifically targeted by caspase activity during non-apoptotic developmental processes. To ascertain whether this consensus sequence was specific to the non-apoptotic auditory brainstem at embryonic day (E) 10, we used protein mass spectrometry of brainstems harvested at a time when auditory brainstem neurons undergo apoptotic cell death (E13). The apoptotic motif VD was significantly enriched among E13 cleavage sites, indicating that motif preference at the P2 subsite had shifted toward the canonical caspase consensus sequence. Additionally, Monte Carlo simulations revealed that only the GD motif was associated with SCoC substrates in the apoptotic auditory brainstem, indicating that GD encodes specificity for SCoC proteins in both non-apoptotic and apoptotic contexts, despite not being preferred in the latter. Finally, to identify candidate human non-apoptotic consensus sequences, we used Monte Carlo analyses to determine motifs and motif pairs associated with SCoC caspase substrates in the Degrabase, a database of cleavage sites in human apoptotic cell lines. We found 11 motifs significantly associated with SCoC proteolysis, including IXXD and GD. We employed a stepwise method to select motif pairs that optimized SCoC specificity for a given coverage of SCoC cleavage events, yielding 11 motif pairs likely to be preferred in SCoC-directed human non-apoptotic caspase consensus sequences. GD + IXXD was among these motif pairs, suggesting a conservation of non-apoptotic consensus sites among vertebrates.

### Keywords
Auditory, Brainstem, Caspase, Chick, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, USA

### Submitter
Forrest Weghorst

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Cramer
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, USA


