### Accession
PXD014225

### Title
Time-resolved phosphoproteomic analysis of the TCR signaling pathway in primary T cells

### Description
T cell receptor (TCR) signaling is essential for the function of T cells. Here we monitor and quantify the dynamics of phosphorylation sites in primary CD4+ T cells during the first 10 minutes after antibody-based TCR stimulation. To capture the earliest molecular events induced by TCR engagement we prepared unstimulated and stimulated T cells (15, 30, 120, 300 or 600 seconds after stimulation). Cells were then lysed in urea, proteins were digested into tryptic peptides, and phosphorylated peptides were enriched using titanium (TiO2) beads. In most experiments a further enrichment step was performed using phospho-Tyrosine (pTyr) immuno-precipitation. We performed 4 independent experiments, each containing 6 time-points of stimulation. This dataset contains the raw LC-MS/MS files of the pre-enriched peptide samples (SP, 24 samples) and the matching TiO2-enriched peptides (TiO2, 24 samples), as well as the eluates from further pTyr immuno-precipitation from 3 experiments (Ptyr, replicates 1, 3, 4: 18 samples). All samples were analyzed in triplicate or quadruplicate nanoLC-MS runs.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ or Cas9-EGFP OT-I CD8+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens with a Dynabeads Untouched Mouse CD4+ or CD8+ T Cell Kit (Life Technologies), expanded for 48 hours with plate-bound anti-CD3 (145-2C11) and soluble anti-CD28 (37-51; both from American Type Culture Collection), then grown in the presence of IL-2 (5–10 U/ml) for 48 h. A total of 100 x 106 short-term expanded CD4+ T cells from wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with antibodies. In the latter case, CD4+ T cells were incubated with biotinylated anti-CD3 (0.2 ug per 106 cells; 145-2C11) and anti-CD4 (0.2 ug per 106 cells; GK1.5) and then cross-linked with purified streptavidin for the indicated times at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by snap-freezing cells in liquid nitrogen.  Stimulated cells were thawed in urea buffer (8 M Urea; 50 mM Tris/HCl pH8; 1 mM Sodium orthovanadate; PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche; cOmplete Mini EDTA-free from Roche) to reach a final urea concentration of 6 M and lysed with a Sonics-Vibracell. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM final of dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 20 mM for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. Urea concentration was reduced to 1 M by a 6-fold dilution with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate before trypsin digestion 1:100 (w:w trypsin:peptides) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted through C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). An aliquot of 15 µg of these peptide samples was kept for futher triplicate MS analysis for protein relative quantification (labeled « SP »). All phospho-peptide enrichments were performed with Titansphere TiO2 beads (5 µm; GL Sciences 5020 75000). Peptide pellets were resuspended in TiO2 loading buffer (80% MeCN, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid), and incubated with TiO2 beads (6 mg of beads per mg of peptides) for a 1 h incubation under agitation at room temperature. Beads were then sequentially washed with (i) loading buffer; (ii) 80% MeCN, 1% TFA; and (iii) 10% MeCN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide (pH 11.3). A second elution was performed with 1% ammonium hydroxide, 40% MeCN (pH 11.3). The two eluates were pooled and filtered through an Empore cartridge C8-SD (4mm/1mL) before drying down under vacuum. 10% of these samples were subjected to MS analysis for phospho-serine/threonine relative quantification (labeled « TiO2 »). 90% of the TiO2 eluates were further enriched for phospho-tyrosine containing peptides using PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine rabbit mAb Kits (P-Tyr-1000; Cell Signaling technology). Phospho-peptides were resuspended on ice in cold IAP buffer (14 mg/mL), and incubated with pre-washed PTMScan beads (80 µl of  P-Tyr bead slurry for 20 mg of protein starting material) for incubation overnight at 4°C under mild agitation. Phospho-peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA and dried down before MS analysis for phospho-tyrosine relative quantification (labeled « pTyr »). Peptides and phospho-peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany). Dried samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA spiked with iRT standard peptides (Biognosis) and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with a 75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). The pre-enriched peptides and TiO2-enriched phospho-peptide samples were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate using a 240 min gradient of solvent B (4 to 12% in 44 min, 12 to 30% in 184 min, 30 to 40% in 12 min). The pY-enriched peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate using a 110 min gradient of solvent B (5% to 25% in 80 min, 25% to 50% in 30 min). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. The survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap over m/z 400-1600  with a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected at 3 m/z and fragmented by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target value of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for peptide and TiO2-enriched phospho-peptide samples, and an AGC target value of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms for pY-containing peptide samples.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against mouse entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release2015_05, Mouse taxonomy, 16,699 entries), the Biognosys iRT peptides, and a list of potential contaminant sequences provided in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. The search included methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine, and three missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search, and the mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 25 mmu. Validation was performed through a false discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level determined by target-decoy search in MaxQuant (with additional filters for peptide validation: minimum length of 6 amino acids and a minimum Andromeda score of 40 for modified peptides). The minimal ratio count was set to 1 for calculation of LFQ intensities. MaxQuant processing of files from phosphorylated peptides was performed independently for each enrichment step (TiO2, pY) and each biological series of experiment (replicates 1-4), with the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant enabled for label-free relative quantification of peptide ions across stimulation time points and injection replicates. Quantitative outputs were then combined together, filtered, normalized and processed for statistical analysis as described in  https://github.com/mlocardpaulet/TCR_ABStim2018.

### Publication Abstract
T-cell receptor (TCR) ligation-mediated protein phosphorylation regulates the activation, cellular responses, and fates of T cells. Here, we used time-resolved high-resolution phosphoproteomics to identify, quantify, and characterize the phosphorylation dynamics of thousands of phosphorylation sites in primary T cells during the first 10&#xa0;min after TCR stimulation. Bioinformatic analysis of the data revealed a coherent orchestration of biological processes underlying T-cell activation. In particular, functional modules associated with cytoskeletal remodeling, transcription, translation, and metabolic processes were mobilized within seconds after TCR engagement. Among proteins whose phosphorylation was regulated by TCR stimulation, we demonstrated, using a fast-track gene inactivation approach in primary lymphocytes, that the ITSN2 adaptor protein regulated T-cell effector functions. This resource, called LymphoAtlas, represents an integrated pipeline to further decipher the organization of the signaling network encoding T-cell&#xa0;activation. LymphoAtlas is accessible to the community at: https://bmm-lab.github.io/LymphoAtlas.

### Keywords
Signaling, Tcr, Phosphoproteomics, Primary t cell

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse


