### Accession
PXD013536

### Title
Multifaceted Mass Spectrometric Investigation of Neuropeptide Changes in Atlantic Blue Crab, Callinectes sapidus, in Response to Low pH Stress

### Description
The decrease of pH level in the water affects animals living in aquatic habitat, such as crustaceans. The molecular mechanisms enabling these animals to survive this environmental stress remain unknown. To understand the modulatory function of neuropeptides in crustaceans when encountering drops in pH level, we developed and implemented a multifaceted mass spectrometric platform to investigate the global neuropeptide changes in response to water acidification in the Atlantic blue crab, Callinectes sapidus. Neural tissues were collected at different incubation periods to monitor dynamic changes of neuropeptides under different stress conditions occurring in the animal. Neuropeptide families were found to exhibit distinct expression patterns in different tissues and even each isoform had its specific response to the stress. Circulating fluid in the crabs (hemolymph) was also analyzed after 2-hour exposure to acidification condition, and together with results from tissue analysis, enabled the discovery of neuropeptides participating in the stress accommodation process as putative hormones. Two novel peptide sequences were detected in the hemolymph that appeared to be involved in the stress-related regulation in the crabs.

### Sample Protocol
A moderate pH level (7.6-7.8) was achieved quickly by introducing CO2 via gas tank into the housing tank. The air saturation was at 50%-60%, which was considered as moderate hypoxic condition. Three animals’ tissues, either control or stressed, were pooled into one sample in order to minimize individual variability and manually homogenized using chilled acidified methanol. Undissolved large proteins were removed by centrifugation at 16,100 xg for 10 min. The pellet was washed twice with acidified methanol. Supernatants were combined, dried down and resuspended in 150 μl of 0.1% FA in water, followed by desalting using OMIX C18 Pipette Tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). 150 μl 0.1% FA in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) was used to elute the peptides and the elution was dried down and subject to labeling steps. 0.75 mL of hemolymph was added to an equal volume of acidified methanol to extract peptides and precipitate large proteins. The samples were centrifuged at 16,100 xg for 10min. The pellet was washed twice by acidified methanol and the supernatants were combined, followed by ultrafiltration through 10kDa MWCO tube (rinsed by 0.1M NaOH and 50/50 MeOH/H2O, v/v) being centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 10min. Filtrate was concentrated to dryness using a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and was resuspended in 150 μl of 0.1% FA in water. Samples were then desalted by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and eluted to 150 μl 0.1% FA in 50% acetonitrile (v/v). Elution was dried down and subject to labeling steps. Purified samples were dissolved into 10 μl 0.1% FA in water and labeled with formaldehyde-H2 (1% v/v) and formaldehyde-D2 (1% v/v), for control and stressed sample respectively. Borane pyridine (30mM) was added to the samples, which were then incubated for 15 min in a 37 °C water bath. Ammonium bicarbonate (100mM) was added to quench the reaction. For each biological replicate, one heavy labeled (stressed, formaldehyde-D2) sample and one light labeled (control, formaldehyde-H2) sample were mixed in equal volume, then dried down and re-dissolved in 15 μl 0.1% FA in water. A 10 μl aliquot was subjected to further desalting process using C18 Ziptip Pipette Tips (Merck Millipore Ltd, Tullagreen, Carrightwohill, Co. Cork, IRL) before being loaded to LC-ESI-MS, and the remaining 5 μl was subjected to MALDI-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS raw data was analyzed by PEAKS Studio 7 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) were selected as C-terminal amidation, methionine oxidation, pyroglutamation, dehydration, dimethylation-H2 and dimethylation-D2. Parent mass error tolerance was 50ppm and fragment mass error tolerance was 0.02 Da. No enzyme cleavage was specified in de novo sequencing and database search. An in-house crustacean neuropeptide database was used. Quantitative analysis was conducted with a mass tolerance of 0.2 Da and retention time range of 1.0 min. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with a -10logP value cutoff of 20 in PEAKS were considered for data filtration and validation.  MALDI-MS raw data was imported to a self-coded Java program to filter peak pairs that had mass increments of 28.0313 and 32.0564 Da from exact masses of NPs in database with mass error tolerance at ±5ppm. Peak intensities of heavy (stressed) and light (control) labeled samples were calculated for fold changes in neuropeptide expression.  In both instrument methods, 5 biological replicates were analyzed for the brain, PO, SG, TG, STG, OG at 2hr stress, brain, SG at 4hr stress.  Four biological replicates were analyzed for the PO, TG and STG at 4hr stress and also hemolymph. Each biological replicate consisted of 3 technical replicates. Student’s t-test was applied (unpaired t-test for tissue analysis, paired t-test for hemolymph analysis) and a p-value smaller than 0.05 was considered to be a statistically significant change.

### Publication Abstract
The decrease of pH level in the water affects animals living in aquatic habitat, such as crustaceans. The molecular mechanisms enabling these animals to survive this environmental stress remain unknown. To understand the modulatory function of neuropeptides in crustaceans when encountering drops in pH level, we developed and implemented a multifaceted mass spectrometric platform to investigate the global neuropeptide changes in response to water acidification in the Atlantic blue crab, Callinectes sapidus. Neural tissues were collected at different incubation periods to monitor dynamic changes of neuropeptides under different stress conditions occurring in the animal. Neuropeptide families were found to exhibit distinct expression patterns in different tissues and even each isoform had its specific response to the stress. Circulating fluid in the crabs (hemolymph) was also analyzed after 2-h exposure to acidification, and together with results from tissue analysis, enabled the discovery of neuropeptides participating in the stress accommodation process as putative hormones. Two novel peptide sequences were detected in the hemolymph that appeared to be involved in the stress-related regulation in the crabs.

### Keywords
Crustacean, Mass spectrometry, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry  University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin, Madison

### Submitter
Yang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry  University of Wisconsin-Madison


