### Accession
PXD017305

### Title
Impact of a conjugative plasmid on plant growth-promoting Bacillus velezensis

### Description
Bacillus velezensis strain GH1-13 with a native conjugative plasmid (pBV71) is thought to be beneficial to the bacterium, although no information on its effects exists. Here we show that strain GH1-13 frequently lost the plasmid during normal growth conditions in a rich medium and changed the morphology and sensitivity to selenite and tellurite. Compared to the plasmid-cured cells, the wild-type and complemented cells exhibited multicellular behavior with the expression of conjugative type IV pili and regulatory Rap homologous genes that regulate the interconnection between conjugation and biofilm formation. Further omics-based analyses of morphogenesis, biofilm formation, and antibiotic synthesis suggest that the conjugative plasmid activates envelope stress responses in association with increased biosynthesis of extracellular polysaccharide and antibiotics for protective functions of the host during exponential phase.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (secretomes) released from wild-type (WT) pBV71 plasmid-containing and plasmid-cured (PC) cells of Bacillus velezensis strain GH1-13 were analysed at different incubation times (5 h and 8 h) of the cells in tryptic soy broth (TSB) with aeration (180 rpm) at 25 °C. A 20 mL of the spent culture media at each time point was filtrated using 0.2 µm membrane filters, and a 9 mL portion of the filtered culture fluid was treated with 2 M trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 1 h on ice in order to precipitate proteins. The TCA precipitant was centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 10 min, washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone, and dissolved in 25 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.0) containing 55 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Ten μg concentration of each protein sample (secretome) determined by using a Bio-Rad Bradford Reagent and bovine serum albumin standard was treated with 10 mM DTT to reduce disulfide bonds at 60 °C for 15 min and cooled to room temperature before the alkylation of cysteine with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 2 h in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 2 M trichloroacetic acid for 1 h, centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 15 min, and washed twice with 80% acetone at -20 °C. Air-dried proteins were treated overnight with 0.5 μg of a sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0) at 37 °C and then digested again overnight with addition of 0.5 μg trypsin. Tryptic peptides were acidified by the addition of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned using Millipore ZipTip C18 tips. The dried peptide samples dissolved in 0.4% acetic acid were analysed on a Thermo Velos Pro mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoflow liquid chromatography (nLC) systems and a reverse-phase Magic C18AQ column, 75 μm × 75 mm (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, USA), operated at 0.3 μL/min. The chromatographic condition was a linear gradient from 5% to 40% ACN in a 0.1% formic acid solution for 50 min, followed by a 20 min wash with 80% ACN and a 10 min re-equilibration to the initial condition. A full-scan survey was performed between m/z 300 and 2,000, followed by data-dependent MS2 scans of the 7 most intense ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
The acquired tandem mass spectrometry data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 and Scaffolder version 4.4.5 using a protein database deduced from the chromosome and plasmid sequences of B. velezensis strain GH1-13 and the common protein contaminants in mass spectrometry. The SEQUEST search options for tandem mass spectra were as follows: average mass (m/z); maximum of 1 miscleavage site of trypsin digestion; precursor mass tolerance, 1.5 Da; fragment mass error, 1 Da; static modifications for carbamidomethylation of cysteine; protein probability >99%; and a false-discovery rate (FDR) <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Conjugative plasmid, Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria, Bacillus velezensis

### Affiliations
Catholic University of Daegu School of Medicine
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yong-Hak Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Hak Kim
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine


