### Accession
PXD046636

### Title
Processivity and specificity of histone acetylation by the male-specific-lethal complex

### Description
In this study we focus on the MYST-type acetyltransferase MOF (males-absent-on-the-first, KAT8), which is the effector enzyme of two transcription regulator complexes in Dro-sophila. As part of the male-specific-lethal dosage compensation complex (MSL-DCC, or DCC for short), the enzyme is targeted to transcribed genes on the X chromosome, where it acetylates H4K16 to unfold the chromatin fiber to boost transcription (15-17). In the context of the NSL complex (16) MOF has been reported to acetylate different combina-tions of histone H4 lysines 5, 8, 12 and 16 at promoters in different cells, illustrating the potential of complex subunits to modulate substrate specificity (18-21). Defining the substrate selectivity of KATs in vivo poses several challenges (1). The intrin-sic substrate selectivity of enzymes may be modulated by its molecular environment, be it the complex assembly or the chromatin context. Redundant activities of different en-zymes, indirect effects and the action of lysine deacetylases (KDACs) may occlude the consequences of loss-of-function manipulation. Furthermore, the specificity of the anti-bodies that are commonly used to detect distinct acetylated lysines in histones may be compromised due to low-level off-target effects, interference of modifications next to acetylated lysines, and the tendency of Kac-antibodies to react with relaxed selectivity with oligo-acetylated histone tails (22-25). A more reliable strategy involves the detection of modified histone peptides by mass spectrometry, which unequivocally detects individ-ual modifications and defined combinations of modifications and has a much better dy-namic range than traditional Western blotting (26-30). In a complementary approach one may determine the intrinsic substrate selectivity of defined recombinant enzymes and KAT complexes in biochemical assays (31). We re-cently reconstituted a recombinant MOF-containing core DCC (here termed ‘4-MSL’, since it contains the subunits MOF, MSL1, MSL2 and MSL3 (32)) and now report on a study of its substrate selectivity on recombinant nucleosome arrays. Pilot experiments using traditional Western blotting of diagnostic antibodies suggested that, in addition to the expected H4K16 acetylation, H4K12 was modified. Since this finding disagrees with the prevailing view that the DCC selectively acetylates H4K16, we applied the targeted mass spectrometry described in (26) to our in vitro reactions, focusing on acetylation of the H4 N-terminus. We compared the acetylation reaction of the 4-MSL complex with another MYST enzyme, dTip60 (KAT5), in the context of a trimeric complex, akin to the yeast piccolo NuA4 complex, which is thought to have a more relaxed lysine selectivity on the H4 N-terminus (33-35).  We found that during short reaction times, the 4-MSL complex acetylated H4K16 with excellent selectivity, while the dTip60piccolo complex preferentially modified H4K12. To our surprise, we also observed that during longer incubations the 4-MSL complex progres-sively acetylated K12, K8 and K5, leading to a complex mixture of oligo-acetylated H4. Mathematical modeling suggests that MOF recognizes and acetylates H4K16 with high selectivity, but remains bound to the substrate and continues to acetylate more N-terminal H4 lysines in a processive manner.  Because the MSL-DCC in vivo contains long, non-coding roX RNA (15,36-38), we ex-plored whether RNA affected the specificity of the reaction. We observed that the addi-tion of RNA to the HAT reaction improves the specificity of the reaction and suppresses the generation of oligo-acetylated forms, possibly by reducing the dwell time of the en-zyme on the nucleosome substrate. The comparison of MOF and dTip60 activities in the context of recombinant HAT com-plexes revealed significant differences in activity and specificity. Our study describes a powerful experimental approach and conceptual framework for the analysis of physiolog-ically relevant components that modulate intrinsic activities.

### Sample Protocol
0.8 µg chromatinized pUC18_25x601 plasmid and protein complexes were incubated in HAT buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 3 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl and 10 µM acetyl-CoA (Sigma-Aldrich)) at 26°C. Protein concentration (12.5–175 nM) and incubation times (2–180 min) varied between the different sets of experiments and are provided in the respective figure legends. In cases, where the HAT assay was performed in presence of RNA, 1 mM ATP (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 U RNasin RNase inhibitor (PROMEGA) were included in the reaction buffer and 1:1 molar ratio of MLE (50 nM). RNAs were titrated (25 nM – 200 nM) or applied in 2-fold excess as mass ratios. The reaction was stopped by incubation at 95°C for 5 min. Histone acetylation was analyzed by Western Blot or by mass spectrometry (see below). The denatured HAT reaction samples were supplemented with SDS-PAGE loading buffer and boiled before loading onto a 15% (v/v) acrylamide Bis-Tris-MES gel in 1 x MES buffer (50 mM MES, 50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 5 mM sodium metabisulfite). Pro-teins were separated at 140 V constant and transferred (1h, 400 mA, 4°C) onto a nitro-cellulose membrane in transfer buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine). Membranes were blocked in 3% (w/v) BSA in TBS for 1 h at RT and probed over night at 4°C with antibod-ies specific for histone H3 (anti-H3, mouse, Abcam ab10799) and histone H4 acetylation (anti-H4K12ac, rabbit, Millipore 07-595 and anti-H4K16ac, rabbit, Millipore 07-329), re-spectively. Membranes were washed three times with TBS-T and incubated with species-specific secondary antibodies (LICOR). Images were acquired using the LICOR imager. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed as described (26). Briefly, heat-denatured HAT assay samples were chemically acetylated using 25% fresh (v/v) acetic anhydride-D6 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 min at RT. The mass difference of three Daltons allows to distinguish chemical and enzymatic acetylation. Light and heavy isotope-labeled ace-tyl groups have the same chemical properties allowing for reliable MS quantification (26). The pH was adjusted stepwise to pH of 7.0 by addition of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate. D6-acetylation continued for 45 min at 37°C with 500 rpm agitation. Proteins were digest-ed with 1 µg of trypsin for 12-18 h at 37°C with 500 rpm agitation. C18 STAGE tips were prepared for desalting as described previously (53). The STAGE tips were washed with 60 µL each; first, 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% (V/V) trifluoro acid, second, 80% (V/V) acetonitrile in MS-grade water and third, 0.1% (V/V) trifluoro acid in MS-grade water before samples were loaded to the C18 tips. Liquid was passed through by centrifugation at 300-400xg for 3 min at RT. The flow through was loaded again. Bound peptides were washed by three washing steps with finally 0.1% (V/V) trifluoro acid in MS-grade water. Peptides were eluted in three steps with 0.25% (v/v) trifluoro acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile in MS-grade water. The samples were dried under vacuum in a speed vac for 1h at 45°C. Samples were resuspended in 17 µL MS buffer (0.1% (v/v) trifluoro acid in MS-grade water), soni-cated for 5 min and stored at -20°C. Samples were separated in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) using a 25-cm Aurora column (Ionopticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% for-mic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo). The MS instrument was programmed to target several ions as described previ-ously (26) except for the MS3 fragmentation. For the analysis of the H4K16R mutant, the m/z values of the corresponding peptide ions [M+H2]2+ were adjusted accordingly (H4G4R17 monoacetylated adjusted from 724.9428 to H4G4R16 637.8759, diacetylated from 723.4329 to 636.3665 and triacetylated from 721.9221 to 634.8571). Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 270-730) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). Targeted ions were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z to a target value of 2x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Raw data from mass spectrometry was analysed using Skyline (54) v21.1. Peak integration was performed for H4 peptides for each of its corresponding modifica-tions. Relative levels of each PTM were calculated from the obtained intensities using R environment, based on the formula given in (26). Formula for calculating the relative lev-els of PTM for mutant in vitro assay is given in Supplemental File 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drophila melanogaster, Qexactive, Rna restricts the processivity of mof in the msl core complex for selective histone h4k16 monoacetylation

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Biomedizinisches Centrum (BMC)

### Submitter
Anna Kiss

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Burkhard
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Biomedizinisches Centrum (BMC)


