### Accession
PXD013368

### Title
APE1 INTERACTOME -  Architecture of The Human Ape1 Interactome Defines Novel Cancers Signatures

### Description
The present work aimed at defining the association of the APE1-protein-protein interactions  network in modulating its role in tumor progression and chemoresistance through proteomic and bionformatic analyses

### Sample Protocol
Immunopurified proteins from whole, nuclear and cytoplasmic cell extracts of HeLa cell clones expressing ectopic APE1 FLAG-tagged protein or stably transfected with the empty vector (Vascotto et al. 2009) were analyzed in parallel by 12% T SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, whole gel lanes were cut into 12 slices, minced and washed with water. Corresponding proteins were separately in-gel reduced, S-alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin, as previously reported (Spreafico et al., Proteomics 2006, 6, 3520-3532). Individual protein digests were then analyzed with a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer through a Nanoflex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (150 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v water/formic acid), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient of solvent B started at 3%, increased to 40% over 40 min, raised to 80% over 5 min, remained at 80% for 4 min, and finally returned to 3% in 1 min, with a column equilibrating step of 30 min before the subsequent chromatographic run. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode using a full scan (m/z range 375-1,500, a nominal resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control target of 3,000,000, and a maximum ion target of 50 ms), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 200-2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 100 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion value of 30 s was also used. Duplicate analysis of each sample was performed to increase the number of identified peptides/protein coverage.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data files per lane were merged for protein identification into Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.4.2 (Matrix Science, UK) with the following parameters: UniProtKB human protein database (159,615 sequences) including the most common protein contaminants; carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, and pyroglutamate formation of Gln as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to ± 10 ppm and ± 0.05 Da, respectively. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates assigned on the basis of at least two sequenced peptides and Mascot score ≥30 were considered confidently identified. Definitive peptide assignment was always associated with manual spectra visualization and verification. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
APE1 is essential in cancer cells due to its central role in the Base Excision Repair pathway of DNA lesions and in the transcriptional regulation of genes involved in tumor progression/chemoresistance. Indeed, APE1 overexpression correlates with chemoresistance in more aggressive cancers, and APE1 protein-protein interactions (PPIs) specifically modulate different protein functions in cancer cells. Although important, a detailed investigation on the nature and function of protein interactors regulating APE1 role in tumor progression and chemoresistance is still lacking. The present work was aimed at analyzing the APE1-PPI network with the goal of defining bad prognosis signatures through systematic bioinformatics analysis. By using a well-characterized HeLa cell model stably expressing a flagged APE1 form, which was subjected to extensive proteomics analyses for immunocaptured complexes from different subcellular compartments, we here demonstrate that APE1 is a central hub connecting different subnetworks largely composed of proteins belonging to cancer-associated communities and/or involved in RNA- and DNA-metabolism. When we performed survival analysis in real cancer datasets, we observed that more than 80% of these APE1-PPI network elements is associated with bad prognosis. Our findings, which are hypothesis generating, strongly support the possibility to infer APE1-interactomic signatures associated with bad prognosis of different cancers; they will be of general interest for the future definition of novel predictive disease biomarkers. Future studies will be needed to assess the function of APE1 in the protein complexes we discovered. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013368.

### Keywords
Interactome, Nlc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
ISPAAM CNR
Proteomic and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Institute for Animal Production Systems in Mediterranean Environments (ISPAAM) National Research Council  ITALY

### Submitter
CHIARA D'AMBROSIO

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomic and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Institute for Animal Production Systems in Mediterranean Environments (ISPAAM) National Research Council  ITALY


