### Accession
PXD004973

### Title
Spatiotemporal proteomic profiling of Huntington's disease mice reveals widespread loss of protein function

### Description
Huntington's disease (HD) is characterized by the aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin (HTT), proceeding from soluble oligomers to end-stage inclusions. The molecular mechanisms of how protein aggregation leads to neuronal dysfunction are not well understood. We employed mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to dissect spatiotemporal mechanisms of neurodegeneration using the R6/2 mouse model of HD. We show that extensive remodeling of the soluble brain proteome correlates with changes in insoluble aggregate formation during disease progression. In-depth characterization of HTT inclusion bodies uncovered an unprecedented complexity of several hundred proteins. Sequestration to inclusions was dependent on protein expression levels and the presence of aggregation-prone amino acid sequence features, such as low-complexity regions or coiled-coil domains. Overexpression of several sequestered proteins ameliorated HTT toxicity and modified the aggregation behavior in an in vitro model of HD. Our study provides a comprehensive and spatiotemporally-resolved proteome resource of HD progression, indicating that widespread loss of protein function contributes to aggregate-mediated toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Brain regions were lysed in RIPA buffer by FastPrep homogenization, followed by acetone protein precipitation. CSF was directly mixed in a urea-based denaturation buffer. Proteins were digested sequentially by LysC and trypsin. Peptides were desalted on stacked SDB-RPS StageTips (3M, Empore) and eluted as described (Kulak et al., 2014). Insoluble pellet fractions after brain tissue lysis was boiled in 2% SDS and washed sequentially with 2% SDS and PBS, followed by acid hydrolysis of the peptide bonds in 90% formic acid. After lyophilization overnight, the protein/peptide mixture was further digested by LysC and trypsin and desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips. MS measurements were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.1.11. Tandem mass spectrometry spectra were searched against the July 2014 release of the UniProt Mus musculus proteome sequence database. We used MaxLFQ label-free quantification (Cox et al., 2014) and matched our data against a cell-type and brain region-resolved brain proteome resource (Sharma et al., 2015). Protein identifications were filtered to remove hits to the reverse decoy database, common contaminations and proteins only identified by modified peptides. We required that each proteins had to be quantified with at least two valid values in at least one group of biological triplicates. Further annotation and statistical analysis were performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). Cellular abundances were calculated based on the iBAQ algorithm (Schwanhausser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin exon 1 (HttEx1) in Huntington's disease (HD) proceeds from soluble oligomers to late-stage inclusions. The nature of the aggregates and how they lead to neuronal dysfunction is not well understood. We employed mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics to dissect spatiotemporal mechanisms of neurodegeneration using the R6/2 mouse model of HD. Extensive remodeling of the soluble brain proteome correlated with insoluble aggregate formation during disease progression. In-depth and quantitative characterization of the aggregates uncovered an unprecedented complexity of several hundred proteins. Sequestration to aggregates depended on protein expression levels and sequence features such as low-complexity regions or coiled-coil domains. In a cell-based HD model, overexpression of a subset of the sequestered proteins in most cases rescued viability and reduced aggregate size. Our spatiotemporally resolved proteome resource of HD progression indicates that widespread loss of cellular protein function contributes to aggregate-mediated toxicity.

### Keywords
Huntington's disease / inclusion bodies / neurodegeneration / quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction


