### Accession
PXD029644

### Title
C18  nanoLC-MS and Glycogenomics to Facilitate O-Glycan profiling in Human Cells

### Description
O-glycosylation is an abundant modification throughout the human proteome and plays a role in, amongst others, regulation of protein cleavage, protein folding, and modulation of cell-cell and -matrix interactions. O-glycosylation type and structure are important for biological function, demanding analytical methodologies that facilitate the annotation of O-glycans in biological material. While various successful strategies for the in-depth profiling of released O-glycans have been reported, these methods are often limitedly accessible to the non-specialist and/or challenged by the high abundance of O-glycan structural isomers. Here, we developed a high-throughput sample preparation approach for the non-reductive release of O-glycans from human cell material. Reducing-end labeling allowed efficient isomer separation and detection using C18 nano-liquid chromatography coupled to Orbitrap mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS). The implementation of glycogenetically engineered cell material proved a way into the complex structural annotation of O-glycan types and isomers. Using human keratinocytes as model system, we found a wide variety of O-glycan structures, including O-fucose, O-glucose, O-GlcNAc and O-GalNAc glycosylation, with the latter carrying both elongate Core 1 and Core 2 structures and varying numbers of fucoses and sialic acids. The method, including the now well characterized standards, provide the opportunity to study glycomic changes in human tissue and disease models using rather mainstream analytical equipment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein immobilization, non-reductive beta-elimination of O-glycans, 2-aminobenzamide labeling, HILIC and PGC SPE, C18 nanoLC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
MS1 feature detection in the raw files was performed using the Minora Feature Detector node in Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific lnc.). The [M+H] values of the resulting features were imported into GlycoWorkbench 2.1 (build 146) [17] and matched to glycan compositions with 0 to 8 hexoses, 0 to 8 N-acetyl hexosamines, 0 to 3 fucoses, 0 to 4 N-acetyl neuraminic acids and a 2-AB label. An additional matching was performed to glycan compositions with 0 to 6 hexoses, 0 to 6 N-acetyl hexosamines, 0 to 2 fucoses, 0 to 2 N-acetyl neuraminic acids, 0 to 3 pentoses and a 2-AB label. The complete list of identified compositions was imported into Skyline 21.1.0.146 (ProteoWizard), using the Molecule Interface.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-Glycosylation is an omnipresent modification of the human proteome affecting many cellular functions, including protein cleavage, protein folding, and cellular signaling, interactions, and trafficking. The functions are governed by differentially regulated <i>O</i>-glycan types and terminal structures. It is therefore essential to develop analytical methods that facilitate the annotation of <i>O</i>-glycans in biological material. While various successful strategies for the in-depth profiling of released <i>O</i>-glycans have been reported, these methods are often limitedly accessible to the nonspecialist or challenged by the high abundance of <i>O</i>-glycan structural isomers. Here, we developed a high-throughput sample preparation approach for the nonreductive release and characterization of <i>O</i>-glycans from human cell material. Reducing-end labeling allowed efficient isomer separation and detection using C18 nanoliquid chromatography coupled to Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Using the method in combination with a library of genetically glycoengineered cells displaying defined <i>O</i>-glycan types and structures, we were able to annotate individual <i>O</i>-glycan structural isomers from a complex mixture. Applying the method in a model system of human keratinocytes, we found a wide variety of <i>O</i>-glycan structures, including <i>O</i>-fucose, <i>O</i>-glucose, <i>O</i>-GlcNAc, and <i>O</i>-GalNAc glycosylation, with the latter carrying both elongated core1 and core2 structures and varying numbers of fucoses and sialic acids. The method, including the now well-characterized standards, provides the opportunity to study glycomic changes in human tissue and disease models using rather mainstream analytical equipment.

### Keywords
Hek293, Glycomics, Keratinocytes, O-glycan, Glycogenomics

### Affiliations
Copenhagen center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics

### Submitter
Noortje de Haan

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wandall
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics


