### Accession
PXD031437

### Title
Chitinolytic enzymes confer pathogenicity of Aliivibrio salmonicida LFI1238 in the invasive phase of cold-water vibriosis

### Description
Aliivibrio (Vibrio) salmonicida is the causative agent of cold-water vibriosis in salmonids (Oncorhynchus mykiss and Salmo salar L.) and gadidae (Gadus morhua L.). Virulence-associated factors that are essential for the full spectrum of Al. salmonicida pathogenicity are largely unknown. Chitin-active lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) have been indicated to play roles in both chitin degradation and virulence in a variety of pathogenic bacteria. In the present study we investigated the role of LPMOs in the pathogenicity of Al. salmonicida LFI238 in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). In vivo challenge experiments using isogenic deletion mutants of the two LPMOs encoding genes AsLPMO10A and AsLPMO10B, showed that both LPMOs, and in particular AsLPMO10B, were important in the invasive phase of cold-water vibriosis. Crystallographic analysis of the AsLPMO10B AA10 LPMO domain (to 1.4 Å resolution) revealed high structural similarity to viral fusolin, an LPMO known to enhance the virulence of insecticidal agents. Finally, exposure to Atlantic salmon serum resulted in substantial proteome re-organization of the Al. salmonicida LPMO deletion variants compared to the wild type strain, indicating the struggle of the bacterium to adapt to the host immune components.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE with a 10% Mini-PROTEAN gel and then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250. Thegel was cut into several slices, after which proteins were reduced, alkylated, and in-gel digested. The peptides were cleaned and desalted using StageTips. The peptide samples were analyzed by a nano UPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) coupled to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry and a quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.17.0) for label-free quantification using 'matchbetween runs'. Data was filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Aliivibrio salmonicida, Lpmos

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences, 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Per Kristian Edvardsen

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Vaaje-Kolstad
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences, 1432, Ås Norway


