### Accession
PXD011963

### Title
The SUMO protease SENP6 regulates the constitutive centromere-associated network by group

### Description
Project 1: Identification of SUMOylated proteins which are regulated by the SUMO protease SENP6. SENP6 knockdown was performed by two independent shRNAs and SUMOylated proteins were purified from U2OS expressing His10-tagged SUMO2 by means of Ni-NTA pulldown. Purified SUMOylated proteins were identified and quantified by label-free quantification.  Project 2: Dynamics of chromatin-associated proteins influenced by SENP6. After siRNA-mediated knockdown of SENP6, chromatin fractions of U2OS cells were isolated and abundances of proteins were quantified. Project 3: Analysis of in vitro SUMOylated CENP-T for the presence of SUMOylated SUMO peptides. For this aim purified CENP-T-HA was in vitro SUMOylated with a SUMO Q87R mutant to reduce the length of the tryptic peptide and therefore to be able to identified sit-specific SUMOylation.

### Sample Protocol
Project 1: Cells were lysed in 25 pellet volumes of 6M Guanidine-HCL, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, buffered at a pH of 8.0. Lysates were sonicated 2x for 5 sec at 30 watts and supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol (β-Me) and Imidazole pH 8.0 and subsequently incubated with Ni-NTA beads for 3-5 hours at RT or overnight at 4˚C. Beads were washed subsequently with wash buffer 1-4; Wash buffer 1: 6M Guanidine-HCL, 100mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM Imidazole, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0,2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 2: 8M Urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10mM TRIS, 10mM imidazole, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0,2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 3: 8M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 4: 8M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10mM TRIS, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% Triton X-100. For mass spec analysis, 0.2% Triton X-100 was included in Wash 1 and 0,1% Triton X-100 was included in Wash 2, Wash 3 and Wash 4 did not contain any Triton X-100. His10-purified proteins were twice eluted in one bead volume of 7M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM TRIS and 500 mM imidazole pH 7.0. Elutions were concentrated using a 100kD cut-off filter and diluted with ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to an end-concentration of 50mM ABC.  Samples were reduce with DTT in two steps, first to 1mM DTT and subsequently to 6mM DTT. In between the reduction steps, sample was alkylated using 5mM cloroacetamide (CAA). Proteins were predigested with LysC for 5 hours. Peptides were diluted with 50mM ABC before Trypsin digestion, overnight and in the dark at RT. Peptides were acidified with 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase Stage Tips. Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile (ACN), vacuum dried and dissolved in 0,1% folic acid (FA). Project 2: Cell were harvested and washed twice in PBS. A small fraction of cell suspension was lysed in SNTBS (2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) buffer as Input control. The residual cells were lysed in buffer A (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCL, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 340 mM saccharose, 1 Mm DTT, 1 protease inhibitor tablet without EDTA/ 10 ml). The lysate was subsequently supplemented with Triton X-100 to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Lysate was incubated on Ice for 8 min and subsequently centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected as cytoplasmic fraction. Pellet was washed twice with buffer A and subsequently lysed in buffer B (3 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 protease inhibitor tablet without EDTA/ 10 ml) for 30 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C pellet (chromatin fraction) was separated form supernatant (nucleoplasms). Chromatin fraction was further diluted in 100 µl SNTBS buffer and heated to 99 °C for 10 min. Chromatin fractions were loaded onto precast 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel. Proteins were excised from gel, divided into two fractions (high and low molecular weight bands) and cut into small  1x1 mm cubes. Gel pieces were destained with 25 mM ABC/ 50% ACN  twice for 20 min at 15 °C. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% ACN for 10 min at 25 °C and subsequently vacuum dried. Gel pieces were rehydrated and reduced with 10mM DTT in 50mM ABC and incubated for 60 min at 56 °C. Further the gel pieces were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC for 45 min at 25 °C. Gel pieces were subsequently washed twice with 50 mM ABC followed by dehydration with 100% ACN. Gel pieces were vacuum dried and rehydrated with 12.5 ng/µl trysin in ABC overnight. After acidifying the gel pieces with 100% TFA, peptides were extracted twice from gel pieces with 3% TFA in 30% ACN followed by a dehydration with 100% ACN. Peptides were vacuum dried to remove ACN subsequently acidified with 2% TFA and then desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase Stage Tips. Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile, vacuum dried and dissolved in 0,1% FA. Project 3: Recombinant CENPT-HA was SUMOylated in vitro by adding 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, 3.5 U ml−1 Creatine kinase, 10 mM Creatine phosphate, 0.6 U ml−1 inorganic pyrophosphate, 5 µg SAE1/2, 20 µg UBC9, and 20 µg FLAG-SUMO2-Q87R to 2 µg samples of CENPT-HA in a volume of 200 µl and incubating for 3 h at 37 °C. For the mass spec analysis SUMOylated CENPT-HA was incubated with 50 µl prewashed  HA beads for 2h at 4 °C in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl. HA beads were washed with 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 20 mM NEM. Further beads were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subsequently incubated with 2 µg of trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The samples were passed through a 0.45 μm filter to remove the HA- beads and subsequently acidified with 2% TFA. Peptides were desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase Stage Tips. Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile, vacuum dried and dissolved in 0,1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Project 1: MaxQuant software, default setting except: Group-specific parameters- Digestion: Specific with Trypsin and Lys-C allowing max. missed cleavages of 2. Modification: Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term)with a max number of modifications per peptide of 5. Label-free quantification: LFQ enabled, FLQ min. ratio count of 2, Fast LFQ enabled, LFQ min. number of neighbors: 3, LFQ average number of neighbors: 6. Global parameter: Fata file was uploaded: Human.fasta, Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), Min. peptide length of 7, max. peptide mass of 4600 (Da), Min. peptide length for unspecific search: 8 and Max. peptide length for unspecific search: 25. Adv. identification second peptides and Match between runs was enabled.  Project 2:  MaxQuant software, default setting except: Group-specific parameters- Digestion: Specific with Trypsin allowing max. missed cleavages of 2. Modification: Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term)with a max number of modifications per peptide of 5. Label-free quantification: LFQ enabled, FLQ min. ratio count of 2, Fast LFQ disabled, LFQ min. number of neighbors: 3, LFQ average number of neighbors: 6. Global parameter: Fata file was uploaded: Human.fasta, Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), Min. peptide length of 7, max. peptide mass of 4600 (Da), Min. peptide length for unspecific search: 8 and Max. peptide length for unspecific search: 25. Adv. identification second peptides and Match between runs was enabled.  Project 3:  MaxQuant software, default setting except: Group-specific parameters- Digestion: Specific with Trypsin allowing max. missed cleavages of 2. Modification: Variable modification: Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term)and QQTGG (K)with a max number of modifications per peptide of 3. Label-free quantification: LFQ enabled, FLQ min. ratio count of 2, Fast LFQ disabled, LFQ min. number of neighbors: 3, LFQ average number of neighbors: 6. Global parameter: Fata file was uploaded: Human.fasta, Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), Min. peptide length of 6, max. peptide mass of 6000 (Da), Min. peptide length for unspecific search: 8 and Max. peptide length for unspecific search: 25. Adv. identification second peptides and Match between runs was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to our extensive knowledge on ubiquitin polymer signaling, we are severely limited in our understanding of poly-SUMO signaling. We set out to identify substrates conjugated to SUMO polymers, using knockdown of the poly-SUMO2/3 protease SENP6. We identify over 180 SENP6 regulated proteins that represent highly interconnected functional groups of proteins including the constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN), the CENP-A loading factors Mis18BP1 and Mis18A and DNA damage response factors. Our results indicate a striking protein group de-modification by SENP6. SENP6 deficient cells are severely compromised for proliferation, accumulate in G2/M and frequently form micronuclei. Accumulation of CENP-T, CENP-W and CENP-A to centromeres is impaired in the absence of SENP6. Surprisingly, the increase of SUMO chains does not lead to ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation of the CCAN subunits. Our results indicate that SUMO polymers can act in a proteolysis-independent manner and consequently, have a more diverse signaling function than previously expected.

### Keywords
Human osteosacrcoma cell line u2os, Chromatin, Senp6

### Affiliations
Chemical Cell Biology Leiden Univerity Medical Center Einthovenweg 20 2333ZC Leiden, The Netherlands
Leiden University Medical Centre

### Submitter
Frauke Liebelt

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Chemical Cell Biology Leiden Univerity Medical Center Einthovenweg 20 2333ZC Leiden, The Netherlands


