### Accession
PXD030782

### Title
Peroxisome-derived hydrogen peroxide can modulate the sulfenylation profiles of key redox signaling proteins in Flp-In T-REx 293 cells

### Description
Ever since the first characterization of peroxisomes, a central theme has been their involvement in cellular hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) metabolism. While the reputation of H2O2 drastically changed from an exclusively toxic molecule to a signaling messenger, the regulatory role of peroxisomes in these signaling events is still largely underappreciated. This is mainly because the number of known protein targets of peroxisome-derived H2O2 is rather limited and testing of specific targets is predominantly based on knowledge previously gathered in related fields of research. To gain a broader and more systematic insight into the role of peroxisomes in redox signaling, new approaches are urgently needed. In this study, we have combined a previously developed Flp-In T-REx 293 cell system in which peroxisomal H2O2 production can be modulated with a yeast AP-1-like-based sulfenome mining strategy to inventory protein thiol targets of peroxisome-derived H2O2 in different subcellular compartments. Using this approach, we were able to identify specific and common targets of peroxisome-derived and exogenous H2O2 in peroxisomes, the cytosol, and mitochondria. We also observed that the sulfenylation kinetics profiles of key targets (e.g., PRDX1, ANXA2, and TUBA1C) belonging to different protein families (e.g., antioxidants, annexins, and tubulins) can vary considerably. In addition, we obtained compelling but indirect evidence that peroxisome-derived H2O2 may oxidize at least some of its targets (e.g., transcription factors) through a redox relay mechanism. In conclusion, given that sulfenic acids function as key intermediates in H2O2 signaling, the findings presented in this study provide initial but critical insight into how peroxisomes may be integrated into the cellular H2O2 signaling network.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 60-80% confluency, trypsinized, collected in cell culture medium, pelleted (150 x g, 5 min), and washed once with DPBS without calcium and magnesium (BioWest, L0615). Cell density was determined by Bürker chamber counting and adjusted to 106 cells/ml. After being subjected to different treatments, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (TCI, E0136) dissolved in methanol (Fisher Scientific, M/4062/17) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Next, the cells were pelleted (150 x g, 5 min), resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 10% (v/v) glycerol) containing 10 mM NEM and a protease inhibitor mix (Sigma-Aldrich, P2714)) at a density of 107 cells/ml, and lysed on ice for 10 min. Thereafter, a cleared lysate was produced by double centrifugation (20,000 x g, 10 min), each time discarding the pellet. The cleared lysates were mixed with 300 µl of (prewashed) high capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Scientific, 20359) and incubated at 4°C on a rotation mixer to enrich IBD-SBP-YAP1C complexes. After 2 h, the bead suspensions were transferred to Micro-Spin columns (Thermo Scientific, 89879) and consecutively washed 5 times with lysis buffer, 5 times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100), and 5 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Finally, the disulfide-bonded interaction partners of IBD-SBP-YAP1C were eluted by incubating the columns 3 times for 15 min with 200 µl of elution buffer (10 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The eluates were pooled and subsequently processed for proteomics analysis. To analyze comparable amounts of IBD-SBP-YAP1C-containing protein complexes, the ratio of cleared lysate to streptavidin agarose beads was chosen such that the affinity matrix was slightly oversaturated. Eluates were incubated for 30 min at 37°C to allow the DTT to fully reduce all proteins. Thereafter, the samples were alkylated (37°C, 30 min) with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I-6125). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 25 mM DTT (AppliChem, A2948) (37°C, 30 min). Subsequently, the proteins were precipitated as described [Wessel and Flügge, 1984] and digested overnight with modified trypsin (Pierce, 90057) in the presence of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, A6141), 5% acetonitrile (Applied Biosystems, 400315), and 0.01% ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega, V2072). Trypsin was inactivated by addition of 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Applied Biosystems, 400028). The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Merck Millipore, ZTC18S960) and loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (C18; particle size: 3 μm; pore size 100 Å; diameter: 75 μm; length: 20 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a C18 PepMap analytical column (particle size: 2 μm; pore size: 100 Å; diameter: 50 μm; length: 150 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 40 min linear gradient (300 nL/min) coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identiﬁed by Mascot (Matrix Science) using Uniprot Homo sapiens as a database (# entries: 194619). S-carbamidomethylation (C), N-ethylmaleimide (C), and oxidation (M) were included as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed, peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 20 mmu for MS and MS/MS, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peroxisome; hydrogen peroxide; cysteine thiol group; yap1c-based sulfenome mining; peroxiredoxin; mitochondrion

### Affiliations
Department of cellular and molecular medicine, Laboratory of peroxisome biology and intracellular communication, KU Leuven, Belgium
KU Leuven

### Submitter
Celien Lismont

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Fransen
Department of cellular and molecular medicine, Laboratory of peroxisome biology and intracellular communication, KU Leuven, Belgium


