### Accession
PXD012647

### Title
Human lymphoma cell membrane proteomics by Pitchfork strategy

### Description
We combined glycopeptide enrichment by SPEG (Tian et al., 2007) with a hydrophobic segment-oriented hpTC method (Vít et al 2016) and  a standard “detergent and trypsin” approach into a  tree-pronged “Pitchfork” strategy for the analysis of membrane proteome in human lymphoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Solid phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides (SPEG) The procedure was done according to Tian et al. (2007), with modifications by Sun et al. (2012) and instead of urea-assisted digestion, in-solution digestion facilitated by SDC was used. The desalted peptide sample was solubilized in a minimal volume of 80% acetonitrile in a bath sonicator and diluted in 500 µl of Affi-Gel Hz Coupling Buffer (Bio-Rad). The sample was oxidized with 10 mM NaIO4 for 1 hour in dark on a rotator. The oxidation was stopped by addition of 20 mM Na2S2O3 and incubation for 10 minutes on the rotator. Affi-Gel Hz Hydrazide Gel beads (Bio-Rad) were washed with deionized water and twice in the Coupling Buffer, mixed with the sample and incubated over night at room temperature on a  rotator. The beads were washed with 1.5 M NaCl, 80 % acetonitrile and 50 mM NH4HCO3 and then incubated in 25 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 3 units of peptide N-glycosidase F (PNGase F, Roche) at 37 °C over night on a rocker. The deglycosylated peptides in the supernatant were collected by centrifugation and additional washes (2×50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 40 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and 40 µl of 80% acetonitrile) were mixed with the supernatant. Isolation and purification of membrane fraction for hpTC For the hpTC samples, the membrane fraction was isolated and purified according to the original protocol of this method (Vit et al., 2016). Briefly, ca. 100 mg of frozen cells (per one replicate of an experiment) were resuspended in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, pH = 7.4) and left on ice for 15 minutes. The suspension was homogenized by passing through a 20 G hypodermic needle and centrifuged at 500×g to pellet unbroken material and the supernatant was treated with 120 Kunitz units of bovine deoxyribonuclease I (Sigma) with 25 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM CaCl2 for 30 minutes at 37 °C. The suspension was centrifuged at 20,000×g at 4 °C and twice washed using Na2CO3 buffer (pH = 11) with 1 mM EDTA (incubated for 30 minutes on ice on a rocker and centrifuged, re-extracted). High pH – trypsin – cyanogen bromide treatment (hpTC) The purified membrane fraction was directly resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 20 µg of trypsin and incubated at 37°C over night. Then the sample was centrifuged and twice washed with Na2CO3 buffer again, between the washes the resuspended membranes were snap-frozen and thawed three times. The trypsin-digested and purified membranes were then solubilized in 70% TFA with cyanogen bromide (20 mg/ml) and incubated in dark at room temperature over night. The peptide digest was then evaporated, solubilized in 80% acetonitrile, 10% isopropanol and 5% formic acid (FA), diluted in water and delipidated on a OptiTrap™ column (Rey et al., 2010, Vit et al., 2016). The sample was loaded in water with 0.5% FA, washed with 0.5 ml water with 0.5% FA, 5 times with 0.5 ml dichloromethane with 0.5% FA, 0.5 ml water with 0.5% FA again, and eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 10% isopropanol, 0.5% FA. nLC-MS/MS Analysis The peptide samples were separated on nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size).  Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After 4 minutes ventile was switched, and Mobile phase B increased from 4%  to 35% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by wash with 75% B 5 min at 400 nL/min, and 4% B  for 5 minutes until the end of the run (for all samples except hpTC). For the hpTC samples, mobile phase B increased from 4%  to 50% B in 120 min at 300 nL/min, followed by wash with 75% B 5 min at 400 nL/min, and 4% B  for 5 minutes until the end of the run. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards, et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
Data processing For protein identification, MS raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.1. The data was searched against the human subset of Swiss-Prot database (20,386 sequences). The search settings differed between the methods. Trypsin/P with 2 max missed cleavage sites was selected in all methods, in addition CNBr (defined as cleavage C-terminal to methionine) with 2 max missed cleavage sites was selected in hpTC analyses. N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications for all methods. In addition, for SPEG and gFASP, asparagine changing to aspartate was included and for hpTC methionine (C-terminal to any peptide) to homoserine lactone (Met -48.003) and also homoserine (Met -29.993) was included. For all methods except hpTC, carbaminomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. Proteins were reported with an FDR of 1% based on the target-decoy strategy to ensure the quality of the identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Integral membrane proteins are under-represented in standard proteomic analyses, mostly because of their low expression and absence of trypsin-cleavage sites in their hydrophobic transmembrane segments. Novel and effective strategies for membrane proteomic analysis aim at soluble N-glycosylated segments of integral membrane proteins (CSC, SPEG, N-glyco-FASP) or selectively target the hydrophobic transmembrane alpha-helical segments employing chemical peptide cleavage by CNBr (hpTC). We combined a solid phase enrichment of glycopeptides (SPEG) with a transmembrane segment-oriented hpTC method and a standard "detergent and trypsin" approach into a three-pronged "Pitchfork" strategy to maximize the membrane proteome coverage in human lymphoma cells. This strategy enabled the identification of &gt;1200 integral membrane proteins from all cellular compartments, including 105 CD antigens, 24&#x202f;G protein-coupled receptors, and 141 solute carrier transporters. The advantage of the combination lies in the complementarity of the methods. SPEG and hpTC target different sets of membrane proteins. HpTC provided identifications of proteins and peptides with significantly higher hydrophobicity compared to SPEG and detergent-trypsin approaches. Among all identified proteins, we observed 32 so-called "missing proteins". The Pitchfork strategy presented here is universally applicable and enables deep and fast description of membrane proteomes in only 3 LC-MS/MS runs per replicate. SIGNIFICANCE: Integral membrane proteins (IMPs) are encoded by roughly a quarter of human coding genes. Their functions and their specific localization makes IMPs highly attractive drug targets. In fact, roughly half of the currently approved drugs in medicine target IMPs. Our knowledge of membrane proteomes is, however, limited. We present a new strategy for the membrane proteome analysis that combines three complementary methods targeting different features of IMPs. Using the combined strategy, we identified over 1200 IMPs in human lymphoma tissue from all sub-cellular compartments in only 3 LC-MS/MS runs per replicate. The three-pronged "Pitchfork" strategy is universally applicable, and offers a fast way toward a reasonably concise description of membrane proteomes in multiple samples.

### Keywords
Hptc, Speg, Lymphoma, Imp, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Charles University
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri Petrak

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Petrak
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Czech Republic


