### Accession
PXD004312

### Title
A mitochondrial proteome profile of type 2 diabetes mellitus in skeletal muscles

### Description
The goal of the project is to understand the mitochondrial proteome profiles related to T2DM. We performed comprehensive proteome profiling of mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscles in nine T2DM patients and nine control subjects with normal glucose tolerance (NGT).

### Sample Protocol
Analytical Sample Protocol - Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: OFFGEL fractionation (26 fractions), Proteolysis: Trypsin Chromatography Protocol – Column length: 70 cm, Column inner diameter: 75 m, Particle size: 3 m; Gradient length: 120 min, Injected: 10 g for triplicate experiments, 4ug for fractionated samples Mass Spectrometry Protocol – Dissociation: CID, Instrument: LTQ-FT, MS1 resolution: 100000, Precursors: Top 7

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using PE-MMR to assign accurate precursor mass to tandem MS data. The resultant MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of uniprot-human-reference (April, 2014; 88,608 entries) and 179 common contaminants in the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ (v9881) search engine under the following condition: Semi tryptic, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification , oxidation of methionine and carbamylation to N-termini as variable modification. The peptide spectrum matches were filtered at 1% FDR

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is closely associated with mitochondrial functions in insulin-responsive tissues. The mitochondrial proteome, compared with the mitochondrial genome, which only contains 37 genes in humans, can provide more comprehensive information for thousands of mitochondrial proteins regarding T2DM-associated mitochondrial functions. However, T2DM-associated protein signatures in insulin-responsive tissues are still unclear. Here, we performed extensive proteome profiling of mitochondria from skeletal muscles in nine T2DM patients and nine nondiabetic controls. A comparison of the mitochondrial proteomes identified 335 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between T2DM and nondiabetic samples. Functional and network analyses of the DEPs showed that mitochondrial metabolic processes were downregulated and mitochondria-associated ER membrane (MAM) processes were upregulated. Of the DEPs, we selected two (NDUFS3 and COX2) for downregulated oxidative phosphorylation and three (CALR, SORT, and RAB1A) for upregulated calcium and protein transport as representative mitochondrial and MAM processes, respectively, and then confirmed their differential expression in independent mouse and human samples. Therefore, we propose that these five proteins be used as a potential protein profile that is indicative of the dysregulation of mitochondrial functions in T2DM, representing downregulated oxidative phosphorylation and upregulated MAM functions.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondrial proteome, Type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm), Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Korea University
Department of Chemistry, Korea University

### Submitter
Dong-Gi Mun

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Won Lee
Department of Chemistry, Korea University


