### Accession
PXD026460

### Title
Effect of TOPBEffect of TOPBP1 on BLM phosphosites

### Description
Identification of BLM phosphosites. The experiment is composed by 2 parts: i) identification of BLM phosphosites with DDA method ii) quantification of phosphosites with a targeted method.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptides generated from the proteolysis of BLM protein (mock or in vitro phosphorylated as described above) were subjected to mass spectrometry identification and quantification. Briefly, ~2 μg of purified BLM protein was loaded on a centrifugal unit (Vivacon 500, 10MKCO, Sartorious) and centrifuged until dryness (centrifugation 8,000 g, 15 min). After denaturation (8 M urea), reduction (5 mM TCEP) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide), BLM was washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (3 centrifugation steps 8,000 g, 15 min) and overnight proteolyzed (0.2 μg trypsin [Promega] sequencing grade). Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and dried peptides were resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys) for quality control.

### Data Protocol
Identification of targeted peptides was performed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) operating in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In a second step, a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) library (precursor m/z, fragments m/z and retention time) was generated from peptides identified in DDA mode. The library was supplemented with 2 phosphopeptides (BLM S304 and BLM S144) annotated in Peptide Atlas database Quantification of targeted peptides was performed by LC-MS/MS operating in PRM mode, using library coordinates for the extraction of targeted peptides. DDA analysis. Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine against BLM and TOPBP1 sequences extended with contaminant. The search parameters were set to include only fully tryptic peptides, carbamidomethylation as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modification. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. False discovery rate of <1% was used peptide level. The spectra library (precursor ion, fragment ions and retention time) was generated from phosphopeptides with a localization score > 0.95 and with a unique phosphosite . Top three peptides with the highest spectrum score, which are not containing phosphosites and without missed cleavages were considered for the normalization of protein abundance and added to the library. Data analysis of PRM data was performed from the top five most intense fragments; to avoid the integration of noisy transitions only transitions with an intensity at least 10 times greater compared to the background signal were considered and summed. Finally, BLM phosphopeptide intensity was log2 transformed and normalized based on the intensity of the top2 BLM non phosphorylated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphosites

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry ETHZ
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry ETHZ


