### Accession
PXD037049

### Title
Biochemically validated structural model of the 15-subunit intraflagellar transport complex IFT-B

### Description
Cilia are ubiquitous eukaryotic organelles impotant for cellular motility, signaling, and sensory reception. Cilium formation requires intraflagellar transport of structural and signaling components and involves 22 different proteins organized into intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes IFT-A and IFT-B that are transported by molecular motors. The IFT-B complex constitutes the backbone of polymeric IFT trains carrying cargo between the cilium and the cell body. Currently, high-resolution structures are only available for smaller IFT-B subcomplexes leaving > 50% structurally uncharacterized. Here, we used Alphafold to structurally model the 15-subunit IFT-B complex. The model was validated using cross-linking/mass-spectrometry data on reconstituted IFT-B complexes, X-ray scattering in solution, diffraction from crystals as well as site-directed mutagenesis and protein-binding assays. The IFT-B structure reveals an elongated and highly flexible complex consistent with cryo-electron tomographic reconstructions of IFT trains. The IFT-B complex organizes into IFT-B1 and IFT-B2 parts with binding sites for ciliary cargo and the inactive IFT dynein motor, respectively. Interestingly, our results are consistent with two different binding sites for IFT81/74 on IFT88/70/52/46 suggesting the possibility of different structural architectures for the IFT-B1 complex. Our data present a structural framework to understand IFT-B complex assembly, function, and ciliopathy variants.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis of DSBU crosslinked IFT-B protein complexes. To obtain a comprehensive map of interactions within the IFT-B complex, we produced two recombinant Chlamydomonas IFT-B complexes. We enriched an IFT-B1 complex consisting of the nine Chlamydomonas proteins IFT88, IFT81, IFT74, IFT70, IFT52, IFT46, IFT27, IFT25 and IFT22 by size exclusion chromatography and cross-linked the sample using the MS cleavable Disuccinimidyl Dibutyric Urea (DSBU) crosslinker. A second protein complex comprising Chlamydomonas IFT-B2 proteins IFT57, IFT38, IFT54 and IFT20 as well as the IFT-B1 proteins IFT88 and IFT52N was also subjected to cross-linking MS to provide data on the interactions within the IFT-B2 complex and between the IFT-B1 and B2 sub-complexes. Cross-linked proteins were digested to generate peptides for MS-analysis. Initially, proteins were reduced and alkylated in a buffer containing 5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 11 mM CAA in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 for 10 minutes at 95 C and precipitated on MagResyn HILIC magnetic particles (Resyn Biosciences) in 70% acetonitrile for 20 minutes and washed with 95% acetonitrile and 70% ethanol before on-bead digestion with Lys-C and trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 overnight (Batth et al., 2019). The resulting peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation) and subjected to direct MS-analysis (10% of the sample) or further enriched for multiple charged cross-linked peptides on mixedmode C18/SCX cartridges (Oasis MCX, Waters Corporation) generating four fractions for MS analysis as previously described (Iacobucci et al., 2018). Cross-linked peptides were analysed by an Easy nanoLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition of ions with a charge state between 3 and 8 and HCD fragmentation using stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, 30 and 33.

### Data Protocol
Inter-peptide cross-links were identified based on their signature doublet signals from the cleavable DSBU cross-linker as implemented in the RISEUP mode of the Program MeroX version 2.0 (Götze et al., 2019). The identified cross-links were evaluated by scores for peptide pair identifications and cross-link position assignments within the peptide sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia are ubiquitous eukaryotic organelles impotant for cellular motility, signaling, and sensory reception. Cilium formation requires intraflagellar transport of structural and signaling components and involves 22 different proteins organized into intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes IFT-A and IFT-B that are transported by molecular motors. The IFT-B complex constitutes the backbone of polymeric IFT trains carrying cargo between the cilium and the cell body. Currently, high-resolution structures are only available for smaller IFT-B subcomplexes leaving &gt;&#x2009;50% structurally uncharacterized. Here, we used Alphafold to structurally model the 15-subunit IFT-B complex. The model was validated using cross-linking/mass-spectrometry data on reconstituted IFT-B complexes, X-ray scattering in solution, diffraction from crystals as well as site-directed mutagenesis and protein-binding assays. The IFT-B structure reveals an elongated and highly flexible complex consistent with cryo-electron tomographic reconstructions of IFT trains. The IFT-B complex organizes into IFT-B1 and IFT-B2 parts with binding sites for ciliary cargo and the inactive IFT dynein motor, respectively. Interestingly, our results are consistent with two different binding sites for IFT81/74 on IFT88/70/52/46 suggesting the possibility of different structural architectures for the IFT-B1 complex. Our data present a structural framework to understand IFT-B complex assembly, function, and ciliopathy variants.

### Keywords
Intraflagellar transport, Cross-linking, Proteomics, Protein structure, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jens Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jens S. Andersen
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark


