### Accession
PXD017269

### Title
A streamlined mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflow for large scale FFPE tissue analysis

### Description
Formalin fixation and paraffin-embedding (FFPE) is the most common method to preserve human tissue for clinical diagnosis and FFPE archives represent an invaluable resource for biomedical research. Proteins in FFPE material are stable over decades but their efficient extraction and streamlined analysis by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has so far proven challenging. Here, we describe an MS-based proteomic workflow for quantitative profiling of large FFPE tissue cohorts directly from pathology glass slides. We demonstrate broad applicability of the workflow to clinical pathology specimens and variable sample amounts, including low-input cancer tissue isolated by laser microdissection. Using state-of-the-art data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent (DIA) MS workflows, we consistently quantify a large part of the proteome in 100 min single-run analyses. In an adenoma cohort comprising more than 100 samples, total work up took less than a day. We observed a moderate trend towards lower protein identifications in long-term stored samples (>15 years) but clustering into distinct proteomic subtypes was independent of archival time. Our results underline the great promise of FFPE tissues for patient phenotyping using unbiased proteomics and prove the feasibility of analyzing large tissue cohorts in a robust, timely and streamlined manner.

### Sample Protocol
Nanoflow LC–MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer  (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) [21] coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source. 300 ng of peptides were loaded on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75-μm inner diameter, New Objective, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) and measured over a total gradient length of 100min with increasing buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) concentration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA) mode as specified in supplementary materials and methods. Details are provided in the supplementary materials and methods.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, DIA raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X software (Biognosys, version 12.0.20491.17 under default settings for targeted DIA analysis with ‘mutated’ as decoy method. DDA raw files were processed in the MaxQuant environment [22] (version 1.5.0.38 and 1.6.7.0). The human UniProtKB database (October 2017 and 2019, UP000005640_9606) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search.

### Publication Abstract
Formalin fixation and paraffin-embedding (FFPE) is the most common method to preserve human tissue for clinical diagnosis, and FFPE archives represent an invaluable resource for biomedical research. Proteins in FFPE material are stable over decades but their efficient extraction and streamlined analysis by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has so far proven challenging. Herein we describe a MS-based proteomic workflow for quantitative profiling of large FFPE tissue cohorts directly from histopathology glass slides. We demonstrate broad applicability of the workflow to clinical pathology specimens and variable sample amounts, including low-input cancer tissue isolated by laser microdissection. Using state-of-the-art data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA) MS workflows, we consistently quantify a large part of the proteome in 100&#x2009;min single-run analyses. In an adenoma cohort comprising more than 100 samples, total workup took less than a day. We observed a moderate trend towards lower protein identification in long-term stored samples (&gt;15&#x2009;years), but clustering into distinct proteomic subtypes was independent of archival time. Our results underscore the great promise of FFPE tissues for patient phenotyping using unbiased proteomics and they prove the feasibility of analyzing large tissue cohorts in a robust, timely, and streamlined manner. &#xa9; 2020 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Tissue, Ffpe, Biobank, Proteomics, Protocol, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried


