### Accession
PXD000590

### Title
In-depth protein profiling of mouse hippocampal postsynaptic density using data-independent acquisition proteomics

### Description
In the present study, we catalogued the proteome of postsynaptic density (PSD) derived from the hippocampus of three-week old (P19) mice. samples in 100 min gradient time.

### Sample Protocol
For this, three independent samples each containing hippocampi pooled from 11 mice were analyzed using a novel ion mobility enhanced data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics workflow.  Using only 20 μg of starting material for tryptic digestion and 200 ng on-column loads for LC-MS analysis, we were able to identify 25,511 peptides and 1,994 proteins in the hippocampal PSD across the three

### Data Protocol
Data Independent Acquisition can not be processed by common DB search engines. RAW data have been analyzed by PLGS (Waters commercial software) and post-processed by an in-house software (ISOQuant).

### Publication Abstract
Located at neuronal terminals, the postsynaptic density (PSD) is a highly complex network of cytoskeletal scaffolding and signaling proteins responsible for the transduction and modulation of glutamatergic signaling between neurons. Using ion-mobility enhanced data-independent label-free LC-MS/MS, we established a reference proteome of crude synaptosomes, synaptic junctions, and PSD derived from mouse hippocampus including TOP3-based absolute quantification values for identified proteins. The final dataset across all fractions comprised 49 491 peptides corresponding to 4558 protein groups. Of these, 2102 protein groups were identified in highly purified PSD in at least two biological replicates. Identified proteins play pivotal roles in neurological and synaptic processes providing a rich resource for studies on hippocampal PSD function as well as on the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000590 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000590).

### Keywords
Brain, Postsynaptic density, Hippocampus, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Universitaet Mainz
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Ute Distler

### Lab Head
Dr Ute Distler
Universitaet Mainz


