### Accession
PXD006483

### Title
Mining the cellular inventory of pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes with functionalized cofactor mimics

### Description
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is an enzyme cofactor required for the chemical transformation of biological amines in numerous essential cellular processes. PLP-dependent enzymes (PLP-DEs) are ubiquitous and evolutionarily diverse, making their classification based on sequence homology challenging. This calls for a more direct approach for identifying new PLP-DEs and uncovering novel roles of PLP within the cell. We present a chemical proteomic method for reporting on PLP-DEs using functionalized cofactor probes. PL-analogs designed to be taken up by cells and metabolized in situ were synthesized. The probes are phosphorylated to functional cofactor surrogates by cellular PL kinases and bind to PLP-DEs via a reversible aldimine bond, which can be fixed by NaBH4-reduction. Conjugation to a reporter tag permits the identification of PLP-DEs using quantitative, label-free mass spectrometry via confidence ranking and profile searches. We label a significant portion of the PLP-ome in Staphylococcus aureus (41%) and annotate uncharacterized proteins as novel PLP-DEs. In applying our method, we were able to study structural tolerance within PLP-DE active sites and to screen for off-targets of the PLP-DE inhibitor D-cycloserine. Our cofactor profiling method represents a robust way to mine the cellular inventory of PLP-DEs which can be used for genome annotation, comparative profiling and drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of S. aureus USA300 TnPdxS grown in B-medium containing 5 µg/ml Erm were diluted 1:100 into fresh media (approximately 100 ml for 3 samples) and grown for 5 h until early stationary phase (OD600 = 2.2 - 2.5). Bacteria were harvested, washed twice with 10 ml CDM-Erm (5 µg/ml) and resuspended to an OD600 = 40. For each sample, 1 ml of this suspension was incubated with 10 µl probe or DMSO (100× stock in DMSO) in culture tubes for 2 h at 37°C, with shaking. For samples treated with DCS, bacteria were incubated with 50 µl DCS (20× stock prepared fresh in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8) for 30 min at 37°C, with shaking, prior to probe labeling. Bacteria were subsequently harvested, washed with PBS (2 × 1 ml, 4°C), resuspended in 1 ml PBS and transferred to 2 ml glass-bead lysis tubes (Precellys Lysing Kit, soil-grinding SK38). Cells were lysed mechanically using a Precellys 24 Homogenizer (6 × 15 sec shaking at 5400 rpm) with cooling breaks on ice between cycles. Upon centrifugation (18,000 x g, 30 min, 4°C), the clarified lysates were reduced with 20 mM NaBH4, (40 µl of 500 mM stock prepared fresh in 0.1 M NaOH) at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were subsequently precipitated by adding ice-cold acetone (4× volume) and storage at -20°C overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (18,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) and washed with ice-cold MeOH (2 × 1 ml). Proteins were solubilized in 0.5 ml PBS containing 0.4% (w/v) SDS and protein concentrations were adjusted to 2 mg/ml (= 1 mg total per sample). Samples were subjected to CuAAC by adding 0.1 mM tri-functional rhodamine-biotin-azide linker,1 0.5 mM BTTAA ligand,2 1 mM  CuSO4 and 2 mM NaAsc to each sample and incubating for 1 h at room temperature. PL1 and Ctrl-labeled samples were incubated with 20 mM IAA prior to click chemistry. Upon precipitation and washing, the protein pellets were re-solubilized in 0.5 ml PBS containing 0.4% SDS (w/v) and centrifuged (18,000 x g, 5 min, rt) prior to avidin bead enrichment. Samples were transferred to Lo-bind Eppendorf tubes containing 50 µl of avidin-agarose bead slurry (Sigma Aldrich) pre-equilibrated with 0.4% SDS (w/v) in PBS (3 × 1 ml, 400 x g, 5 min, rt), and rotated for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were then washed with 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS (3 × 1 ml), 6 M urea (2 × 1 ml) and finally PBS (3 × 1 ml). The samples were resuspended in 200 µl X-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5). Upon reduction with 5 mM TCEP for 1 h at 37°C, proteins were alkylated using 10 mM IAA for 30 min at 25°C and samples were quenched with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 25°C. Enzymatic digestion using LysC (1 µl of 0.5 µg/µl) was first carried out for 2 h at 25°C, upon which samples were diluted with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (600 µl of 50 mM stock in ddH2O) and digested with trypsin (1.5 µl of 0.5 µg/µl in 50 mM acetic acid) for a further 16 h at 37°C. Samples were acidified to 1% (v/v) FA and desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (50 mg, Waters) with a vacuum manifold.3 Samples were prepared for MS-analysis by dissolving in 25 µl of 1% (v/v) FA and filtering through 0.22 µm PVDF filters (Millipore). All samples were prepared in three biological replicates from individual starting cultures and were processed in parallel. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% TFA and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated at 50 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, 105 min to 22%, 10 min to 32%, 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, 10 min equilibration at 5%) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Survey scans (m/z 300-1500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 2e5). The most intense ions of charge states 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation at a collision energy of 30%. The instrument was operated in top speed mode and spectra were acquired in the ion trap with the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 1e4). The option to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was enabled. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 60 s. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.0sp2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant4 software (version 1.5.3.8). MS/MS-based peptide identification was carried out using the Andromeda5 search engine with the S. aureus USA300 UniProtKB database (May 2016, 2607 accessions). A reverse database of protein sequences used for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation was automatically generated in MaxQuant. The following parameter settings were used: peptide and protein FDR 1%, enzyme specificity trypsin, minimal number of amino acids required for peptide identification 7, variable modification methionine oxidation, fixed modification carbamidomethylation. At least two unique peptides were required for the identification of proteins. All other parameters were used according to the default settings. For label-free protein quantification, the MaxLFQ algorithm was used as part of the MaxQuant environment. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to maximize the number of quantification events across all replicates. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) as part of the MaxQuant environment. Proteins identified only by site modification, reverse hits or contaminants were removed. Data were filtered to retain only those proteins with > 2 MS/MS counts and quantified in at least 2 out of 3 replicates (or at least 8 out of 9 replicates). Missing values were then imputed on the basis of a normal distribution (width=0.3, down-shift=1.8). Volcano plots were generated by performing a two-sample t-test with permutation-based statistics (FDR 0.05, s0 = 1).

### Publication Abstract
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is an enzyme cofactor required for the chemical transformation of biological amines in many central cellular processes. PLP-dependent enzymes (PLP-DEs) are ubiquitous and evolutionarily diverse, making their classification based on sequence homology challenging. Here we present a chemical proteomic method for reporting on PLP-DEs using functionalized cofactor probes. We synthesized pyridoxal analogues modified at the 2'-position, which are taken up by cells and metabolized in situ. These pyridoxal analogues are phosphorylated to functional cofactor surrogates by cellular pyridoxal kinases and bind to PLP-DEs via an aldimine bond which can be rendered irreversible by NaBH<sub>4</sub> reduction. Conjugation to a reporter tag enables the subsequent identification of PLP-DEs using quantitative, label-free mass spectrometry. Using these probes we accessed a significant portion of the Staphylococcus aureus PLP-DE proteome (73%) and annotate uncharacterized proteins as novel PLP-DEs. We also show that this approach can be used to study structural tolerance within PLP-DE active sites and to screen for off-targets of the PLP-DE inhibitor D-cycloserine.

### Keywords
Pyridoxal phosphate, Cofactor, Vitamin b6

### Affiliations
TU München Lehrstuhl Organische Chemie II Department of Chemistry Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching bei München
TU München

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Stephan A. Sieber
TU München Lehrstuhl Organische Chemie II Department of Chemistry Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching bei München


