### Accession
PXD024803

### Title
CHD6 IP from human induced pluripotent stem cells LC-MS-MS

### Description
Members of the chromodomain-helicase-DNA binding (CHD) protein family are chromatin remodelers implicated in human pathologies, with CHD6 being one of its least studied members. We discovered a de novo CHD6 missense mutation in a patient clinically presenting the rare Hallermann-Streiff syndrome (HSS). We used genome editing to generate isogenic iPSC lines and model HSS in relevant cell types. By combining genomics with functional in vivo and in vitro assays, we show that CHD6 binds a cohort of autophagy and stress response genes across cell types. The HSS mutation affects CHD6 protein folding and impairs its ability to recruit co-remodelers in response to DNA damage or autophagy stimulation. This leads to accumulation of DNA damage burden and senescence-like phenotypes. We therefore uncovered a molecular mechanism explaining HSS onset via chromatin control of autophagic flux and genotoxic stress surveillance.

### Sample Protocol
Wt/mutCHD6 immunoprecipitation was performed on freshly-harvested doxycycline-induced iPSCs. First, cell nuclei were isolated by incubating cells for 15 min on ice in NIB buffer (15mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 250 mM sucrose) containing 0.3% NP-40. Nuclei were pelleted for 5 min 800 x g at 4oC, washed twice in the same buffer, lysed for 10 min on ice in IP buffer (150 mM LiCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% Empigen) freshly supplemented with 2 mM sodium vanadate, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), PMSF (10 μl), 0,5mM DTT, 5 μl Caspase inhibitor III (Calbiochem), and 50 units Benzonase per ml of IP buffer, before preclearing cell debris by centrifugation at >15,000 x g at 4oC. Finally, 1 mg of the lysate was incubated with anti-HA antisera overnight at 4oC. Magnetic beads (Active Motif) were then washed once with 1x PBS-Tween and combined with the antibody-lysate mixture. Following a 2-h incubation at 4oC, beads were separated on a magnetic rack and washed 5x, 5 min each in wash buffer (150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% NP-40) and another two times in wash buffer without NP-40. Captured proteins were predigested and eluted from the beads using digestion buffer (2M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT) supplemented with trypsin and eluted from the beads with elution buffer (2M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM chloroacetamide) supplemented with trypsin and LysC, before subjected to mass-spectrometry at CECAD proteomics facility. The proteomics platform uses the shotgun proteomics approach. The resulting peptide mixture was separated by reversed phase chromatography using nano-UHPLC system. As the peptides elute from the column they were ionized and detected by an Quadrupole Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer. In data-dependent acquisition mode masses of intact peptides were detected by MS scans which were followed by peptide fragmentation to determine the sequence and post-translational modifications of the peptides.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC  (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm length, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-8% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 8-30% solvent B within 39.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 8.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 0.3 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10.0 s. All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot HUMAN.fasta (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chd6 immunoprecipitation, Human ipscs, Chd6 overexpression, Hallermann-streiff syndrome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Cologne
Professor for Translational Epigenetics, Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center  Germany

### Submitter
Yulia Kargapolova

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Papantonis
Professor for Translational Epigenetics, Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center  Germany


