### Accession
PXD034379

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 protein encoded by ORF8 contains a histone mimic, disrupts chromatin regulation, and enhances replication

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 emerged in China at the end of 2019 and caused the global pandemic of COVID-19, a disease with high morbidity and mortality. While our understanding of this new virus is rapidly increasing, gaps remain in our understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 can effectively suppress host cell antiviral responses. Recent work on other viruses has demonstrated a novel mechanism through which viral proteins can mimic critical regions of human histone proteins. Histone proteins are responsible for governing genome accessibility and their precise regulation is critical for a cell’s ability to control transcription and respond to viral threats. Here, we show that the protein encoded by ORF8 (Orf8) in SARS-CoV-2 functions as a histone mimic of the ARKS motif in histone 3. Orf8 is associated with chromatin, binds to numerous histone-associated proteins, and is itself acetylated within the histone mimic site. Orf8 expression in cells disrupts multiple critical histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) including H3K9ac, H3K9me3, and H3K27me3 and promotes chromatin compaction while Orf8 lacking the histone mimic motif does not. Further, SARS-CoV-2 infection in human cell lines and postmortem patient lung tissue cause these same disruptions to chromatin. However, deletion of the Orf8 gene from SARS-CoV-2 largely blocks its ability to disrupt host-cell chromatin indicating that Orf8 is responsible for these effects. Finally, deletion of the ORF8 gene affects the host-cell transcriptional response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in multiple cell types and decreases the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived lung alveolar type 2 (iAT2) pulmonary cells. These findings demonstrate a novel function for the poorly understood ORF8-encoded protein and a mechanism through which SARS-CoV-2 disrupts host cell epigenetic regulation. Finally, this work provides a molecular basis for the finding that SARS-CoV-2 lacking ORF8 is associated with decreased severity of COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
For histone PTM analysis by data independent acquisition, data analysis was performed with Skyline 10 (MacCoss Lab) using the synthetic histone library as an internal standard and reference.  Statistical analysis was performed in the same way as previous histone PTM analysis.  For raw files generated by data dependent acquisition, a database search was performed using the human SwissProt sequence and/or Orf8 sequence with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the following search criteria: carboxyamidomethylation at cysteine residues as a fixed modification; oxidation at methionine, acetylation at lysine, mono-, di-, and tri-methylation at lysine residues as variable modifications; two maximum allowed missed cleavage; 10 ppm precursor MS tolerance; a 0.02 Da MS/MS. Statistical analysis was performed within the Proteome Discoverer environment including normalization, scaling,  and a two-tailed student’s t-test.  For raw files generated by parallel reaction monitoring, data analysis and manual inspection was performed with Skyline10 (MacCoss Lab) and IPSA. Precursor and product ions with a mass accuracy below 10ppm were considered. Spectra where all abundant ions could be matched, and products spanned the whole length of the peptide were considered an identification. Spectra of interest were then exported into Adobe Illustrator to reflect IPSA visualization.

### Data Protocol
Histone PTM analysis: Purification of histones was validated and 20µg of histone were used for chemical derivatization and digestion as described before. Briefly, unmodified lysines were derivatized twice with a 1:3 ratio of acetonitrile (ACN) and proprionic anhydride. Histones were then digested with trypsin in a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio at 37°C overnight. Digested histones with newly formed N-termini were derivatized twice. Finally, they were desalted by the C18 micro spin column (Harvard Apparatus). The column was prepared with 200 μL of 100% ACN and equilibrated with 200 μL of loading buffer 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Reconstituted peptides were loaded onto the column, washed with a loading buffer, and eluted with 200 μL of 70% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA). All steps for loading, washing, and elution were carried out with benchtop centrifugation (300 x g for 2 min). The eluted peptides were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Dried histone peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA. A synthetic library of 93 heavy labeled and derivatized peptides containing commonly measured histone PTMs was spiked into the endogenous samples to a final concentration of approximately 100ng/µl of endogenous peptides and 10fm/µl of each heavy labeled synthetic analyte. For each analysis, 1µl of sample was injected on column for data-independent analysis (DIA) analyzed on a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific) attached to an Ulimate 3000 nano UPLC system and Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). Using aqueous solution of 0.1% FA as buffer A and organic solution of 80% ACN 0.1% FA as buffer B, peptides were separated on a 63-minute gradient at 400nL/min starting at 4% B and increasing to 32% B over 58 minutes, and then increasing to 98% B over 5 minutes. The column was then washed at 98% B over 5 minutes and equilibrated to 3% B. Data independent acquisition was performed with the following settings. A full MS1 scan from 300 to 950 m/z was acquired with a resolution of 60,000, ACG target of 3e6, and maximum injection time of 55ms. Then a series of 25 MS2 scans were acquired across the same mass range with sequential isolation windows of 24 m/z with a collision energy of 28, a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 55ms.  Trypsin & chymotrypsin digestion of Orf8 for identification modifications: The gel band was destained, reduced in 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC for 30 min at 55°C, and alkylated with 100 mM IAA in 50 mM ABC at RT for 30 min in the dark. The protein was then digested by incubation with chymotrypsin or trypsin in 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio at 37°C overnight. Following digestion, the supernatant was collected. To further extract additional peptides from the gel, 150 μL of 50% ACN and 1% TFA was added and incubated with shaking for 30min followed by 100uL of ACN with shaking for 10min. The supernatants were collected, combined, and dried. The dried samples were desalted as described above.  Orf8 vs control IP for identification of binding partners: Orf8 IP elutants were reduced and alkylated as described above. Proteins were then digested and desalted with mini S-Trap (Protifi LLC) using the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Orf8 LC-MS/MS & LC-PRM/MS analysis: Dried peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% FA, and 2 µg of each sample was injected. Data dependent (DDA) acquisition runs were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF or HF-X (Thermo Scientific) attached to an Ulimate 3000 nano UPLC system and Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). Using the same column and buffer conditions as described above, peptides were separated on a 112 minute gradient at 400nL/min starting at 5% B, increasing to 35% B over 104 minutes, and then increasing to 60% B over 8 minutes. The column was then washed at 95% B for 5 minutes and equilibrated to 5% B. DDA was performed with dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds. A full MS1 scan from 380 to 1200 m/z was acquired with a resolution of 120,000, ACG target of 3e6, and maximum injection time of 32ms. Then, a series of MS2 scans were acquired for the top 20 precursors with a charge state of 2-5, a collision energy of 28, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Each MS2 scan was acquired with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 32ms (HF) or 55ms (HFX). An unscheduled parallel reaction monitoring method was developed to identify 16 possible modified and unmodified peptide targets of Orf8. Peptides were separated with the same LC gradient conditions. A full MS1 scan from 350 to 950 m/z was acquired with a resolution of 120,000, ACG target of 3e6, and maximum injection time of 100ms. Then, a series of MS2 scans were acquired with a loop count of 16 precursors, a collision energy of 28, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Each MS2 scan was acquired with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 100ms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Infectious disease, Epigenetics

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics  Washington University School of Medicine  St. Louis, MO 63110   United States of America

### Submitter
Joseph A Cesare

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics  Washington University School of Medicine  St. Louis, MO 63110   United States of America


