### Accession
PXD023273

### Title
Proteomics Complementation of the Rat Uterotrophic Assay for Estrogenic Endocrine Disruptors: A Roadmap of Advancing High Resolution Mass Spectrometry-based Shotgun Survey to Targeted Biomarker Quantifications  Authors: Laszlo Prokai *, Fatima Rahlouni, Khadiza Zaman,Vien Nguyen, and Katalin Prokai-Tatrai

### Description
The widely used rat uterotrophic assay to assess known and potential estrogenic compounds only considers uterine weight gain as endpoint measurement. To complement this method with an advanced technology that reveals molecular targets, we analyzed changes in protein expression using label-free quantitative proteomics by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry on a high resolution (Orbitrap) instrument. Our samples were uterine protein extracts of ovariectomized rats after daily 17β-estradiol exposure for five days in comparison with those of vehicle-treated control animals. The study revealed that __ uterine proteins significantly regulated by estrogen treatment, and crucial findings were verified using multiple reaction monitoring-based targeted proteomics. When mapped by pathway analyses, estrogen-regulated proteins represented cell death and survival, cellular movement and protein synthesis as top molecular and cellular functions, and networks were found with the presence of nuclear estrogen receptor(s) as a prominent molecular node confirmed the relevance of our findings to hormone-associated events.

### Sample Protocol
Animals  Sprague Dawley rats weighing 200−250 g were obtained from Charles Rivers Laboratories (Wilmington, DE, USA). They were kept under standard 12 h light/12 h dark cycle, and the room temperature was maintained at 21 °C. Animals had full access to standard diet and water. Rats were treated according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of North Texas Health Science Center (USDA Registration Number: 74-R0081; PHS Assurance Number: A3711-01; AAALAC Accreditation Status: Unit 000622, continued full accreditation most recently on July 6, 2017) under the project numbers 2011/12-28-A05 and 2014/15-22-A05.  Ovariectomy of the animals was done by their supplier (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA). The animals were shipped approximately one week after ovariectomy and were allowed to adapt in the animal facility of the University of North Texas Health Science Center for approximately two weeks before starting daily injections with the vehicle (corn oil, 60 µL per injection) control, or E2 (50 µg/kg body weight in corn oil vehicle) for 5 consecutive days between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Uteri harvested from three vehicle-treated and two E2-treated animals were used for discovery-driven proteomics, while tissues were obtained from four rats for each treatment group to follow up with targeted proteomics. The animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, decapitated, and their brains were removed. An abdominal incision was then made and the uterus was removed by cutting at the junction of the uterus and vagina and at the site of the ovariectomy on each horn. Excess fat and connective tissues were removed, and the organ was blotted and weighed. All tissues were stored at –80 °C until sample preparation and analysis.  Protein digestion  Approximately one-tenth of the whole uterus (10 mg control and 50 mg E2-treated) was incubated in 200 µL of 8M urea for 1 hr. The samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1400x g and the supernatant was collected. and protein content was measured using a microplate reader (BioTek Synergy H1 with Take3 plate; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). An aliquot containing 100 µg protein was taken and the volume was adjusted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 100 µL. The sample was then reduced with dithiothreitol and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetic amide. After 9-fold dilution of the sample with aqueous 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin digestion was performed at 37 ◦C overnight, then the reaction was quenched by acidification with formic acid (1 µL). The solution was desalted by solid-phase extraction (SPE) using 1 mL Sep-Pak™ C18 SPE cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), and the extract was dried under vacuum (Vacufuge™, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) into a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent LC-MS/MS data acquisition for discovery-driven shotgun proteomics           The digested samples were analyzed using a hybrid ion trap–Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos Orbitrap Pro) coupled to an EASY nLC-1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system fitted with a 15 cm × 75 µm i.d. EasySpray column packed with 3 µm PepMap C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Gradient elution was used: Solvent A and solvent B were water and acetonitrile, respectively, and each contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples (100 µg protein) were reconstituted in 100 µL of solvent containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and transferred into 200 µL polypropylene autosampler vials closed with an open-top screw cap and Teflon-lined silicon septum (USA Scientific, Orlando, FL, USA). During a 20 min column equilibration at 5% B, 5 µL of solution was injected while maintaining constant column pressure at 600 bar. The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using the following gradient: (1) 5 min isocratic at 5% B; (2) linear program to 40% B over 90 min and then (3) isocratic at 40% B for 5 min; (4) to 90% B over 5 min; (6) isocratic at 90% B for 5 min; and (6) resetting to 5% B in 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion nanoelectrospray (nanoESI) mode with source voltage of 2.0 kV and ion-transfer tube temperature of 275 ◦C. Full-scan mass spectra (MS) were acquired at 60,000 resolutions in the Orbitrap and up to 20 MS-dependent tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using collision-induced dissociation (CID) of multiply-charged ions (z ≥ 2). Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. Two technical replicates were run for each sample. Data Processing and Statistical Analysis MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt protein sequence database (species: Rattus norvegicus, 29938 entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.2; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) run from Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3; Thermo Fisher Scientific). A parent ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 25 ppm and 0.80 Da respectively, and we allowed only one missed cleavage in our search filters. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was indicated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was designated as variable modification. We used Scaffold software (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc.; Portland, OR, USA) to validate our search results using the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms requiring over 95% and 99% probabilities, respectively, and at least two identified unique peptides for each protein. We have also deposited our data to the Proteome Exchange Consortium by the PRIDE partner repository. Our label-free quantification relied on spectral counting built into the Scaffold software, and p < 0.05 was considered significantly different using unpaired t-tests for statistical comparison between sample categories. We also considered twofold change in spectral counts as a threshold of biological effect. Missing values, if any, were handled using Scaffold’s default method and settings. The identified E2-regulated proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA®, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, USA; https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis/) to derive bioinformatics annotations along with potential protein interaction networks, as well as associated biological functions and processes. Overlaps of p-values were reported from IPA®’s calculations using the right-tailed Fisher’s exact test.

### Publication Abstract
The widely used rat uterotrophic assay to assess known and potential estrogenic compounds only considers uterine weight gain as endpoint measurement. To complement this method with an advanced technology that reveals molecular targets, we analyzed changes in protein expression using label-free quantitative proteomics by nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry from uterine protein extracts of ovariectomized rats after daily 17&#x3b2;-estradiol exposure for five days in comparison with those of vehicle-treated control animals. Our discovery-driven study revealed 165 uterine proteins significantly regulated by estrogen treatment and mapped by pathway analyses. Estrogen-regulated proteins represented cell death, survival and development, cellular growth and proliferation, and protein synthesis as top molecular and cellular functions, and a network found with the presence of nuclear estrogen receptor(s) as a prominent molecular node confirmed the relevance of our findings to hormone-associated events. An exploratory application of targeted proteomics to bisphenol A as a well-known example of an estrogenic endocrine disruptor is also presented. Overall, the results of this study have demonstrated the power of combining untargeted and targeted quantitative proteomic strategies to identify and verify candidate molecular markers for the evaluation of endocrine-disrupting chemicals to complement a conventional bioassay.

### Keywords
Strogen-regulated proteins; rat; uterus; liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry quantitative label-free proteomics; targeted  pathway analysis; protein networks; endocrine disruption

### Affiliations
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas Health Science Center at FortWorth, TX, USA
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Prokai, Ph.D, D.Sc
Professor and Robert A. Welch Chair in Biochemistry Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of North Texas Health Science Center at FortWorth, TX, USA


