### Accession
PXD031848

### Title
ABPP-HT* - Deep meets fast for activity-based profiling of deubiquitylating enzymes using advanced DIA mass spectrometry methodsABPP-HT* - Deep meets fast for activity-based profiling of deubiquitylating enzymes using advanced DIA mass spectrometry methods

### Description
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) uses a combination of activity-based chemical probes with mass spectrometry (MS) to selectively characterise a particular enzyme or enzyme class. ABPP has proven invaluable for profiling enzymatic inhibitors in drug discovery. When applied to cell extracts and cells, challenging the ABP-enzyme complex formation with a small molecule can simultaneously inform on potency, selectivity, reversibility/binding affinity, permeability, and stability. ABPP can also be applied to pharmacodynamic studies to inform on cellular target engagement within specific organs when applied to in vivo models. Recently, we established separate high depth and high throughput ABPP (ABPP-HT) protocols for the profiling of deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs). However, the combination of the two, deep and fast, in one method has been elusive. To further increase the sensitivity of the current ABPP-HT workflow we implemented state-of-the-art data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS analysis tools. Hereby, we describe an improved methodology, ABPP-HT* (enhanced high-throughput-compatible activity-based protein profiling), that in combination with DIA MS methods allowed for the consistent profiling of 35-40 DUBs and provided a reduced number of missing values, whilst maintaining a throughput of 100 samples per day.

### Sample Protocol
1 Agilient Bravo Assay MAP Liquid handling platform immunoprecipitation The immunoprecipitation methodology used in this paper is as outlined previously using the original ABPP-HT methodology [17]. Briefly, 100 µg of anti-HA antibody (12CA5) was immobilized on Protein A cartridges (Agilent, G5496-60000), using the in-built immobilization methodology, with PBS used for all wash steps. The in-built affinity purification methodology was used for HA-Ub-PA immunoprecipitation, with standard settings other than a slow flow-rate for lysate loading (1 µl/min) to ensure optimal antibody binding. Peptides were eluted with 50 µl of 0.15 % TFA.  4.6 Evosep/timsTOF LC-MS/MS Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid in water and Solvent B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. All centrifugation steps were 700 g for 60 seconds unless stated otherwise. For peptide loading onto EvoTips (Evosep) [37], tips were first activated by soaking in 1-propanol, then washed with 20 μL of Solvent B by centrifugation. Washed tips were conditioned by soaking in 1-propanol until the C18 material appeared pale white. Conditioned tips were equilibrated by centrifugation with 20 μL Solvent A. Samples were then loaded into the tips while the tips were soaking in Solvent A to prevent drying, peptides were then bound to the C18 material by centrifugation. Tips were washed by centrifuging with 20 μL Solvent A. Next, 100 μL Solvent A was added to the tips and the tips were centrifuged at 700 xg for 10 seconds. Samples were then immediately analysed by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were analysed using an Evosep One (Evosep) [37] coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a 100 µm x 80 mm C18 column packed with 3 µm beads (PepSep, EV-1109). The pre-set “100 samples per day” method was used, resulting in a gradient length of 11.5 minutes at a flow rate of 1.5 µL/min. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation, serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. TIMS ion accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms and mass spectra were recorded from 100 – 1700 m/z.   2  Mass spectrometry sample preparation Samples were neutralized with 180 µl of 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, and digested overnight at 37 ˚C with 1 µg of trypsin (Worthington, LS003740 TPCK-treated). Samples were then acidified with formic acid (1 % final concentration).   3 Data-dependent acquisition methods The ion mobility range was set to 0.85 – 1.30 Vs/cm2. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation were isolated with an ion mobility-dependant collision energy that increased linearly from 27 – 45 eV over the ion mobility range. Three PASEF MS/MS scans were collected per full TIMS-MS scan, giving a duty cycle of 0.53 s. Ions were included in the PASEF MS/MS scans if they met an intensity threshold of 2000 and were sampled multiple times until a summed target intensity of 10000, once sampled, ions were excluded from reanalysis for 24 seconds.  4 Data-independent acquisition methods The mass spectrometer was operated in diaPASEF mode using 8 diaPASEF scans per TIMS-MS scan, giving a duty cycle of 0.96 s [19].  For Figures 1, 2, 3C-3E and 4 the ion mobility range was set to 0.6 – 1.6 Vs/cm2. Each mass window isolated was 25 m/z wide, ranging from 400-1000 m/z with an ion mobility-dependent collision energy that increased linearly from 20 eV to 59 eV between 0.6 – 1.6 Vs/cm2 (Table S1). Due to a software upgrade, for Figure 3A + B the ion mobility range was set to 0.85 – 1.3 Vs/cm2. Each mass window isolated was 25 m/z wide, ranging from 475-1000 m/z with an ion mobility-dependent collision energy that increased linearly from 27 eV to 45 eV between 0.85 – 1.3 Vs/cm2 (Table S2).

### Data Protocol
1 Software settings All software was set to default settings unless stated (e.g. MBR vs no MBR), with N-terminal acetylation and Methionine oxidation set as variable modification, and no fixed modifications. All searches used Homo sapiens Uniprot database (retrieved 16-04-2021), other than maxDIA which requires its own generated FASTA (UP000005640_9606). Software versions: Fragpipe 17.1 (MSFragger 3.4, Philosopher 4.1.1, Python 3.9.7). DIA-NN 1.8, Maxquant 2.0.3.   2 Data analysis   Graphs were generated and fitted using Graphpad prism 9.2.0 (333), other than the upset plot (Figure 1B) [38]. For Fragpipe/Maxquant/maxDIA unique/razor ‘maxLFQ’ intensities were used, for DIA-NN razor intensities are not assigned to a protein group and so unique intensities were used for Figures 1-3 to avoid overestimating the number of DUBs present, and for Figures 3A and 3B to avoid counting the same protein multiple times. Figures 1D and 4 includes DIA-NN razor intensities which are denoted as DUB1;DUB2. Unique Fragpipe peptides were counted from the output file ‘protein.tsv’. Proteotypic DIA-NN peptides with intensities > 0 were extracted from the output file report.pr_matrix.tsv, with precursors averaged to give unique peptide numbers.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) uses a combination of activity-based chemical probes with mass spectrometry (MS) to selectively characterise a particular enzyme or enzyme class. ABPP has proven invaluable for profiling enzymatic inhibitors in drug discovery. When applied to cell extracts and cells, challenging the ABP-enzyme complex formation with a small molecule can simultaneously inform on potency, selectivity, reversibility/binding affinity, permeability, and stability. ABPP can also be applied to pharmacodynamic studies to inform on cellular target engagement within specific organs when applied to in vivo models. Recently, we established separate high depth and high throughput ABPP (ABPP-HT) protocols for the profiling of deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs). However, the combination of the two, deep and fast, in one method has been elusive. To further increase the sensitivity of the current ABPP-HT workflow, we implemented state-of-the-art data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS analysis tools. Hereby, we describe an improved methodology, ABPP-HT* (enhanced high-throughput-compatible activity-based protein profiling) that in combination with DIA MS methods, allowed for the consistent profiling of 35-40 DUBs and provided a reduced number of missing values, whilst maintaining a throughput of 100 samples per day.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Ubiquitin, Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (dia), Activity-based probes, Proteomics, Deubiquitylating enzymes, Drug discovery, Mass spectrometry, Activitomics

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
TDI-NDM (University of Oxford)

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
TDI-NDM (University of Oxford)


