### Accession
PXD003011

### Title
Bovine milk LCMSMS proteomics -  Proteomics data in support of the quantification of the changes of bovine milk proteins during mammary gland involution

### Description
This project tested the hypothesis that drying off and involution is accompanied by similar changes among the low abundance proteins as mastitis, thereby presenting a possible alternative means of maximising yields of host-defence-associated bioactive proteins

### Sample Protocol
The milk samples were centrifuged at 1500 x g for 20 min and the fat layer was removed before storage at -20 °C (skimmed milk). An aliquot of the skimmed milk was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 60 min at 30 °C to pellet the casein micelles, and the clear supernatant was removed and stored at -20 °C (whey). Whey and skimmed milk samples were reduced, carbamidomethylated and trypsin digested by FASP. Dimethyl labelling was done on a C18 column. Mixed samples (see labelling strategy) were measured by nLC LTQ-Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification and protein relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Here we provide data from three proteomics techniques; two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) followed by identification of selected spots using PSD MALDI-TOF MS/MS, one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS analysis of gel slices (GeLC) and dimethyl isotopic labelling of tryptic peptides followed by Orbitrap MS/MS (DML), to quantify the changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins that occurs after drying off. We analysed skim milk and whey sampled at day 0 and either day 3 or day 8 after drying off. These analyses identified 45 spots by MALDI-TOF, 51 proteins by GeLC and 161 proteins by DML, for which the detailed data work-up is presented as three Excel files. The data supplied in this article supports the accompanying publication "Changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins during mammary involution" (Boggs et al., 2015) [1]. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers ProteomeXchange: PXD003110 and ProteomeXchange: PXD003011.

### Keywords
Bovine whey skimmed milk drying off host defence

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


