### Accession
PXD033478

### Title
Histone post-translational modification analysis of Aspergillus strains

### Description
Chemical modifications of DNA and histone proteins impact the organization of chromatin within the nucleus. Changes in these modifications, catalyzed by different chromatin-modifying enzymes, influence chromatin organization, which in turn is thought to impact the spatial and temporal regulation of gene expression. While combinations of different histone modifications, the histone code, have been studied in several model species, we know very little about histone modifications in the fungal genus Aspergillus, whose members are generally well-studied due to their importance as models in cell and molecular biology as well as their medical and biotechnological relevance.

### Sample Protocol
https://epic-xs.eu/download/histone-extraction-for-mass-spectrometry-based-analysis-of-post-translational-modifications-in-the-fungal-genus-aspergillus/

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.6.10. The Uniprot UP000000560, UP000006706, UP000002530 databases were used for identification respectively of A. nidulans, A. niger and A. fumigatus histone peptides. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) was set at a maximum of 1%. The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 4 amino acids. Min. score for modified peptides and min. delta score for modified peptides were set to 1. Variable modifications include lysine propionylation, monomethylation-propionylation, dimethylation, trimethylation, acetylation, malonylation, succinylation. N-terminal PIC labeling was set as a fixed modification. To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search, the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs, setting different combinations of variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical modifications of DNA and histone proteins impact the organization of chromatin within the nucleus. Changes in these modifications, catalysed by different chromatin-modifying enzymes, influence chromatin organization, which in turn is thought to impact the spatial and temporal regulation of gene expression. While combinations of different histone modifications, the histone code, have been studied in several model species, we know very little about histone modifications in the fungal genus <i>Aspergillus</i>, whose members are generally well studied due to their importance as models in cell and molecular biology as well as their medical and biotechnological relevance. Here, we used phylogenetic analyses in 94 Aspergilli as well as other fungi to uncover the occurrence and evolutionary trajectories of enzymes and protein complexes with roles in chromatin modifications or regulation. We found that these enzymes and complexes are highly conserved in Aspergilli, pointing towards a complex repertoire of chromatin modifications. Nevertheless, we also observed few recent gene duplications or losses, highlighting <i>Aspergillus</i> species to further study the roles of specific chromatin modifications. SET7 (KMT6) and other components of PRC2 (Polycomb Repressive Complex 2), which is responsible for methylation on histone H3 at lysine 27 in many eukaryotes including fungi, are absent in Aspergilli as well as in closely related <i>Penicillium</i> species, suggesting that these lost the capacity for this histone modification. We corroborated our computational predictions by performing untargeted MS analysis of histone post-translational modifications in <i>Aspergillus nidulans</i>. This systematic analysis will pave the way for future research into the complexity of the histone code and its functional implications on genome architecture and gene regulation in fungi.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Aspergillus

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


