### Accession
PXD028974

### Title
A longer isoform of Stim1 is a negative SOCE regulator but increases cAMP modulated NFAT signaling

### Description
Alternative splicing is a potent modifier of protein function. Stromal interaction molecule 1 (Stim1) is the essential activator of store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) triggering activation of transcription factors. Here, we characterize Stim1A, a splice variant with an additional 31 amino acid domain inserted in frame within its cytosolic domain. Prominent expression of exon A is found in astrocytes, heart, kidney and testes. Full length Stim1A functions as a dominant-negative regulator of SOCE and ICRAC, facilitating sequence specific fast calcium dependent inactivation and destabilizing gating or Orai1. Downregulation or absence of native Stim1A results in increased SOCE. Despite reducing SOCE, Stim1A leads to increased NFAT translocation. Differential proteomics revealed interference of Stim1A with the cAMP-SOCE crosstalk by altered modulation of phosphodiesterase (PDE8B), resulting in reduced cAMP degradation and increased PIP5K activity, facilitating an increased NFAT activation. Our study uncovers a hitherto unknown mechanism regulating NFAT activation and indicates that cell type specific splicing of Stim1 is a potent means to regulate the NFAT signalosome and cAMP-SOCE crosstalk.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry and Data processing. For sample preparation, HEK STIM1/2 -/- cells were transfected with SP-HA-STIM1-mcherry or SP-HA-STIM1A-mcherry. 24h post transfection cells were stimulated adding 1 µM Thapsigargin to the medium. After lysate generation and concentration determination 5 mg of whole cell lysate were used to precipitate STIM1(A) using Pierce™ anti-HA agarose (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Bound protein was eluted using 2% SDS containing 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8). Protein samples were loaded on 12% SDS-PAGE gels and allowed to migrate approximately 8 mm into the separating gel. Protein bands from 3 independent replicates were cut out, followed by tryptic in-gel protein digestion and peptide desalting. Peptides were resuspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid just before the LC-MS/MS run. The LC-MS/MS system (Eksigent nanoLC 425 coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, ABSciex) was operated as described in Hammel et al. (Hammel et al., 2018) .

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS measurements was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The library used for peptide spectrum matching was constructed based on the Homo sapiens reference proteome UP000005640 (Bateman, 2019) including the sequences of hSTIM1A and hSTIM1A_D503A. The peptide library was extended by methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set to 0.01. Proteins were quantified using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014).  Protein abundances were normalized according to the detected amount of bait protein. Missing values were imputed on protein level by mean value imputation, adding random gaussian noise estimated using sample mean and variance. If both parameters could not be estimated from the data, the random value imputation was based on the 0.3 quantile of the empirical distribution of the experiment, simulating the detection limit for lowly abundant proteins. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA adjusted for multiple testing and Hay's post-hoc test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pde8, Splicing, Orai, Pip2, Nfat

### Affiliations
Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine (CIPMM), Bld. 48, Saarland University
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Niemeyer
Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine (CIPMM), Bld. 48, Saarland University


