### Accession
PXD036273

### Title
SWATH-MS proteome of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae showing differential protein expression due to the ModP and ModQ phasevarions

### Description
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae is responsible for porcine pleuropneumoniae, a severe respiratory disease that causes major global financial losses to the swine industry every year. Phase variation is the random switching of gene expression, either ON-OFF switching of expression, or the expression of multiple allelic protein variants. A number of bacteria encode cytoplasmic DNA methyltransferases that are phase-variable. This variable methyltransferase expression leads to global gene expression differences mediated by epigenetic mechanisms. These systems are called phasevarions (phase-variable regulons). In all described cases, phasevarions control expression of current and putative vaccine candidates, and influence phenotypes relevant to pathobiology. We have discovered two new phase-variable Type III DNA methyltransferases in A. pleuropneumoniae, which we named modP and modQ. Sequence analysis of multiple strains showed modP was present as four allelic variants, but just a single allelic variant of modQ was present. Phase-variable expression of modP (modP1 or modP2) and modQ leads to differential protein expression. This SWATH-MS dataset demonstrates the resulting changes to protein expression as a result of the of ModP1, ModP2 and ModQ phasevarions. This dataset represents triplicate repeats from strains which express either ModP or ModQ (ON) and strains which do not (OFF).

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of enriched ON/OFF variants (ModP1, ModP2 and ModQ) were grown to mid-log phase (OD600 ~ 0.5) and cultures were normalized to OD600 of 1. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (5,500x g for 5 min) and resuspended in 300 µl of 6 M guanidinium chloride, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Cysteines of the total protein were alkylated by addition of acrylamide to a final concentration of 25 mM and incubated at 30°C for 60 minutes with shaking (500 rpm). Concentration of samples was assessed using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher). A 100 µg aliquot of the protein was then precipitated by addition of 1:1 methanol: acetone at -20°C overnight. The protein was pelleted at 18,000xg for 10 minutes and supernatant was removed before the pellet was resuspended in 50 µL trypsin reaction buffer and 1 µg trypsin (New England Biolabs) added and the suspension incubated overnight at 37°C. Tryptic digested peptides were then desalted and purified using a Ziptip (Millipore) as per manufacturer instructions. Briefly, tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Prominence nanoLC system (Shimadzu) and Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a Nanospray III interface (SCIEX). Peptides were separated on a Vydac EVEREST reversed-phase C18 HPLC column at a flow rate of 1 μL/min. A gradient of 10−60% buffer B over 45 min, with buffer A (1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) was used. An MS-TOF scan was performed from an m/z range of 350− 1800 for 0.5 s followed by information dependent acquisition of MS/MS of the top 20 peptides from m/z 40−1800 for 0.05 s per spectrum, with automated CE selection. Identical LC conditions were used for SWATH-MS. SWATH-MS of triplicate biological replicates was performed with the same MS-TOF scan, followed by high sensitivity information-independent acquisition with m/z isolation windows with 1 m/z window overlap each for 0.1 s across an m/z range of 400−1250. Collision energy was automatically assigned by Analyst software (AB SCIEX) based on m/z window ranges.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching against A. pleuropneumoniae AP76 and JL03 genomes (NCBI Accession CP001091.1 and CP000687.1 respectively) and common contaminants with standard settings using ProteinPilot 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX). False discovery rate analysis was performed on all searches. ProteinPilot search results were used as ion libraries for SWATH analyses. The abundance of proteins was measured automatically using PeakView (AB SCIEX) with standard settings. Comparison of protein relative abundance was performed based on protein intensities or ion intensities using a linear mixed-effects model with the MSstats package in R. Proteins with ≥2.0-fold changes in abundance and with adjusted P values greater than ≤0.05 were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae is the cause of porcine pleuropneumonia, a severe respiratory tract infection that is responsible for major economic losses to the swine industry. Many host-adapted bacterial pathogens encode systems known as phasevarions (phase-variable regulons). Phasevarions result from variable expression of cytoplasmic DNA methyltransferases. Variable expression results in genome-wide methylation differences within a bacterial population, leading to altered expression of multiple genes via epigenetic mechanisms. Our examination of a diverse population of A. pleuropneumoniae strains determined that Type I and Type III DNA methyltransferases with the hallmarks of phase variation were present in this species. We demonstrate that phase variation is occurring in these methyltransferases, and show associations between particular Type III methyltransferase alleles and serovar. Using Pacific BioSciences Single-Molecule, Real-Time (SMRT) sequencing and Oxford Nanopore sequencing, we demonstrate the presence of the first ever characterised phase-variable, cytosine-specific Type III DNA methyltransferase. Phase variation of distinct Type III DNA methyltransferase in A. pleuropneumoniae results in the regulation of distinct phasevarions, and in multiple phenotypic differences relevant to pathobiology. Our characterisation of these newly described phasevarions in A. pleuropneumoniae will aid in the selection of stably expressed antigens, and direct and inform development of a rationally designed subunit vaccine against this major veterinary pathogen.

### Keywords
Phasevarions, Methyltransferase, Epigenetics, Bacteria, Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae

### Affiliations
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4222, Australia
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University

### Submitter
Nusrat Nahar

### Lab Head
Dr John Atack
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4222, Australia


