### Accession
PXD038814

### Title
Demonstration of increased biologically active CXCL12α plasma concentrations after ACKR3 antagonist treatment in humans

### Description
CXCL12 is a chemokine that binds to its cognate receptors CXCR4 and ACKR3 (CXCR7). An increase in CXCL12 concentrations has been used as a pharmacodynamic biomarker to assess ACKR3 antagonism in healthy adults. Furthermore, increased CXCL12 concentrations have been observed in various human pathologies. To date, CXCL12 concentrations have typically been quantified using antibody-based assays with overlapping or unclear specificity for the various existing CXCL12 proteoforms. Only the N-terminal full-length CXCL12 proteoform is biologically active and can engage CXCR4 and ACKR3. However, this proteoform could so far not be quantified in healthy adults. Here, we describe a new and validated fit-for-purpose immunoaffinity mass spectrometry (IA-MS) biomarker assay for specific measurement of five CXCL12α proteoforms in human plasma, including the biologically active CXCL12α proteoform. The assay was employed in a Phase 1 clinical study with the ACKR3 antagonist ACT-1004-1239 to quantify CXCL12α proteoforms. At baseline levels, 1.00 nM total CXCL12α and 0.10 nM biologically active CXCL12α was quantified in placebo treated adults. The concentrations of both proteoforms increased up to two-fold in healthy adults following drug administration. At all doses, 10% of CXCL12α was biologically active and the simultaneous increase of all proteoforms suggests that a new equilibrium has been reached 24 h following dosing. Hence, this IA-MS biomarker assay can be used to specifically measure active CXCL12 proteoform concentrations in clinical trials. Specific quantification of active chemokines can support decision making in clinical trial and thus successful drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were injected on an Orbitrap Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ulitmate HPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) system. The injected sample (10 μL) was first loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 75 μm x 2 cm; C18; 3 μm; 100A (P/N: 164535) at 32°C for 5 min with 0.1% FA in water at 6 μL/min before switching the trap column in the nano-flow path. Peptides were then separated on a PepMap RSLC C18; 75 μm x 15 cm; 2 μm; 100A (P/N: ES804A) at 40°C using a gradient from 5% Buffer B (ACN/water/FA 80:20:0.1, v/v/v) in Buffer A (water/FA 100:0.1, v/v) to 35% Buffer B for 10 min at 300 nL/min before washing and equilibrating the column again. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode cycling over a Full MS scan for monitoring purposes, followed by the PRM scans. The Full MS scans were performed at 60k resolution, using an AGC target of 3e6, maximum injection time of 120 ms, and a scan range of 300 to 1000 m/z. The scheduled PRM scans were performed at 30k resolution at 200 m/z, with an AGC target of 2e5, maximum IT of 50 ms and 1.4 m/z isolation window. In total, 20 precursors were selected for fragmentation in the Trypsin method and 17 in the GluC method.  The samples were analyzed in four batches using a block-randomized approach. As QC samples, three QC2 samples were included in each batch to control for assay performance. The mean intra-batch precision of the QC samples had a CV of 6.2% and all proteoforms had less < 10% CV, confirming the high precision of the assay (Figure S2A). The mean inter-batch precision was 7.7% and all proteoforms and QCs showed < 15% CV (Figure S2B). The accuracy was assessed by comparing the concentrations of the QC samples to the empirical concentration obtained during the validation of the assay. No sample in any batch had more than 20% deviation. Hence, the results were precise and accurate within the pre-defined limits.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were imported into the software Skyline (MacCoss Lab, University of Washington) for data extraction from the acquired spectra. Up to 5 product ions of each precursor ion were selected for quantification and the data was subsequently exported and analyzed using an R Markdown script. The integrated signal for each endogenous isotopologue was normalized to the internal standard (signal of the heavy isotopologue) and the concentration was determined based on the calibration curve produced with standards consisting of 10 CAL samples with different amounts (0.059 nM – 8.230 nM) of an equimolar mix of synthetic CXCL121-68 and CXCL123-67 in a surrogate matrix of 0.001% BSA in water. The regression was performed using a quadratic fit (y ~ ax2 + bx + c) and a 1/x2 weighting. On average, the back-calculated concentrations of the calibration standards had an accuracy of 5.5%. For all peptides, it was possible to quantify the resulting peptides (0.0295 nM – 4.14 nM for the terminal peptides and double the concentrations for central peptides) across all CAL samples, except for the peptide YLEKALNK that needed to be quantified above a concentration of 0.059 nM.  The analysis of the N-terminal cleavage (Figure 2C) was performed before the assay was set up completely and the intensity of the light isotopologue was normalized by the mean intensity of the three central peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, Ia-ms

### Affiliations
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Switzerland

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Blattmann
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Switzerland


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: plasma
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: healthy
- Instrument: Q Exactive HF-X
- label: label free

