### Accession
PXD016204

### Title
Outer membrane proteome of Leptospira; revealing the bottom of iceberg

### Description
Leptospira, the causative agent of leptospirosis is known to have several proteases with potential to degrade extracellular matrix. However, a multipronged approach to identify, classify, characterize and elucidate their role has not been attempted. In this study, we carried out in-depth proteomic analysis of Triton X-114 fractions of Leptospirainterrogansusing high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Our analysis resulted in the identification of We have identified 2957 proteins that account 80.6% proteins of Leptospira and their subcellular distribution. The analysis showed differential enrichment of proteins in aqueous, detergent and pellet fractions with respect to the subcellular localization predicted by on CELLO v.2.5. It is found that highest number of OMP and pathogenic protein species were found in aqueous and pellet representing the cytoplasm and inner membranewhile the detergent fraction representing the OM contain highest amount of OMPs and pathogenic proteins even though the number of protein species were less. Thus the higher number of OMP and pathogenic proteins in the inner compartments of the cell carry the possibility of their deployment on the OM in abundance under pathogenic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Leptospirainterrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 was cultured in Ellinghausen-McCullough-Johnson-Harris (EMJH) medium, supplemented with 1 % BSA at 30 °C. The mid log phase culture was harvested by centrifuging at 2,500 × g for 30 min at 4 °C and washedwith PBS containing 5 mM MgCl2. The pellet was lysed and the protein was extracted using 10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8) containing 1 % Triton X-114 and 150 mM NaCl at 4 °C. The Triton X-114extract was centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C and the supernatant was separated and used for phase separation. The Triton X-114 concentration of the supernatant was further increased to 2 % (v/v), mixed well and incubated at 37 °C for one hour for phase separation. The upper aqueous and lower detergent phases were separated and designated as “aqueous” and “detergent” phase respectively. The pellet from the Triton X-114 extract was further extracted with buffer containing 10 mM TRIS-Cl (pH8), 8 M urea, 4 mM DTT and 1 % SDS and centrifuged to separate the undissolved precipitate and the supernatant was designated as “pellet fraction”.From each fraction 250 µg of protein was taken for In-solution trypsin digestion followed by fractionation using basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography. The fractions obtained were desalted using C18 StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files obtained from mass spectrometry analysis were processed using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using SEQUEST and Mascot search algorithms against Leptospira interrogans serogroup Icterohaemorrhagiae serovar copenhageni (strain Fiocruz L1-130) obtained from NCBI (3,667 protein entries). The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The peptide matches that qualifies 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered as true identification that was calculated using Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
The Triton X-114-based solubilization and temperature-dependent phase separation of proteins is used for subcellular fractionation where, aqueous, detergent, and pellet fractions represents cytoplasmic, outer membrane (OM), and inner membrane proteins, respectively. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of Triton X-114 fractions of proteomic analysis of Leptospira interrogans identified 2957 unique proteins distributed across the fractions. The results are compared with bioinformatics predictions on their subcellular localization and pathogenic nature. Analysis of the distribution of proteins across the Triton X-114 fractions with the predicted characteristics is performed based on "number" of unique type of proteins, and "quantity" which represents the amount of unique protein. The highest number of predicted outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and pathogenic proteins are found in aqueous and pellet fractions, whereas detergent fraction representing the OM has the highest quantity of OMPs and pathogenic proteins though lower in number than the aqueous and pellet fractions. This leaves the possibility of an upsurge in pathogenic proteins and OMPs on the OM under pathogenic conditions suggesting their potential use to combat leptospirosis. Further, the Triton X-114 subcellular fractions are more correlated to enrichment of pathogenic proteins predicted by MP3 software than predicted localization.

### Keywords
Protease, Pathogenesis, Outer membrane, Pathogenic high resolution proteomics, Leptospira

### Affiliations
Scientist E Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research  Port Blair, INDIA
Indian Council of Medical Research, Regional Medical Research Centre

### Submitter
Madathiparambil G.  Madanan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr M. G. Madanan
Scientist E Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research  Port Blair, INDIA


