### Accession
PXD022293

### Title
Proteomics of marine mussels exposed to the toxic marine alga Prorocentrum lima

### Description
This project aimed to disclose the metabolic alterations and responses of the marine mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis after grazing the toxic microalga Prorocentrum lima. Mussels metabolic alterations were investigated by shotgun proteomics, during the phases of intoxication and depuration. The diarrhetic shelllfisf toxins were also quantified in this project, for assessing the levels of contamination of mussels.

### Sample Protocol
Mussel tissues (digestive glands and gills) were homogenized in Tris (100 mM), SDS 2% (w/v), dithiothreitol (0.1M), pH 7.6 and protease inhibitors (complete protease cocktail tablets, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) with sonication and incubated overnight. Samples were denatured with heat (95°C, 3 minutes) and clarified at 16000 g for 20 minutes. The supernatants were recovered and total protein estimated with Bradford method. Proteins were digested following the filter aided sample preparation method described by Wisniewski et al. (2009), using centrifugal filter units with nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL) of 30 kDa (MRCF0R030, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Protein samples (40 μg protein) were alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (recombinant, proteomics grade, Roche) for 16 h at 37°C, at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Protein digests were recovered by centrifugal filtration, acidified with formic acid (FA) (10%, v/v), desalted and concentrated by reversed phase extraction (C18 Top-Tips, TT2C18, Glygen, Columbia, MD, USA). Before LC–MS/MS the peptides were recovered in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Samples were then analysed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient for total protein fraction:  2 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 50 min (10% B to 35% B), 8 min (35% B to 99% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 7e3, intensity threshold 6.4e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 20s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against M. galloprovincialis transcriptome database (Campos et al., 2015). The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.  Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set to 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss+acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high.  The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were considered for quantification and precursor abundance was based on intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mytilus galloprovincialis; prorocentrum lima; diarrhetic shellfish toxins; shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
CIIMAR
Blue Biotechnology and Ecotoxicology Laboratory (BBE); Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research (CIIMAR), Porto University

### Submitter
Alexandre Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Marnoto Campos
Blue Biotechnology and Ecotoxicology Laboratory (BBE); Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research (CIIMAR), Porto University


