### Accession
PXD026853

### Title
maize mms21 seedling total proteome

### Description
Three maize mms21 mutant alleles and their normal siblings were harvested 10 days after planting for total proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total maize proteome profiling was performed as described by McLoughlin et al. (2018) with minor modifications. Proteins were extracted into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mM Na2EDTA, 2 mM dithiothreitol and 1 × plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), and precipitated with methanol-chloroform.  Pellets were resuspended into 8 M urea, reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h before digestion with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated with a 100-µl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies) and resuspended in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then analyzed with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) after reversed-phase nano-HPLC separation with a 25-cm analytical C18 resin column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 5 to 80% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition.  Data-dependent acquisitions were obtained using Xcalibur 4.0 software in positive-ion mode.  MS1 spectra were measured at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control of 1 × 106, a maximum ion time of 50msec, and a mass range of 300-1,800 m/z.  Up to 12 MS2, with a charge state of 2 to 4, were triggered at a resolution of 17,500, an automatic gain control of 5 × 105 with a maximum ion time of 120 msec, a 1.6-m/z isolation window, and a normalized collision energy of 28.  MS1 scans that triggered MS2 scans were dynamically excluded for 30 sec. Each biological replicate was analyzed by two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data sets were searched against the maize B73 proteome database (Zm-B73-REFERENCE-GRAMENE-4.0 from www.maizegdb.org) using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a list of common protein contaminants.  Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT, allowing a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of Cys and oxidation of Met were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumoylayion, Mms21, Maize, Smc5

### Affiliations
Washington Univeristy in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Junya Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Vierstra
Washington Univeristy in St. Louis


