### Accession
PXD038418

### Title
Epigenetic inactivation of the 5-methylcytosine RNA methyltransferase NSUN7 is associated with clinical outcome and therapeutic vulnerability in liver cancer

### Description
RNA modifications are important regulators of transcript activity and an increasingly emerging body of data suggest that the epitranscriptome and its associated enzymes are altered in human tumors. In this study, the initial screening for genetic and epigenetic defects of 5-methylcytosine RNA methyltransferases in tranformed cell lines, identified the NOL1/NOP2/Sun domain family member 7 (NSUN7) as undergoing promoter CpG island hypermethylation-associated transcriptional silencing in a cancer-specific manner. NSUN7 epigenetic inactivation was common in liver malignant cells and we coupled bisulfite conversion of cellular RNA with next-generation sequencing (bsRNA-seq) to found the RNA targets of this poorly characterized putative methyltransferase. Using knock-out and restoration-of-function models, we observed that the mRNA of the coiled-coil domain containing 9B (CCDC9B) gene required NSUN7-mediated methylation for transcript instability. Most important, proteomics analyses determined that CCDC9B loss impaired protein levels of its partner, the MYC-regulator Influenza Virus NS1A Binding Protein (IVNS1ABP), creating sensitivity to bromodomain inhibitors in those liver cancer cells exhibiting NSUN7 epigenetic silencing. The DNA methylation-associated loss of NSUN7 was also observed in primary liver tumors where it was associated with poor overall survival and an immune-like signature, providing a potential attractive therapeutic niche for the current use of immune checkpoint inhibitors in hepatocellular carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent biological replicates from EV- and NSUN7-transfected SNU-423 cells were used. Cell pellets were lysed in Urea-based buffer (6 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) on a Bioruptor sonicator. Lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g to remove insoluble debris. Proteins were overnight precipitated with 100% w/v TCA, and then pellets were washed with chilled acetone for 30 min. Samples were then centrifuged and resuspended with 6M Urea Tris 0,1M and quantified by DCTM Protein Assay (BIO-RAD) kit. Protein digestion was carried out with Lys-C and Trypsin overnight at 30 °C. Enzymatic reaction was stopped with formic acid (10% (v/v) final concentration). 200 ug of digested peptides were acidified by the addition of formic acid and purified using reversed-phase C18 cartridges (SepPak Classic, 500 mg sorbent, Waters) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and TMT16-plex reagents (ThermoFisher) were added from stocks dissolved in 100% anhydrous ACN at a protein:TMT ratio of 1:1.5 (w/w), and the peptide–TMT mixture was incubated for 1 h at 25 °C and 400 rpm. Labelled peptides were desalted using RP solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters), fractionated with Zorbax Extent-C18 (2.1 x 150 mm 3.5 µm 300A) into 96 fractions, and pooled into 48 fractions. Peptides were separated using an Evosep EV1106 column (150 μm × 150 mm, 1.9 μm) (Evosep) at a flow rate of 500nL/min with an 88 min run. The column outlet was directly connected to an EASY-Spray source (Thermo) fitted on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (375-1500 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolution setting and automatic gain control (AGC) of 2 x 105). The following MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top speed approach. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, 0.25 activation Q, an AGC target of 1 x 104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and turbo ion scan rate. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. For the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, multiple fragment ions from the previous MS2 scan (SPS ions) were co-selected and fragmented by HCD using a 65 % collision energy and a precursor isolation window of 2 Da. Reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 1 x 105 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with PEAKS X+ software to search against the Swissprot Human database downloaded from UniprotKB website. The final list of identified peptides and proteins were filtered by using a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) both at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peaks, Snu cells, Methyltransferase, Nsun7, Tmt16plex

### Affiliations
Cancer Epigenetics Group,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona,  Catalonia, Spain.
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Manel Esteller
Cancer Epigenetics Group,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona,  Catalonia, Spain.


