### Accession
PXD024051

### Title
ELOF1 is a transcription-coupled DNA repair factor  that directs RNA polymerase II ubiquitylation

### Description
Cells employ transcription-coupled repair (TCR) to eliminate transcription-blocking DNA lesions. DNA damage-induced binding of the TCR-specific repair factor CSB to RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) triggers RNAPII ubiquitylation at a single lysine (K1268) by the CRL4CSA ubiquitin ligase. How CRL4CSA is specifically directed toward the K1268 site is unknown. Here, we identify ELOF1 as the missing link that facilitates RNAPII ubiquitylation, a key signal for the assembly of downstream repair factors. This function requires its constitutive interaction with RNAPII close to the K1268 site, revealing ELOF1 as a specificity factor that interacts with and positions CRL4CSA for optimal RNAPII ubiquitylation. Drug-genetic interaction screening also reveals a CSB-independent compensatory pathway in which ELOF1 protects cells against DNA replication stress by preventing DNA damage-induced R-loops. Our study offers key insights into the molecular mechanisms of TCR and provides a genetic framework of the interplay between the transcriptional stress response and DNA replication.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for Co-IP. Cells were mock treated or irradiated with UV-C light (20 J/m2) and harvested 1 h after UV. Chromatin-enriched fractions were prepared by incubating the cells for 20 min on ice in IP buffer (IP-130 for endogenous RNAPII IP and IP-150 for GFP-IP), followed by centrifugation, and removal of the supernatant. For endogenous RNA pol II IPs the chromatin-enriched cell pellets were lysed in IP-130 buffer (30 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 130 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 250 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen), and 2 µg RNAPII-S2 (ab5095, Abcam) for 2-3 h at 4 °C. For GFP IPs the chromatin-enriched cell pellets were lysed in IP-150 buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen)) for 1 h at 4 °C. Protein complexes were pulled down by 1.5 h incubation with Protein A agarose beads (Millipore) or GFP-Trap® A beads (Chromotek). For subsequent analysis by western blotting, the beads were washed 6 times with IP-130 buffer for endogenous RNAPII IPs and EBC-2 buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) for GFP-IPs. The samples were prepared by boiling in Laemmli-SDS sample buffer. Bound proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies.  Generation of mass spectrometry samples. After pulldown, the beads were washed 4 times with EBC-2 buffer without NP-40 and 2 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. Peptides were desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge by washing with 0.1 % acetic acid. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1 % formic acid / 60 % acetonitrile and lyophilized as described6.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition. Samples were analyzed on a Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm fused silica emitter fused silica capillary (FS360-75-15-N-5-C50, New Objective, Massachusetts, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50ºC in a Column Oven for ESI/NANO Spray (Sonation, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 40 min. Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode was used with a TopN method at maximum speed with a resolution of 60,000 and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) cycles of 3 seconds. Internal calibration was enabled based on dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane (445.12003 m/z). Scan range for MS was from 300 to 1,600 m/z. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) normalized collision energy of 28%. Precursors selected for MS/MS analysis were dynamically excluded for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition. Samples were analyzed on a Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm fused silica emitter fused silica capillary (FS360-75-15-N-5-C50, New Objective, Massachusetts, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50ºC in a Column Oven for ESI/NANO Spray (Sonation, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 40 min. Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode was used with a TopN method at maximum speed with a resolution of 60,000 and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) cycles of 3 seconds. Internal calibration was enabled based on dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane (445.12003 m/z). Scan range for MS was from 300 to 1,600 m/z. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) normalized collision energy of 28%. Precursors selected for MS/MS analysis were dynamically excluded for 30s.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna repair., Transcription, Rna polymerase ii, Tc-ner

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands


