### Accession
PXD029672

### Title
Structural Alternation in Heat Shock Proteins of Activated Macrophages

### Description
The inflammatory response of macrophages is an orderly and complex process under strict reg-ulation accompanied by drastic changes in morphology and functions. It is predicted that pro-teins will undergo structural changes during these finely regulated processes. However, changes in structural proteome in macrophages during the inflammatory response remain poorly char-acterized. In the present study, we applied limited proteolysis coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) to identify proteome-wide structural changes in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated macrophages. We identified 386 structure-specific proteolytic fingerprints from 230 proteins. Using GO molecular function enrichment, we discovered that proteins with altered structures were enriched into unfolded protein binding and protein folding chaperone, in which HSP60 was ranked as the most changed protein. We verified the structural changes in HSP60 by using cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) and native CETSA. Our results showed that the thermal sta-bility of HSP60 was enhanced in activated macrophages and formed a HSP10-less complex. In conclusion, we demonstrate that in situ structural systems biology is an effective method to characterize proteomic structural changes and reveal that the structures of chaperone proteins vary significantly in macrophage activation.

### Sample Protocol
LiP-MS experiments used untreated and LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells. Briefly, RAW264.7 cells were treated for 12 or 24 h with LPS treatment. Three 10 cm dishes (ap-proximately 1 × 107 cells per dish) were used for each treatment to serve as three technical repetitions. Cells were collected using a cell scraper, washed three times with PBS to re-move the interference of serum protein in the culture medium, and then centrifuged at 400 x g for 5 min to collect cells. After being centrifuged at 4 °C and 17,000 x g for 5 min, the supernatant was quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and diluted to 1 μg/μL. Finally, 400 μg of protein from each sample was divided into four PCR tubes for subsequent experiments. Two of them were used for LiP-digested sam-ples and the other two tubes were used for trypsin-digested samples. All the samples were placed in a 25 °C PCR instrument and preheated for 5 min. Then 1μg proteinase K (Sigma, MO, USA) per tube was added to the LiP-digested samples while 1μg trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) per tube was added to the trypsin-digested samples. Sample tubes were placed in a 25 °C PCR instrument for 3 min, and heated to 95 °C for 10 min to quench the diges-tion. Then, 100 μL of 10% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma, MO, USA) was added to each tube and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. Every two PCR tubes of the same digestion procedure were combined into one 1.5 mL tube. Next, 40 μL of 25 mM dithiothreitol was added and heat-ed in a metal bath at 95 °C for 10 min.Then, 40 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide was added at room temperature for 1 h in the dark to block the free sulfhydryl groups. Then, for all the samples, trypsin digestion was performed by adding 566 μL of 357mM tetraethylammo-nium bromide (TEAB, Sigma, MO, USA) pH 8.0 and 2μg trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) per tube, 1200 rpm 37 °C overnight. Afterwards, 20μL formic acid was used to acidify the samples and samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min to remove the sodium de-oxycholate precipitate. Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges(Waters, MA, USA) were used to desalt the samples. The eluted peptides were labeled overnight with tandem mass tags (TMT) 6-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), and the labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using a UPLC 3000 system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an XBridge C18 RP column (Waters, MA, USA). Samples were separated into 48 fractions which were consolidated into 12 fractions and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.The labeled peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with nano-LC combined with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The digestion products were separated by a 120-min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), which directly interfaced with a Thermo Fu-sion Lumos mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made fused silica ca-pillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; IDEX, IL, USA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm; Varian, CA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid mobile phase B con-sisted of 100 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.3(Thermo Fisher Scien-tific, MA, USA) software, and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350–1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 3 sec cycles of data-dependent MS/MS scans at 34 % normalized collision energy (HCD). The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the selected da-tabase (Uniprot mouse reviewed proteome. 2021/03/07) using an in-house Proteome Dis-coverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The search criteria were as fol-lows: No-Enzyme(Unspecific)was required, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT plex (K-terminal and N-terminal) were set as the fixed modifications, oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-terminal) were set as the variable modifications, the precursor ion mass toler-ances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer, and the frag-ment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. Relative protein quantification was also performed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3) ac-cording to the manufacturer’s instructions on the reporter ion intensities per peptide.

### Data Protocol
LiP-MS experiments used untreated and LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells. Briefly, RAW264.7 cells were treated for 12 or 24 h with LPS treatment. Three 10 cm dishes (ap-proximately 1 × 107 cells per dish) were used for each treatment to serve as three technical repetitions. Cells were collected using a cell scraper, washed three times with PBS to re-move the interference of serum protein in the culture medium, and then centrifuged at 400 x g for 5 min to collect cells. After being centrifuged at 4 °C and 17,000 x g for 5 min, the supernatant was quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and diluted to 1 μg/μL. Finally, 400 μg of protein from each sample was divided into four PCR tubes for subsequent experiments. Two of them were used for LiP-digested sam-ples and the other two tubes were used for trypsin-digested samples. All the samples were placed in a 25 °C PCR instrument and preheated for 5 min. Then 1μg proteinase K (Sigma, MO, USA) per tube was added to the LiP-digested samples while 1μg trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) per tube was added to the trypsin-digested samples. Sample tubes were placed in a 25 °C PCR instrument for 3 min, and heated to 95 °C for 10 min to quench the diges-tion. Then, 100 μL of 10% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma, MO, USA) was added to each tube and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. Every two PCR tubes of the same digestion procedure were combined into one 1.5 mL tube. Next, 40 μL of 25 mM dithiothreitol was added and heat-ed in a metal bath at 95 °C for 10 min.Then, 40 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide was added at room temperature for 1 h in the dark to block the free sulfhydryl groups. Then, for all the samples, trypsin digestion was performed by adding 566 μL of 357mM tetraethylammo-nium bromide (TEAB, Sigma, MO, USA) pH 8.0 and 2μg trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) per tube, 1200 rpm 37 °C overnight. Afterwards, 20μL formic acid was used to acidify the samples and samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min to remove the sodium de-oxycholate precipitate. Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges(Waters, MA, USA) were used to desalt the samples. The eluted peptides were labeled overnight with tandem mass tags (TMT) 6-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), and the labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using a UPLC 3000 system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an XBridge C18 RP column (Waters, MA, USA). Samples were separated into 48 fractions which were consolidated into 12 fractions and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The inflammatory response of macrophages is an orderly and complex process under strict regulation accompanied by drastic changes in morphology and functions. It is predicted that proteins will undergo structural changes during these finely regulated processes. However, changes in structural proteome in macrophages during the inflammatory response remain poorly characterized. In the present study, we applied limited proteolysis coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) to identify proteome-wide structural changes in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated macrophages. We identified 386 structure-specific proteolytic fingerprints from 230 proteins. Using the Gene Ontology (GO) biological process enrichment, we discovered that proteins with altered structures were enriched into protein folding-related terms, in which HSP60 was ranked as the most changed protein. We verified the structural changes in HSP60 by using cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) and native CETSA. Our results showed that the thermal stability of HSP60 was enhanced in activated macrophages and formed an HSP10-less complex. In conclusion, we demonstrate that in situ structural systems biology is an effective method to characterize proteomic structural changes and reveal that the structures of chaperone proteins vary significantly during macrophage activation.

### Keywords
Structural proteomics; raw264.7; lps; lip-ms; hsp60

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.100084
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Wenhao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.100084


