### Accession
PXD039430

### Title
An isobaric labeling approach to enhance detection and quan-tification of tissue-derived plasma proteins as potential early disease biomarkers

### Description
Accurate detection and quantification of low abundance proteins by standard mass spectrometry approaches remains challenging. In addition, it is difficult to link low abundance plasma proteins back to their specific tissues or organs of origin with confidence. To address these challenges, we developed a mass spectrometry approach based on the use of tandem mass tags (TMT) and a tis-sue reference sample.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue aliquots were isolated under a sterile laminar flow hood using sterile scal-pels and tweezers. Aliquots of approximately 2 mg were collected on a frozen aluminum plate in dry ice and transferred to bead tube with 500 uL Tris HCl on ice for homogeniza-tion. Homogenization was completed by bead beating in a frozen metal tube holder for 30 seconds at 2000 rpm. 10 uL of plasma was used with the Thermo Scientific High-Select Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion kit for removal of the 14 highly abundant proteins.  Both plasma and homogenized tissues were precipitated using acetone. For unlabeled proteomics (label-free proteomics, LFQ), 100 ug of the resulting tissue proteins were dis-solved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and followed by three major steps: 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for reduction, 375 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for acet-ylation, and 2.5 ug trypsin for overnight digestion. The digested samples were further fractionated using the Thermo pH fractionation kit (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation).  For TMT proteomics, 100 ug of total precipitated proteins from kidney cortex, me-dulla, and plasma in 100 mM TEAB were processed using 200mM TCEP, 375 mM IAA, and 2.5 ug trypsin digestion. Cortex, medulla, and plasma digests were labeled with the designated TMT10plex channel (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, 3 x 0.8mg, 90111) reagents (see Supplementary Table S1 for specific information) and combined ac-cording to ratios of kidney to plasma protein concentrations outlined in Table 1. For ex-ample, a ratio of 5:1 (kidney tissue to plasma) contains 50 ug peptides from each tissue sample to 10 ug peptides from each plasma sample. A blank TMT channel was placed following the kidney tissue prior to the channels containing plasma to limit interference of reporter ion intensities abundant proteins from the kidney samples. Multiplexed sam-ples were processed further using Thermo pH fractionation kit (Pierce High pH Re-versed-Phase Peptide Fractionation, PI84868).

### Data Protocol
All data acquisition was done using Thermo Scientific Xcalibur software and data analy-sis was completed in MaxQuant against P. anubis proteome database (P. Anubis Uniprot Reference Proteome ID UP000028761) using the default parameters for TMT or LFQ analysis. MaxQuant output files (proteingroups) were manually curated, and contami-nant matches or protein identifications with no measured reporter ion intensities across all samples were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic analysis of plasma holds great promise to advance precision medicine and identify biomarkers of disease. However, it is likely that many potential biomarkers circulating in plasma originate from other tissues and are only present in low abundances in the plasma. Accurate detection and quantification of low abundance proteins by standard mass spectrometry approaches remain challenging. In addition, it is difficult to link low abundance plasma proteins back to their specific tissues or organs of origin with confidence. To address these challenges, we developed a mass spectrometry approach based on the use of tandem mass tags (TMT) and a tissue reference sample. By applying this approach to nonhuman primate plasma samples, we were able to identify and quantify 820 proteins by using a kidney tissue homogenate as reference. On average, 643 &#xb1; 16 proteins were identified per plasma sample. About 58% of proteins identified in replicate experiments were identified both times. A ratio of 50 &#x3bc;g kidney protein to 10 &#x3bc;g plasma protein, and the use of the TMT label with the highest molecular weight (131) for the kidney reference yielded the largest number of proteins in the analysis, and identified low abundance proteins in plasma that are prominently found in the kidney. Overall, this methodology promises efficient quantification of plasma proteins potentially released from specific tissues, thereby increasing the number of putative disease biomarkers for future study.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-msms, Tmt, Kidney

### Affiliations
Wake Forest School of Medicine 
Wake Forest School of Medicine

### Submitter
Sumaiya  Nazli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Olivier
Wake Forest School of Medicine


