### Accession
PXD042178

### Title
Structural and mechanistic insights into the CAND1-mediated SCF substrate receptor exchange

### Description
Modular SCF (SKP1-CUL1-Fbox) ubiquitin E3 ligases orchestrate multiple cellular pathways in eukaryotes. Their variable SKP1-Fbox substrate receptor (SR) modules enable regulated substrate recruitment and subsequent proteasomal degradation. CAND proteins are essential for the efficient and timely exchange of SRs. To gain structural understanding of the underlying molecular mechanism, we reconstituted a CAND1-driven exchange reaction of substrate-bound SCF alongside its co-E3 ligase DCNL1 and visualised it by cryo-EM. We describe high-resolution structural intermediates including a ternary CAND1-SCF complex, as well as conformational and compositional intermediates representing SR- or CAND1-dissociation. We describe in molecular detail how CAND1-induced conformational changes in CUL1/RBX1 provide an optimised DCNL1 binding site and reveal an unexpected dual role for DCNL1 in CAND1-SCF dynamics. Moreover, a partially dissociated CAND1-SCF conformation accommodates cullin neddylation, leading to CAND1 displacement. Our structural findings, together with functional biochemical assays help formulate a detailed model for CAND-SCF regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Individual proteins/complexes (10 µM) were incubated with 40 µL of D2O buffer on ice for 2 seconds and at room temperature for 3, 30 and 300 seconds in triplicate. The labelling reaction was quenched by adding chilled 2.4% v/v formic acid in 2M guanidinium hydrochloride and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80 °C prior to analysis.  The quenched protein samples were rapidly thawed and subjected to proteolytic cleavage by pepsin followed by reversed-phase HPLC separation. Briefly, the protein was passed through an Enzymate BEH immobilized pepsin column, 2.1 x 30 mm, 5 µm (Waters, UK) at 200 µL/min for 2 min and the peptic peptides trapped and desalted on a 2.1 x 5 mm C18 trap column (Acquity BEH C18 Van-guard pre-column, 1.7 µm, Waters, UK). Trapped peptides were subsequently eluted over 11 minutes using a 5-43% gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v formic acid at 40 µL/min. Peptides were separated on a reverse phase column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column 1.7 µm, 100 mm x 1 mm (Waters, UK). Peptides were detected on a SELECT SERIES Cyclic IMS (cIMS) mass spectrometer (Waters, UK) acquiring over a m/z of 300 to 2000, with the standard electrospray ionization (ESI) source and lock mass calibration using [Glu1]-fibrino peptide B (50 fmol/µL). The Cyclic IMS was operated in positive ion mode at a source temperature of 80 °C with a spray voltage of 3.0 kV. The TWIMS (travelling wave ion mobility spectrometry) wave height was set at 22 V with a velocity of 375 m/s. The helium cell and IMS separation gas flow rates were 150 and 45 mL/min, respectively, giving rise to a cIMS cell pressure of 1.7 mbar. Spectra were collected after one pass in the cIMS region, corresponding to 47 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed by MSe using an identical gradient of increasing acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v formic acid over 12 minutes. The resulting MSe data were analysed using Protein Lynx Global Server (3.0.3) software (Waters, UK) with an MS tolerance of 5 ppm. Mass analysis of the peptide centroids was performed using DynamX (3.0) software (Waters, UK). Only peptides with a score >6.4 were considered. The first round of analysis and identification was performed automatically by the DynamX software; however, all peptides (deuterated and non-deuterated) were manually verified at every time point for the correct charge state, presence of overlapping peptides, and correct retention time. Deuterium incorporation was not corrected for back-exchange and represents relative, rather than absolute changes in deuterium levels. Changes in H/D amide exchange in any peptide may be due to a single amide or a number of amides within that peptide. All time points in this study were prepared at the same time and individual time points were acquired on the mass spectrometer on the same day.

### Publication Abstract
Modular SCF (SKP1-CUL1-Fbox) ubiquitin E3 ligases orchestrate multiple cellular pathways in eukaryotes. Their variable SKP1-Fbox substrate receptor (SR) modules enable regulated substrate recruitment and subsequent proteasomal degradation. CAND proteins are essential for the efficient and timely exchange of SRs. To gain structural understanding of the underlying molecular mechanism, we reconstituted a human CAND1-driven exchange reaction of substrate-bound SCF alongside its co-E3 ligase DCNL1 and visualized it by cryo-EM. We describe high-resolution structural intermediates, including a ternary CAND1-SCF complex, as well as conformational and compositional intermediates representing SR- or CAND1-dissociation. We describe in molecular detail how CAND1-induced conformational changes in CUL1/RBX1 provide an optimized DCNL1-binding site and reveal an unexpected dual role for DCNL1 in CAND1-SCF dynamics. Moreover, a partially dissociated CAND1-SCF conformation accommodates cullin neddylation, leading to CAND1 displacement. Our structural findings, together with functional biochemical assays, help formulate a detailed model for CAND-SCF regulation.

### Keywords
Human, Cand1, Hdx-ms, Cryo-em

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
The Visual Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, NW1 1AT London, UK.

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Radoslav I. Enchev
The Visual Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, NW1 1AT London, UK.


