### Accession
PXD001593

### Title
Age-related cleavages of crystallins in human lens cortical fibre cells generate a plethora of low molecular weight peptides and cross-linked crystallin complexes

### Description
A large variety of low molecular weight (LMW) peptides, derived from the breakdown of crystallins, have been reported in middle to old age human lenses. The proliferation of these LMW peptides coincides with the earliest stages of cataract formation, suggesting that the protein cleavages involved may contribute to the aggregation and insolubilisation of crystallins – these being hall marks of cataractogenesis. This study reports the identification of 238 endogenous LMW crystallin peptides from the cortical extracts of human lenses aged 16, 44, 75 and 83 years. Analysis of the peptide terminal amino acids showed that Lys and Arg were situated at the C-terminus with significantly higher frequency compared to other residues, suggesting that trypsin-like proteolysis may be active in the lens cortical fibre cells. Selected reaction monitoring (SRM) analysis of a prominent αA-crystallin peptide (αA57-65) showed that the concentration of this peptide in the human lens increased gradually to middle age, after which the rate of αA57-65 formation escalated significantly. Using 2-D gel electrophoresis and nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS, 13 protein complexes of 40-150 kDa consisting of multiple crystallin components were characterised from the water soluble cortical extracts of an adult human lens. The detection of these protein complexes suggested the possibility of crystallin cross-linking, with these complexes potentially acting to stabilise degraded crystallins by sequestration into water soluble complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction and isolation of the endogenous LMW peptides in human lenses Human lenses were obtained from donors aged 16, 44, 75 and 83 years at the Lions New South Wales Eye Bank (Sydney, Australia) and stored at -80 °C within 30 min following surgical excision. Lenses obtained from the 75 and 83 year old patients showed signs of moderate nuclear cataract according to Pirie’s classification [19]. Lenses were dissected into cortical and nuclear regions using a 4.5 mm trephine. Cortical tissues were separately homogenised in buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) with a hand-held tissue homogeniser, using roughly 1 mL of buffer per 100 mg tissue (wet weight), and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. The homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were re-homogenised with buffer A and centrifuged at 10,000 × g. The supernatants from both extraction steps were pooled together as cortical water soluble (CWS) protein extracts. Remaining pellets were re-homogenised in buffer B (8 M urea in buffer A), incubated at room temperature for 15 min, then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected to give the cortical urea-soluble (CUS) protein extracts. The urea concentration in all samples was adjusted to 4 M using buffer B for WS extracts and buffer A for US extracts. β-Mercaptoethanol (0.5% v/v final concentration) was added and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min, before being filtered through a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off YM-10 Microcon centrifugal filter unit (Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) by centrifugation at 8000 × g, 4 °C, to yield the LMW lens extracts. Protease inhibitor cocktail (P2714, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) was prepared as per the manufacturers specifications and used in all buffers.

### Data Protocol
Endogenous peptides present in the LMW lens extracts were identified using nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis at the Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia). Urea was removed from the extracts using C4 ZipTips (Omix, Redwood City, California, USA) prior to freeze-drying and loading onto an Agilent 1100 nanoLC system (Agilent Technologies, Forest Hill, Australia) fitted with a peptide Captrap (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, California, USA) and a 150 μm × 100 mm, 300 Å C18 Protecol column (SGE Analytical Science, Ringwood, Australia), coupled to a Qstar XL ESI mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Mt Waverly, Australia). Peptides were separated using gradient elution from 5% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% solvent B in 40 min, at a flow-rate of 500 nL/min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid). Peptides eluting from the column were analysed directly in nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS information dependent acquisition (IDA) scan mode. MS/MS spectra were searched against Homo sapiens protein sequence database (20,352 entries) published on Swissprot (2010) through Mascot (version 2.2) with peptide mass tolerance ±300ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da and enzyme ‘None’. In the first search, only methionine oxidation was specified as variable modification. After the first search, posttranslational modifications including acetylation at the N-terminus and Lys residues; deamidation at Asp and Gln residues; methylation at His, Lys and Cys residues; phosphorylation at Ser and Thr residues; and oxidation at Met, Trp and Tyr residues, were added into variable modification list to identify possible modifications of the peptides in the human lens samples. Database search results from the 2 searches were combined to generate the peptide list for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Low molecular weight peptides derived from the breakdown of crystallins have been reported in adult human lenses. The proliferation of these LMW peptides coincides with the earliest stages of cataract formation, suggesting that the protein cleavages involved may contribute to the aggregation and insolubilization of crystallins. This study reports the identification of 238 endogenous LMW crystallin peptides from the cortical extracts of four human lenses representing young, middle and old-age human lenses. Analysis of the peptide terminal amino acids showed that Lys and Arg were situated at the C-terminus with significantly higher frequency compared to other residues, suggesting that trypsin-like proteolysis may be active in the lens cortical fiber cells. Selected reaction monitoring analysis of an endogenous &#x3b1;A-crystallin peptide (&#x3b1;A(57-65)) showed that the concentration of this peptide in the human lens increased gradually to middle age, after which the rate of &#x3b1;A(57-65) formation escalated significantly. Using 2D gel electrophoresis/nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS, 12 protein complexes of 40-150 kDa consisting of multiple crystallin components were characterized from the water soluble cortical extracts of an adult human lens. The detection of these protein complexes suggested the possibility of crystallin cross-linking, with these complexes potentially acting to stabilize degraded crystallins by sequestration into water soluble complexes.

### Keywords
Crystallin, Human lens, Endogeneuous peptideslens aging; crystallin; cataract; mass spectrometry; endogenous peptides; 2-d gel electrophoresis; nanolc-esi-ms/ms; trypsin-like cleavage

### Affiliations
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility
APAF

### Submitter
Xiaomin Song

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaomin Song
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility


