### Accession
PXD031065

### Title
Uptake mechanisms and regulatory responses to MECAM- and DOTAM-based artificial siderophores and their antibiotic conjugates in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
The development of new antibiotics against Gram-negative bacteria has to deal with the low permeability of the outer membrane. This obstacle can be overcome by utilizing siderophore-dependent iron uptake pathways as gates for antibiotic uptake. Iron-chelating siderophores are actively imported by bacteria, and their conjugation to antibiotics allows smuggling the latter into bacterial cells. Synthetic siderophore mimetics based on MECAM and DOTAM cores, both chelating iron via catechol groups, have been recently applied as versatile carriers of functional cargo. In the present study, we show that MECAM and the MECAM-ampicillin conjugate 3 transport iron into Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells via the catechol-type outer membrane transporters PfeA and PirA, and DOTAM solely via PirA. Differential proteomics and RTqPCR showed that MECAM import induced the expression of pfeA, whereas 3 led to an increase in the expression of pfeA and ampc, a gene conferring ampicillin resistance. The presence of DOTAM did not induce the expression of pirA, but upregulated the expression two zinc transporters (cntO and PA0781), pointing out that bacteria become zinc starved in the presence of this compound. Kinetic experiments with radioactive 55Fe demonstrated that iron uptake was as efficient as with the natural prototype siderophore enterobactin. The study provides a mechanistic and functional validation for DOTAM- and MECAM-based artificial siderophore mimetics as vehicles for the delivery of cargo into Gram-negative bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were determined by a Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as standard. Proteins were further precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100 % methanol (5 volumes, -20°C). After centrifugation at 12.000 g and 4°C during 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and submitted to reduction (5 mM dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10 min) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20 min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 150 ng of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The proteomic datasets were obtained by the injection of 5000 ng of each peptidic mixture on an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data was converted to .mgf files with the Proteome Discoverer Daemon software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, script “Export-to-mgf”, version 2.2). For differential proteomic analyses, data was searched against the P. aeruginosa UniprotKB sub-database with a decoy strategy (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, P. aeruginosa strain PAO1, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used: (i) Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme, (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed, (iii) methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 10 ppm, and at 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Mascot data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) (Bouyssié et al., 2020). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates: This “BasicSC” value calculated by Proline includes all PSMs of all peptides, including the modified peptides (three fixed and variable modifications) and the peptides shared by different protein sets. After a normalization of the data matrix with the total number of spectra in one sample, the “BasicSC” spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). The statistical test was based on the published msmsTests R package available in Bioconductor to process label-free LC-MS/MS data by spectral counts (Gregori et al., 2019). For each identified protein, an adjusted p-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
The development of new antibiotics against Gram-negative bacteria has to deal with the low permeability of the outer membrane. This obstacle can be overcome by utilizing siderophore-dependent iron uptake pathways as entrance routes for antibiotic uptake. Iron-chelating siderophores are actively imported by bacteria, and their conjugation to antibiotics allows smuggling the latter into bacterial cells. Synthetic siderophore mimetics based on MECAM (1,3,5-<i>N</i>,<i>N</i>',<i>N</i>&#x2033;-tris-(2,3-dihydroxybenzoyl)-triaminomethylbenzene) and DOTAM (1,4,7,10-tetrakis(carbamoylmethyl)-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane) cores, both chelating iron via catechol groups, have been recently applied as versatile carriers of functional cargo. In the present study, we show that MECAM and the MECAM-ampicillin conjugate <b>3</b> transport iron into <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> cells via the catechol-type outer membrane transporters PfeA and PirA and DOTAM solely via PirA. Differential proteomics and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) showed that MECAM import induced the expression of <i>pfeA</i>, whereas <b>3</b> led to an increase in the expression of <i>pfeA</i> and <i>ampc</i>, a gene conferring ampicillin resistance. The presence of DOTAM did not induce the expression of <i>pirA</i> but upregulated the expression of two zinc transporters (<i>cntO</i> and <i>PA0781</i>), pointing out that bacteria become zinc starved in the presence of this compound. Iron uptake experiments with radioactive <sup>55</sup>Fe demonstrated that import of this nutrient by MECAM and DOTAM was as efficient as with the natural siderophore enterobactin. The study provides a functional validation for DOTAM- and MECAM-based artificial siderophore mimetics as vehicles for the delivery of cargo into Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
Pseudomnas, Siderophore, Dotam, Antibiotic conjugate, Mecam

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
CNRS, University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France. University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.


