### Accession
PXD023204

### Title
Zinc-associated proteome of Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Fungal diseases are critical burdens on the global healthcare system, infecting over 25% of the world’s population. For the opportunistic fungal pathogen, Cryptococcus neoformans, infection leads to cryptococcosis; a disease enabled by elaboration of sophisticated virulence factors, including polysaccharide capsule, melanin, thermotolerance, and extracellular enzymes in the presence of the host. Conversely, the host protects itself from fungal invasion by regulating and sequestering transition metals (e.g., iron, zinc, copper) important for microbial growth and survival. Building upon knowledge of zinc transport regulation at the transcriptional level, here, we explore the intricate relationship between zinc availability and fungal virulence via mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. We observe distinct protein-level responses to zinc-limited and -excess conditions through a shift of the proteome profile towards stress response and metal acquisition, including the upregulation of the zinc transporter, ZIP1. In addition, we reveal a novel connection among zinc availability, protein folding, capsule production, and virulence through the detection of a Wos2-like ortholog in the secretome under replete conditions. Overall, we provide new biological insight into cellular remodeling at the protein level of C. neoformans under regulated zinc conditions and uncover a novel connection between zinc availability and fungal virulence. These findings support the development of new antifungal strategies focused on the enhancement of nutritional immunity within the host.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed as previously described. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and lysed using a probe sonicator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to final concentrations of 2% and 10 mM, respectively, followed by incubation at 95˚C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm, and incubation with of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min in the dark. Next, 100% ice cold acetone was then added to the samples to a final concentration of 80% and incubated overnight at -20˚C. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm, 4˚C, for 10 min, washed with 80% acetone twice, air dried, and resuspended in 8 M urea/40 mM HEPES. Protein concentrations were determined using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and normalized to 100 µg of protein prior to overnight digestion with a mixture LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). To stop the digestion, 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, and 50 µg of acidified peptides were desalted and purified using C18 (three layers) Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips.  Secretome samples were processed according to an in-solution digestion as previously described. Cellular debris was filtered from the culture supernatant by 0.22 µm syringe filters, then one-third volume of 8M urea/40 mM HEPES was added to filtered supernatant followed by ultrasonication in ice bath for 15 cycles (30s on/30 s off). Samples were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA, respectively, followed by enzymatic digestion and STAGE-tip purification.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry raw data files were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26). The search was completed using the incorporated Andromeda search engine against the reference C. neoformans var. grubii serotype A (strain H99/ATCC 208821) proteome (Aug. 2018; 7,430 sequences) from Uniprot. The parameters established include: trypsin enzyme specificity with 2 max missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; fixed modifications – carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications – methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min, in which LFQ used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Cryptococcus neoformans, Virulence, Polysaccharide capsule, Zinc limitation, Fungal pathogenesis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1, 519-824-4120 ext. 52129
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1, 519-824-4120 ext. 52129


