### Accession
PXD017290

### Title
Comprehensive identification of full-length mRNA isoforms reveals massive diversity of neural cell-surface molecules and illuminates their function in development and disease

### Description
Genes encoding cell-surface proteins are crucial for nervous system development and are implicated in neurological disorders. These genes produce alternative mRNA isoforms which remain poorly characterized, impeding our understanding of how disease-associated mutations cause pathology. Here we introduce a new strategy to reveal complete full-length isoform portfolios encoded by individual genes. Using our strategy to catalog diversity of neural cell surface molecules, we identified thousands of unannotated isoforms expressed in retina and brain. Mass spectrometry revealed that many newly-discovered proteins are expressed on the cell surface in vivo. Remarkably, we discover that the major isoform of the retinal degeneration gene CRB1 was previously overlooked. This isoform is the only one expressed by photoreceptors, the affected cells in CRB1 disease. By generating mouse mutants, we reveal a function for this isoform at the cell-cell junctions of the retinal outer limiting membrane, and we provide a causal link between loss of this Crb1 isoform and photoreceptor death. Therefore, our isoform identification strategy accelerates discovery of new gene functions relevant to disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing protocol  Retina trypsin ectodomain extraction Juvenile P14 Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane followed by decapitation. Eyes were enucleated and dissected out of the eyecup in Ringers solution (154 mM NaCl, 5.6mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2.2 mM CaCl2, 10 mM glucose, 20 mM HEPES). Retinas were placed in100 ul Ringers solution containing 5 g trypsin/lys-c. Solution with retina was incubated at RT for 10 minutes with periodic gentle mixing. Contents were then centrifuged at 300×G for 1.5minutes and the supernatant was transferred to new tube. Urea was added to protein mixture to 8M then incubated at 50OC. After 1 hr incubation, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10mM and incubated for 15 min at 50°C. Peptides were alkylated by adding 3.25 ul of 20 mMIodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Reaction was quenched by adding DTT to 50 mM final concentration. Mixture was diluted 1:3 with ~270 ul of ammonium bicarbonate. Mixture was further digested overnight by adding 1 ug of trypsin/lys-c at 37°C. Cell surface protein labeling and pulldown Cell surface labeling of membrane proteins was performed based on a described protocol (Smolders et al., 2015). Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane followed by decapitation. Eyes were enucleated and retinas were dissected out of the eyecup into ice cold HBSS. Retinas were washed with HBSS followed by incubation in HBSS supplemented with EZ-Link Sulfo_NHS-SS-Biotin (0.5 mg/ml in HBSS) for 45 min on ice. Retinas were then washed 3X with HBSS + 100M lysine to quench remaining reactive esters. Retinas were then collected in 400 l (200 l/retina) lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA). Retinas were homogenized using short pulses on a sonicator. The lysate centrifuged at 21,000 × G for 20 min at 4°C and the soluble fraction was collected. For immunoprecipitation, 75 g of protein lysate was mixed with 100 l of Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Pierce™) and incubated at room temperature while rotating. Streptavidin/biotin complex was sequestered using a magnet and washed with lysis buffer. Proteins were eluted from the beads by incubation with elution buffer (PBS with 0.1% SDS 100 mM DTT) at 50°C for 30 min. Experimental samples (input, biotin enriched, and non-biotin labeled negative control) were mixed with 4× SDS-PAGE sample buffer and incubated on a heat block at 90°C for 10 min. Samples were then loaded on a 4-15% mini PROTEAN TGX Stain-Free protein gel.Electrophoresis was carried out at 65 V through the stacking gel then adjusted to 100 V until the dye front reached the end of the gel.   In-Gel Tryptic Digestion After electrophoresis, the gel was washed twice with H2O, fixed with 50% methanol, 7% acetic acid for 20 min and stained with colloidal Coomassie based GelCode Blue Stain reagent (Thermo Fischer Scientific, cat # 24590) for 30 min. The gel was destained with distilled water at 4°C for 2 h while rocking. Protein bands were imaged on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc Touch imager. Using a clean razor blade, bands between 75-250 kDa were excised, cut into ~1×1 mm pieces and collected in 0.5 ml siliconized (low retention) centrifuge tube. Gel pieces were destained with 200 µl of Destaining Solution (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, NH4HCO3 in 50:50 acetonitrile:water) at 37°C for 30 min with shaking. Solution was removed and replaced with 200 µl of Destaining Solution and incubated again at 37°C for 30 min with shaking. Solution was removed from the gel pieces and peptides were reduced with 20 µl of 20 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.8 )at 60°C for 15 min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding 50 µl of the alkylation buffer (ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 50 mM Iodoacetamide) and incubated in the dark at room temparature for 1 h. Alkylation buffer was removed from tubes and replaced with 200 µl destaining buffer. Samples were incubated for 30 min at 37°C with shaking, buffer removed, and washed again with destaining buffer. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 75 µl of acetonitrile and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Acetonitrile was removed from tubes and shrunken gel pieces were left to dry for 15 min. Trypsin/lys-c (5 ng/l in 25µl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer) was added to gel pieces and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. An additional 25 µl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to the tubes and incubated overnight at 37°C. Sample volume was brought to 125 µl with distilled water, and liquid containing trypsinized peptides was placed in a clean siliconized 0.5 ml tube.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis of retinal samples 2 µl aliquots of tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters Corp, Milford, MA). Peptides were initially trapped on a 180 µm × 20 mm Symmetry C18 column (at the 5 µl/min flow rate for 3 min in 99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid). Peptide separation was then performed on a 75 µm × 150 mm column filled with the 1.7 µm C18 BEH resin (Waters) using the 6 to 30% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid for 90 min at the flow rate of 0.3 µl/min at 35°C. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the ion source of Synapt G2 using the 10 µm PicoTip emitter (Waters) at the voltage of 3.0 kV. Each sample was subjected to a data-independent analysis (HDMSE) using ion mobility workflow for simultaneous peptide quantitation and identification. For robust peak detection and alignment of individual peptides across all HDMSE runs we performed automatic alignment of ion chromatography peaks representing the same mass/retention time features using Progenesis QI software. To perform peptide assignment to the ion features, PLGS 2.5.1 (Waters) was used to generate searchable files that were submitted to the IdentityE search engine incorporated into Progenesis QI for Proteomics. For peptide identification we searched against the IsoSeq custom database described above. To identify novel peptides, all peptides identified were cross referenced with UniProtKb mouse database.

### Publication Abstract
Genes encoding cell-surface proteins control nervous system development and are implicated in neurological disorders. These genes produce alternative mRNA isoforms which remain poorly characterized, impeding understanding of how disease-associated mutations cause pathology. Here we introduce a strategy to define complete portfolios of full-length isoforms encoded by individual genes. Applying this approach to neural cell-surface molecules, we identify thousands of unannotated isoforms expressed in retina and brain. By mass spectrometry we confirm expression of newly-discovered proteins on the cell surface in vivo. Remarkably, we discover that the major isoform of a retinal degeneration gene, CRB1, was previously overlooked. This CRB1 isoform is the only one expressed by photoreceptors, the affected cells in CRB1 disease. Using mouse mutants, we identify a function for this isoform at photoreceptor-glial junctions and demonstrate that loss of this isoform accelerates photoreceptor death. Therefore, our isoform identification strategy enables discovery of new gene functions relevant to disease.

### Keywords
Pacbio sequencing, Cell-surface molecules, Isoforms, Neural development

### Affiliations
Duke University
Departments of 1Neurobiology and 2Ophthalmology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA

### Submitter
Christopher Kozlowski

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy N. Kay
Departments of 1Neurobiology and 2Ophthalmology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA


