### Accession
PXD037569

### Title
Spatially resolved mapping of proteome turnover dynamics with subcellular precision

### Description
We report the development of prox-SILAC method that combines proximity-dependent protein labeling (APEX/HRP) with metabolic incorporation of stable isotopes (pulse-SILAC) to map newly synthesized proteins with subcellular spatial resolution. We apply prox-SILAC to investigate proteome dynamics in the mitochondrial matrix and the ER lumen. Our analysis reveals a highly heterogeneous distribution in protein turnover dynamics within macromolecular machineries such as the mitochondrial ribosome and respiratory complexes I-V, thus shedding light on their mechanism of hierarchical assembly. Furthermore, we investigate the dynamic changes of ER proteome when cells are challenged with stress or when cells are undergoing stimulated differentiation, identifying subsets of proteins with unique patterns of turnover dynamics, which may play key regulatory roles in alleviating stress or promoting differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated using a loading column (100 µm × 2 cm) and a C18 separating capillary column (75 µm × 15 cm) packed in-house with Luna 3 μm C18(2) bulk packing material (Phenomenex, USA). The mobile phases (A: water with 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC gradient was held at 2% for the first 8 min of the analysis, followed by an increase from 2% to 10% B from 8 to 9 min, an increase from 10% to 44% B from 9 to 123 min, and an increase from 44% to 99% B from 123 to 128 min. For the samples analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, the precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) source held at +2.0 kV compared to ground, and the inlet capillary temperature was held at 320 °C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 350-1600 Th with an AGC target of 400,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, RF lens at 30%, and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-7 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor monoisotope.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against Homo sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded on Nov 19th, 2020). Database search were performed with MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.2.3). The digestion mode was set to trypsin. The maximum number of modification allowed per peptide was set to five. The maximum number of missed cleavages allowed per peptide was two. Mass shifts of +57.0214 Da (carbamidomethylation, C) was searched as fixed modifications; +15.9949 Da (oxidation, M), +42.0105 Da (acetyl N-terminal) were searched as variable modifications. Mass shifts of +8.0142 Da (Lys8, K) and +10.0083 Da (Arg10, R) were set as heavy label. The FDR were set to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular activities are commonly associated with dynamic proteomic changes at the subcellular level. Although several techniques are available to quantify whole-cell protein turnover dynamics, such measurements often lack sufficient spatial resolution at the subcellular level. Herein, we report the development of prox-SILAC method that combines proximity-dependent protein labeling (APEX2/HRP) with metabolic incorporation of stable isotopes (pulse-SILAC) to map newly synthesized proteins with subcellular spatial resolution. We apply prox-SILAC to investigate proteome dynamics in the mitochondrial matrix and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen. Our analysis reveals a highly heterogeneous distribution in protein turnover dynamics within macromolecular machineries such as the mitochondrial ribosome and respiratory complexes I-V, thus shedding light on their mechanism of hierarchical assembly. Furthermore, we investigate the dynamic changes of ER proteome when cells are challenged with stress or undergoing stimulated differentiation, identifying subsets of proteins with unique patterns of turnover dynamics, which may play key regulatory roles in alleviating stress or promoting differentiation. We envision that prox-SILAC could be broadly applied to profile protein turnover at various subcellular compartments, under both physiological and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Proximity-dependent labeling, Pusle-silac, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Biology
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering
Peking University 
Department of Chemical Biology College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering Peking University

### Submitter
Yi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Zou
Department of Chemical Biology College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering Peking University


