### Accession
PXD011668

### Title
Proteomic analysis of coral symbionts exposed to thermal stress: Acropora millipora and Symbiodinium adriaticum

### Description
A thermal stress experiment on Heron Island (Great Barrier Reef) which involved a slow ramp in temperature over one week and then sampling after 4 days at 32 degrees was completed. Control samples were maintained at 27C. The idea of the experiment was to study bleaching from a single cell perspective and thus look at cell condition (both animal and host) in symbio (inside the host tissue) and compare it with the physiological/macromolecular composition of the expelled symbionts (dinoflagellates). Are the cells expelled from the coral host during thermal stress are a result of host stress or algae stress. We took samples for proteomics from the extracted endoderm cells (in symbio) and also of expelled cells.  Samples were collected as the symbio left the host.  These were flash frozen.  Are the symbiont cells expelled from the coral host during thermal stress are a result of host stress or algae stress?

### Sample Protocol
Four individual colonies of Acropora millipora were collected on the reef flat of Heron Island (TMT1, 2, 3, 4), Great Barrier Reef, Australia in February 2015. Corals were kept in flow through tanks for 5 days before experimental treatment. One set of coral colonies were maintained in control conditions at 27˚C (ambient summer water temperature), while replicate colonies assigned for bleaching stress were exposed to slow temperature increases of 1˚C per day until reaching 30˚C and then by 0.5 ˚C per day until reaching 32˚C where they were maintained for up to 1 week. Corals were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen after 4 days at 32 ˚C, during the onset of bleaching, but before any tissue loss or death had started.  Frozen nubbins were air picked in filtered seawater, homogenised and then centrifuged at 4˚C to separate the animal tissue from the algae cells. The animal tissue (supernatant) was immediately snap-frozen in liquid N2 and kept at -80 ˚C for transport. The algal pellet was re-suspended in filtered seawater and re-centrifuged x2 to wash any remnant animal tissue before being snap frozen and stored at -80 ˚C for transport.  Aside from some physiological measurements (cell density, chlorophyll a, photobiology), samples were taken for infra-red spectroscopy, which will be done on a Synchrotron next week in Melbourne. This will allow us to measure the macromolecular composition in the in symbio dinoflagellates and host cells versus the expelled dinoflagellates. Samples were also taken for TEM.  The cellular contents of the corals were blown out of the skeleton using air  into a tube for protoemics.  Symbiont cells were collected in tubes and frozen separately.  All frozen coral fragments were pulverized using a chilled mortar and a pestle with liquid nitrogen, and coral proteins were extracted and quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay as described in with modifications. Briefly, proteins were homogenized in 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in a microtube using a sonicating probe on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for > 20 minutes at 4℃ to eliminate the zooxanthellae, and the collected supernatant was quantified by the BCA assay, and stored at -80 ℃. An equal quantity (80 µg) of protein was placed in an Eppendorf® LoBind microcentrifuge tube with a total of 100 µl of 6M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein samples were alkylated and digested with trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease MS-Grade) with 1:20 (w/w) enzyme to protein ratio for overnight at room temperature, following the protocol of (Nunn et al., 2015) with modification.  Peptide samples were analyzed in triplicate on the Thermo Scientific Q- Exactive tandem mass spectrometer using data dependent analysis with the top 20 ions selected for MS2 analysis. Peptides entering the mass spectrometer were separated using liquid chromatography (5-35% acetonitrile over 90 minutes) on a 3 cm pre-column and 30 cm analytical column, both packed with 3 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch)..   5_35%B_90min_30cmDrM_10sDynExc_top20_CE25_400_1400

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed using Comet (Eng et al., 2012) version 2015.01 rev. 2, using a draft FASTA proteome for Acropora millipora (attached) and a concatenated decoy database in which peptide sequences were reversed but C-terminal amino acids were left in place. Search parameters included a static modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021464) and a variable modification for methionine oxidation (15.9949). Enzyme specificity was trypsin, with three missed cleavages allowed. Parent ion mass tolerance was set to 10ppm around five isotopic peaks, and fragment ion binning was 0.02, with offset 0.0. Comet results for technical replicates were combined prior to further analysis. To determine the full set of peptides for comparison, as described previously (Granholm et al., 2013), after each unique peptide was associated with its top-scoring spectrum irrespective of charge state, we used the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007; Granholm et al., 2013) to apply the widely-accepted target-decoy search strategy to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) associated with a given set of accepted peptide sequences. In this context, the FDR is defined as the proportion of the accepted peptide spectral matches (PSMs) that are not responsible for generating observed spectra. All peptides accepted at FDR 0.01 in at least one sample were used for comparison (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Peptide quantitation was performed using spectral counting. Percolator was used to determine the set of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) accepted at FDR 0.01 in each sample, and PSMs were summarized by peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbionts, Thermal stress, Phytoplankton climate change, Coral, Acropora millipora

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington Dept of Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Brook Nunn

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L Nunn
University of Washington Dept of Genome Sciences


