### Accession
PXD017788

### Title
Mouse BMDMs and Erythrophagocytosis LCMSMS

### Description
Reticuloendothelial macrophages engulf ~0.2 trillion senescent erythrocytes daily in a process called erythrophagocytosis (EP). This critical mechanism preserves systemic heme-iron homeostasis by regulating red blood cell (RBC) catabolism and iron recycling. Although extensive work has demonstrated the various effects on macrophage metabolic reprogramming by stimulation with proinflammatory cytokines, little is known about the impact of EP on the macrophage metabolome and proteome. Thus, we performed mass spectrometry-based metabolomics and proteomics analyses of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) before and after EP of IgG-coated RBCs. Further, metabolomics was performed on BMDMs incubated with free IgG to ensure that changes to macrophage metabolism were due to opsonized RBCs and not to free IgG binding. Uniformly labeled tracing experiments were conducted on BMDMs in the presence and absence of IgG-coated RBCs to assess the flux of glucose through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). In this study, we demonstrate that EP significantly alters amino acid and fatty acid metabolism, the Krebs cycle, OXPHOS, and arachidonate-linoleate metabolism. Increases in levels of amino acids, lipids and oxylipins, heme products, and RBC-derived proteins are noted in BMDMs following EP. Tracing experiments with U-13C6 glucose indicated a slower flux through glycolysis and enhanced PPP activation. Notably, we show that it is fueled by glucose derived from the macrophages themselves or from the extracellular media prior to EP, but not from opsonized RBCs. The PPP-derived NADPH can then fuel the oxidative burst, leading to the generation of reactive oxygen species necessary to promote digestion of phagocytosed RBC proteins via radical attack. Results were confirmed by redox proteomics experiments, demonstrating the oxidation of Cys152 and Cys94 of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and hemoglobin-β, respectively. Significant increases in early Krebs cycle and C5-branched dibasic acid metabolites (α-ketoglutarate and 2-hydroxyglutarate, respectively) indicate that EP promotes the dysregulation of mitochondrial metabolism. Lastly, EP stimulated aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthase and arginase activity as indicated by significant accumulations of ALA and ornithine after IgG-mediated RBC ingestion. Importantly, EP-mediated metabolic reprogramming of BMDMs does not occur following exposure to IgG alone. In conclusion, we show that EP reprograms macrophage metabolism and modifies macrophage polarization.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from BMDM cell pellets were separated by SDS-PAGE, and bands ranging from ~20-80 kDa were excised, reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested. Extracted peptides were analyzed by nanoLCMS-MS (Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 – Q Exactive HF; Thermo Fisher Scientific; San Jose, CA, USA and Bremen, Germany) and separated on a house-made 15 cm C18 analytical column (100 mm inner diameter) packed with Cortecs C18 resin (2.7 mm; Phenomenex; Torrance, CA, USA), using a 80 min linear gradient of 2- 32% ACN at 350 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by MSConvert version 3.0.18250-994311be0. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1). Mascot was set up to search the uniprot_sprot_201802 database (selected for Mus musculus, unknown version, 16965 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme non-specific. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 25 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Cys->Dha of cysteine, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of cysteine and methionine, dioxidation of cysteine, acetyl of the n-terminus and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 3 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Reticuloendothelial macrophages engulf &#x223c;0.2 trillion senescent erythrocytes daily in a process called erythrophagocytosis (EP). This critical mechanism preserves systemic heme-iron homeostasis by regulating red blood cell (RBC) catabolism and iron recycling. Although extensive work has demonstrated the various effects on macrophage metabolic reprogramming by stimulation with proinflammatory cytokines, little is known about the impact of EP on the macrophage metabolome and proteome. Thus, we performed mass spectrometry-based metabolomics and proteomics analyses of mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) before and after EP of IgG-coated RBCs. Further, metabolomics was performed on BMDMs incubated with free IgG to ensure that changes to macrophage metabolism were due to opsonized RBCs and not to free IgG binding. Uniformly labeled tracing experiments were conducted on BMDMs in the presence and absence of IgG-coated RBCs to assess the flux of glucose through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). In this study, we demonstrate that EP significantly alters amino acid and fatty acid metabolism, the Krebs cycle, OXPHOS, and arachidonate-linoleate metabolism. Increases in levels of amino acids, lipids and oxylipins, heme products, and RBC-derived proteins are noted in BMDMs following EP. Tracing experiments with U-<sup>13</sup>C<sub>6</sub> glucose indicated a slower flux through glycolysis and enhanced PPP activation. Notably, we show that it is fueled by glucose derived from the macrophages themselves or from the extracellular media prior to EP, but not from opsonized RBCs. The PPP-derived NADPH can then fuel the oxidative burst, leading to the generation of reactive oxygen species necessary to promote digestion of phagocytosed RBC proteins via radical attack. Results were confirmed by redox proteomics experiments, demonstrating the oxidation of Cys152 and Cys94 of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and hemoglobin-&#x3b2;, respectively. Significant increases in early Krebs cycle and C<sub>5</sub>-branched dibasic acid metabolites (&#x3b1;-ketoglutarate and 2-hydroxyglutarate, respectively) indicate that EP promotes the dysregulation of mitochondrial metabolism. Lastly, EP stimulated aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthase and arginase activity as indicated by significant accumulations of ALA and ornithine after IgG-mediated RBC ingestion. Importantly, EP-mediated metabolic reprogramming of BMDMs does not occur following exposure to IgG alone. In conclusion, we show that EP reprograms macrophage metabolism and modifies macrophage polarization.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lcmsms, Rbcs, Bmdms

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Denver-Anschutz Medical Campus
University of Colorado Denver – Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Aurora, CO, USA

### Submitter
Alexis Catala

### Lab Head
Dr Angelo D'Alessandro
University of Colorado Denver – Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Aurora, CO, USA


