### Accession
PXD021819

### Title
Discovery and pharmacological evaluation of STEAP4 as a novel target for HER2 overexpressing Breast cancer

### Description
The HER2 overexpressing and the Triple Negative Breast Cancer forms (TNBC) remain the most aggressive subtypes of BC with poor prognosis, frequent disease relapse and metastasis. In this study the aim was to identify key membrane-associated proteins which are overexpressed in these aggressive BC subtypes and can serve as potential biomarkers or drug targets. We leveraged on the development of a membrane enrichment protocol in combination with the global profiling GeLC-MS/MS technique, and compared the proteomic profiles of a HER2 overexpressing (HCC-1954) and a TNBC (MDA-MB-231) cell line with that of a benign control breast cell line (MCF-10A). An average of 2300 proteins were identified from each cell line, of which approximately 600 were membrane-associated proteins. Our global proteomic methodology in tandem with invigoration by Western blot and Immunofluorescence analysis, readily detected several previously-established BC receptors like HER2 and EPHA2, but importantly STEAP4 and CD97 emerged as novel potential candidate markers.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched membrane fractions from BC cell lines were prepared and separated from cytosolic fractions using a commercially available kit (Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit; cat. no. 89842, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 5 × 106 cells were harvested and the cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 min. Then the cell pellet was washed with 3 mL Cell Wash Solution, centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 min and the supernatant was discarded. The cells were resuspended in 1.5 mL Cell Wash Solution, transferred to small tube and centrifuged again at 300 × g for 5 min. The cell pellet was then mixed with 0.75 mL of Permeabilization Buffer, vortexed briefly to obtain a homogeneous cell suspension and incubated 10 min at 4 0C with constant mixing. The permeabilized cells were centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 × g and the supernatant containing the cytosolic proteins was carefully collected to a new tube and stored at -80 0C for future use. Subsequently, the protein pellet was resuspended in 0.5 mL of Solubilization Buffer, incubated at 4 0C for 30 min with constant mixing and centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4 0C. Finally, the supernatant containing solubilized membrane and membrane-associated proteins was transferred to a new tube and stored at -80 0C for further analysis. Meanwhile, whole cell lysate fractions were isolated using the Ripa Buffer cell lysis protocol, as described before. The protein concentrations of the resulting membrane cell lysate fractions were measured using the Bradford assay. One-dimensional SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed. Briefly, 10 μg of the enriched membrane fractions from individual cell lines were run in 12% SDS PAGE, and stained with Coomassie Colloidal Blue overnight. Bands were excised from the gels and cut into small pieces (1-2 mm). Gel pieces were destained in 40% acetonitrile and in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced in 10 mM DTE and 100 mM NH4HCO3, and alkylated in 50 mM IAA and 100 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were dried using the Savant Speedvac™ concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and trypsinized overnight with 600 ng trypsin, using a trypsin stock solution of 10 ng/μL in 10 mM NH4HCO3. The extraction of peptides was performed with sequential washes of the trypsinized gel pieces with 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by two washes with 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature, with agitation. The extracted peptides were dried using the Savant Speedvac™ concentrator and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high resolution nano-ESI Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, Bremen, Germany). Briefly, 5 μL corresponding to 5 μg of the peptide mixture were analyzed on a nanoflow system (Dionex™, Camberly, UK). After loading on a Dionex 0.1×20 mm, 5 μm C18 nanotrap column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 98% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% mobile phase B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), the sample was eluted into an Acclaim PepMap C18 nanocolumn 75 μm × 50 cm (Dionex™, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), 2 μm 100 Å, at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The trap and the nanoflow column were maintained at 35 0C. The samples were eluted with a gradient of solvent A: solvent B starting at 2%B for 10 min, rising to 5%B at 11 min, 15%B at 73 min and 55%B at 95 min. The column was then washed and re-equilibrated prior to injection of the next sample. The eluant was ionized using a Proxeon nanospray ESI source, operating in positive ion mode into an Orbitrap Elite FTMS (Thermo Finnigan, Bremen, Germany). Ionization voltage was at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature was at 250 0C. The mass-spectrometer was operated in MS/MS mode scanning from 300 to 2200 amu. The resolution of ions in MS1 was 60,000 and 15,000 for HCD MS2. The top 10 multiply charged ions were selected from each scan for MS/MS analysis using HCD at 33% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software package (Thermo Finnigan), using the Sequest search engine and the Uniprot human reviewed database, updated on May 30, 2016, including 20,204 entries. The search was conducted using carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications. Two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) validation was based on q value: target FDR (strict): 0.01, target FDR (relaxed): 0.05. SEQUEST results were filtered for false-positive identifications. Quantification analysis was performed using a label-free approach based on the area intensities of identified proteins. The area intensity for each protein in each biological sample was normalized according to the following formula: Normalized Area = (Protein Area/Total Area) × 106.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer (BC) is a highly heterogeneous disease encompassing multiple subtypes with different molecular and histopathological features, disease prognosis, and therapeutic responses. Among these, the Triple Negative BC form (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype with poor prognosis and therapeutic outcome. With respect to HER2 overexpressing BC, although advanced targeted therapies have improved the survival of patients, disease relapse and metastasis remains a challenge for therapeutic efficacy. In this study the aim was to identify key membrane-associated proteins which are overexpressed in these aggressive BC subtypes and can serve as potential biomarkers or drug targets. We leveraged on the development of a membrane enrichment protocol in combination with the global profiling GeLC-MS/MS technique, and compared the proteomic profiles of a HER2 overexpressing (HCC-1954) and a TNBC (MDA-MB-231) cell line with that of a benign control breast cell line (MCF-10A). An average of 2300 proteins were identified from each cell line, of which approximately 600 were membrane-associated proteins. Our global proteomic methodology in tandem with invigoration by Western blot and Immunofluorescence analysis, readily detected several previously-established BC receptors like HER2 and EPHA2, but importantly STEAP4 and CD97 emerged as novel potential candidate markers. This is the first time that the mitochondrial iron reductase STEAP4 protein up-regulation is linked to BC (HER2+ subtype), while for CD97, its role in BC has been previously described, but never before by a global proteomic technology in TNBC. STEAP4 was selected for further detailed evaluation by the employment of Immunohistochemical analysis of BC xenografts and clinical tissue microarray studies. Results showed that STEAP4 expression was evident only in malignant breast tissues whereas all the benign breast cases had no detectable levels. A functional role of STEAP4 intervention was established in HER2 overexpressing BC by pharmacological studies, where blockage of the STEAP4 pathway with an iron chelator (Deferiprone) in combination with the HER2 inhibitor Lapatinib led to a significant reduction in cell growth <i>in vitro</i>. Furthermore, siRNA mediated knockdown of STEAP4 also suppressed cell proliferation and enhanced the inhibition of Lapatinib in HER2 overexpressing BC, confirming its potential oncogenic role in BC. In conclusion, STEAP4 may represent a novel BC related biomarker and a potential pharmacological target for the treatment of HER2 overexpressing BC.

### Keywords
Human, Steap4, Orbitrap, Breast cacner, Therapeutic targets, Her2

### Affiliations
Biotechnology
Division of Pharmacology‐Pharmacotechnology, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens (BRFAA).

### Submitter
Konstantinos Vougas

### Lab Head
Dr Constantin Tamvakopoulos
Division of Pharmacology‐Pharmacotechnology, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens (BRFAA).


