### Accession
PXD025556

### Title
Characterization and therapeutic repercussion of the ecology in HER2 positive breast cancer

### Description
Conditioned medium experiments carried out in our laboratory with CAFs derived from HER2-positive patients showed a significant capacity to promote resistance to trastuzumab plus pertuzumab therapies in two HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines (BCCLs), even in the presence of docetaxel. In order to elucidate the components of CAF-conditioned medium that would be relevant in the promotion of BCCL resistance, we performed a multi-omics strategy to identify miRNAs, cytokines, transcription factors and/or kinases in the secretome that target specific objectives in cancer cells. The combination of miRNA analysis, label-free LC-MS/MS quantification and cytokine arrays to explore the secretome of CAFs under treatment conditions revealed several up- and down-regulated candidates. We discuss the potential role of some of the most interesting candidates in generating resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer

### Sample Protocol
Fresh CM samples were concentrated from 20 mL to approximately 2 mL by using Vivaspin® 20 Centrifugal Concentrators 10K (Sartorius). Proteinase K 500 μg/mL in PBS was added to break the exosomal membranes. A total of 6 samples, corresponding to three biological replicates of each group (control and treated samples) were analysed. The proteomic analysis was performed at the Proteomics Unit of Complutense University of Madrid (Spain) as reported elsewhere. Briefly, 50 μg of each protein extract were concentrated in a stacking gel. The bands of proteins were cut from the gel, reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested o/n. Then the peptides from the digested proteins were desalted and concentrated with C18 reverse phase chromatography, eluted, frozen-dried in Speed-vac and resuspended in acetonitrile/formic acid. The desalted peptides were analysed by a reversed phase liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-ESI-MS/MS) in an EASY-nLC 1000 System coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (an ultra-high-field mass orbitrap analyser) through the Nano-Easy spray source (all from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). All data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and in positive mode with Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). Peptide identifications from raw data were carried out using the Mascot v. 2.6.1 (MatrixScience, London, UK) search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.2 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A database search was performed against Toxo DB release 26 (https://toxodb.org). To determine the abundance of the identified peptides and proteins in different isolates, a label-free experiment based on precursor signal intensity was performed. After the analyses were completed, a final report presented the list of peptide groups and proteins with normalised abundances and selected ratios.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer application includes a statistical feature (Anova Background) for assessing the significance of differential expression by providing p-values and adjusted p-values (q-values) for those ratios. Only proteins identified with high confidence (FDR < 1%) with at least one unique peptide, abundance ratio variability < 30%, q-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5 were considered to be differentially expressed between groups

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer; her2-positive; tumour microenvironment; targeted-therapy; trastuzumab; resistance; cancer-associated fibroblast; label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
UCM
Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research Institute (IIS—FJD, UAM), Madrid 28040, Spain

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Madoz-Gúrpide
Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research Institute (IIS—FJD, UAM), Madrid 28040, Spain


