### Accession
PXD025590

### Title
Proteome characterization of BALF extracellular vesicles in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis: unveiling undercover molecular pathways.

### Description
In the longtime challenge of identifying specific, easily-detectable and reliable biomarkers of interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), alternative biofluids, such as bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), have been extensively studied. In particular, BALF proteomics is gaining momentum and providing interesting new insights into the pathogenesis of ILDs, especially Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF). Interest in the role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the pathogenesis of IPF has also grown. Though few, current studies on EVs in BALF of IPF patients focus mainly on miRNAs. To the best of our knowledge, the present study is therefore the first shotgun proteomic investigation of EVs isolated from BALF of IPF patients. Our main aim was to characterize the proteome of the vesicular component of BALF and to explore its individual impact on the pathogenesis of IPF. To this purpose, ultracentrifugation was chosen as EVs isolation technique and their purification was assessed by TEM, 2DE and LC-MS/MS. Our 2DE data and scatter plots showed considerable differences between the proteome of EVs and that of its supernatant and of whole BALF. Analysis of protein content and protein functions evidenced that EV proteins are predominantly involved in cytoskeleton remodeling, adenosine signaling, adrenergic signaling, C-peptide signaling and lipid metabolism. Our findings may suggest a wider system involvement in the disease pathogenesis and support the importance of pre-fractioning of complex samples, like BALF, in order to let low-abundant proteins-mediated pathways to emerge.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilized in a denaturation solution composed of 8 M Urea and 4% w/v CHAPS and their protein concentration was determined by Bradford Assay. MS-preparative SDS-PAGE was carried out utilizing pre-cast 12% polyacrylamide gels  with Criterion™ Vertical Electrophoresis Cell with the following voltage conditions: 60 V for stacking gel and 120 V for separation gel. The protein amount loaded was 50 µg for BALF and BALF fluidic fraction, and total protein content for EVs. Protein bands were cut out and further minced into 1mm3 gel pieces; then, they were destained twice in 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN)/20 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) at 37°C with shaking at 700 rpm for 30 min. Following destaining, gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% ACN. After, a 10 ng/µl Trypsin in 10% v/v ACN/20 mM ABC solution for protein digestion was added to gel pieces, which rehydrated on ice for 60 min; then, they were covered with 10% v/v ACN/20 mM ABC solution and digestion was performed overnight at 37°C.first digestion was stopped by adding a 50% v/v ACN/5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution and gel pieces were incubated at 24°C with shaking at 700 rpm for 30 min. Supernatant containing peptide extracts was collected into a new vial.Peptides of mono-dimensional gel digestion were analysed using LC-MS/MS analysis. Particularly, dried samples were dissolved in a 2% v/v ACN/0.1% v/v TFA solution and incubated at 24°C with shaking at 350 rpm for 30 min; after centrifugation at 20000 x g at room temperature for 30 min, supernatants were used for the LC-MS/MS analysis. Particularly, supernatants were transferred to an LC sample vial and an appropriate amount of each sample was injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance LC system. Peptides were loaded on a trap column with 6 µl/min and washed with 0.1% v/v TFA loading buffer. After 5 minutes, the trap column was switched in line with the nano flow separation column and peptides were eluted with a flow of 250 nl/min and a linear gradient of elution buffer A (0.1% v/v formic acid) and elution buffer B (80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid). The LC system was online connected to the nanoESI source of an LTQ Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Fragments were scanned out in the orbitrap mass analyzer in centroid mode and raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.50, https://maxquant.net/maxquant/). For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the human entries of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database and they were stated identified if false discovery rate (FDR) on protein and peptide level was less than 0.01. Oxidation of methionine residues, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues and propionamidation of cysteine residues were selected as variable modifications; furthermore, a maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. A minimum ratio count of one unique or razor peptide was required for quantification. Furthermore, the results for the identified protein groups were further processed for statistical purposes using the Perseus software (Version 1.5.2.6, https://maxquant.net/perseus/).

### Publication Abstract
In the longtime challenge of identifying specific, easily detectable and reliable biomarkers of IPF, BALF proteomics is providing interesting new insights into its pathogenesis. To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first shotgun proteomic investigation of EVs isolated from BALF of IPF patients. Our main aim was to characterize the proteome of the vesicular component of BALF and to explore its individual impact on the pathogenesis of IPF. To this purpose, ultracentrifugation was chosen as the EVs isolation technique, and their purification was assessed by TEM, 2DE and LC-MS/MS. Our 2DE data and scatter plots showed considerable differences between the proteome of EVs and that of whole BALF and of its fluid component. Analysis of protein content and protein functions evidenced that EV proteins are predominantly involved in cytoskeleton remodeling, adenosine signaling, adrenergic signaling, C-peptide signaling and lipid metabolism. Our findings may suggest a wider system involvement in the disease pathogenesis and support the importance of pre-fractioning of complex samples, such as BALF, in order to let low-abundant proteins-mediated pathways emerge.

### Keywords
Balf; extracellular vesicles; ipf; fibrosis; shotgun; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Department, University of Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Enxhi Shaba

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luca Bini
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Department, University of Siena, Italy


