### Accession
PXD024330

### Title
Interactome of the Autophagy Receptor TAX1BP1 (T6BP)

### Description
CD4+ T lymphocytes play a major role in the establishment and maintenance of immunity. They are activated by antigenic peptides derived from extracellular or newly synthesized (endogenous) proteins presented on the surface of antigen presenting cells (APCs) by the MHC-II molecules. The pathways leading to endogenous MHC-II presentation remain poorly characterized. We demonstrate here that the autophagy receptor, T6BP, influences both autophagy-dependent and -independent endogenous presentation of HIV- and HCMV-derived peptides. By studying the immunopeptidome of MHC-II molecules, we show that T6BP affects both the quantity and quality of peptides presented. T6BP silencing induces mislocalization of the MHC-II-loading compartments and a rapid degradation of the invariant chain (CD74) without altering the expression and internalization kinetics of MHC-II molecules. T6BP also controls the ER localization of the chaperone calnexin that we identified as a T6BP partner. Remarkably, calnexin silencing in APCs replicates the functional consequences of T6BP silencing: decreased CD4+ T cell activation and exacerbated CD74 degradation. Altogether, we unravel T6BP as a key player of the MHC-II-restricted endogenous presentation pathway and we propose one potential mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation HeLa-CIITA cells were harvested 24h after cDNA transfection with either plasmid encoding GFP-T6BP (kind gift from F.Buss, Cambridge, UK) or encoding GFP. 2.107 cells were washed in cold PBS and lysed in 300 μl of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM MgCl, 2 mM ATP, and 1x Protease Inhibitor (Roche) (30min, ice), mixing every 10min and centrifuged at 20,000g (20min, 4°C). Lysates were recovered, 300μl of wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) was added and the pellets were discarded. GFP-Trap agarose magnetic beads (Chromotek) were vortexed, 25μl of bead slurry was washed 3 times with cold wash buffer. Each diluted lysate was added to 25 μl of equilibrated beads and tumbled end-over-end (1h, 4°C). Beads were collected using a magnetic support and washed 3 times. For Western Blot analysis, SDS-sample buffer was added to aliquots and the samples were boiled (5 min, 99°C).  On-bead digestion for mass spectrometry Following immunoprecipitation with GFP-Trap (Chromotek), digestions were performed using manufacturer instructions on the P3S proteomic core facility of Sorbonne Université. For each sample, beads were resuspended in 25 μl of elution buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 μg/ml sequencing grade Trypsine, 1 mM DTT) and incubated in a thermomixer at 400rpm (30min, 30°C). Beads were collected using a magnetic support and the supernatants were recovered. For elution, beads were then washed with 50 μl of elution buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 5 mM iodoacetamide) and collected with a magnetic support. Supernatants were harvested and mixed with the previous ones. This elution was repeated once. Combined supernatants were incubated in a thermomixer at 400 rpm (overnight, 32°C). Reactions were stopped by adding 1μl trifluoroacetic acid and digests were desalted using home-made StageTips. StageTips were first rehydrated with 100µl of methanol and then equilibrated with 100 µl of 50% acetonitrile 0.5% acetic acid. After peptide loading, StageTips were washed with 200 µl of 0.5% acetic acid and peptides were eluted with 60 µl of 80% acetonitrile 0.5% acetid acid. Eluted peptides were totally dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo), solubilised in 20 µl of 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptide mixtures were analysed with a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were separated on an Aurora RP-C18 analytical column (25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 120 Å, 1,6 µm IonOpticks) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, at 40°C, with mobile phase A (ACN 2% / FA 0.1%) and B (ACN 99.9% / FA 0.1%). A 30 min elution gradient was run from 0% to 3% B in 1 min, 3% to 15 % B in 17 min then 15% to 23% B in 7 min and 23% to 32% B in 5 min. MS acquisition was run in DDA mode with PASEF. Accumulation time was set to 100 msec in the TIMS tunnel. Capillary voltage was set to 1,6 kV, mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z in MS and MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was activated for ions within 0.015 m/z and 0.015 V.s/cm² and released after 0,4 min. Exclusion was reconsidered if precursor ion intensity was 4 times superior. Low abundance precursors below the target value of 20,000 a.u and intensity of 2,500 a.u. were selected several times for PASEF-MS/MS until the target value was reached. Parent ion selection was achieved by using a two-dimensional m/z and 1/k0 selection area filter allowing the exclusion of singly charged ions. Total cycle time was 1,29 sec with 10 PASEF cycles.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0, with no normalisation, no matching between runs and with a minimum of 2 peptide ratios for protein quantification. The output protein file was filtered with ProStar 1.14 to keep only proteins detected in 2 samples or more in at least 1 of the 2 conditions. Missing values were imputed using SLSA (Structured Least Square Adaptative) algorithm for partially missing values in each condition and DetQuantile algorithm for missing values in an entire condition. In order to select relevant binding partners, data were statistically processed using limma test and filtered to retain only differentially expressed preys (FDR 1%) with a fold change ≥ 10 between T6BP-GFP and GFP conditions. Selected preys were uploaded to the CRAPome v2 (Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification) online analysis tool to identify potential contaminants. For each binding partners a Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) probability threshold was assessed by the Resource for Evaluation of Protein Interaction Networks (REPRINT) using the default settings. Selected preys were then uploaded in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software version 49932394 (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis) to perform annotation and over-representation analysis. Finally, network visualization was designed using Cytoscape software (v. 3.7.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Autophagy receptor, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell
CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell Department of Virology - Team: Autophagy and Antiviral Immunity UMR 9198 CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette France

### Submitter
Arnaud Moris

### Lab Head
Dr Arnaud Moris
Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell Department of Virology - Team: Autophagy and Antiviral Immunity UMR 9198 CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette France


