### Accession
PXD017827

### Title
Proteome Analysis of Avian Metapneumovirus C Type infected Vero cells by iTRAQ coupled with LC-MS

### Description
To date, no study has been carried out to assess the protein profiles of aMPV/C-infected cells. In the present study, iTRAQ combined with LC-MS/MS was used to reveal the global proteomic changes occurring in Vero cells in response to aMPV/C infection for the first time and to help understand the molecular mechanisms underlying viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Vero cells were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 using DMEM supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution. The avian metapneumovirus subgroup C JC strain was propagated in Vero cells, and virus titer was determined by TCID50 assay. Vero cells at 80% confluence in 75 cm2 flasks were inoculated with the JC strain at an MOI of 1 for 48 and 72 hours. Uninfected cells were used as controls. Cells from three independent experiments (9 cells samples) were collected with a cell scraper, washed in cold PBS and centrifuged at 500×g for 10 min. The proteins were extracted, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer with 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA and 10 mM DTT. We then obtained solubilized protein and removed the cellular debris by sonicating and centrifuging at 4°C and 30,000×g. A Bradford protein assay was used to quantify the protein concentration in the supernatants. One hundred grams of each sample was digested at 37°C overnight with sequencing grade modiﬁed trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Each sample was processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent labeling. The labeled digested proteins were then pooled and vacuum dried. Strong-cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was performed with a Thermo EASY-nLC High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) System. iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were loaded onto Thermo scientific EASY columns in buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 25% CAN). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 0-40% buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 500 mM KCl, 25% ACN) for 85 min, 40-100% buffer B for 3 min and then 100% buffer B for 2 min using a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The reconstituted samples were analyzed using a Thermo Finnigan Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer. The MS scanning conditions included 90 min in positive ion mode; 300-1800 m/z; 70,000 resolution at m/z 200; AGC target: 3e6; maximum IT: 10 ms; number of scan ranges: 1; dynamic exclusion: 40.0 s; MS2 activation type: HCD; isolation window: 2 m/z; 17,500 at m/z 200; microscans: 1; maximum IT: 60 ms; normalized collision energy: 30 eV; and underfill ratio: 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Relative quantiﬁcation and protein identiﬁcation were performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Trypsin was chosen due to its enzyme cleavage specificity, and there were a maximum allowed number of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation and oxidation were set as fixed modifications for the iTRAQ labeling approach. The analysis was performed using a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da using the iTRAQ method. Each MS/MS Ion search was based on the UniProt Macaca mulatta proteome database (UP000006718). The score threshold for peptide identification was set at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). To designate signiﬁcant changes in protein expression, fold changes >1.33 or <0.76 were set as cutoff values.

### Publication Abstract
Avian metapneumovirus subtype C (aMPV/C) causes an acute respiratory disease that has caused serious economic losses in the Chinese poultry industry. In the present study, we first explored the protein profile in aMPV/C-infected Vero cells using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics. A total of 921 of 7034 proteins were identified as significantly altered by aMPV/C infection. Three selected proteins were confirmed by Western blot analysis. Bioinformatics GO analysis revealed multiple signaling pathways involving cell cycle, endocytosis, and PI3K-Akt, mTOR, MAPK and p53 signaling pathways, which might participate in viral infection. In this analysis, we found that PLK2 expression was upregulated by aMPV/C infection and investigated whether it contributed to aMPV/C-mediated cellular dysfunction. Suppressing PLK2 attenuated aMPV/C-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and p53-dependent apoptosis and reduced virus release. These results in a mammalian cell line suggest that high PLK2 expression correlates with aMPV/C-induced apoptosis and viral replication, providing new insight into the potential avian host cellular response to aMPV/C infection and antiviral targets.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ampv/c, Vero cells

### Affiliations
Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, No. 9 Shuguang Garden Middle Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100097, People’s Republic of China
Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences

### Submitter
Rong Quan

### Lab Head
Dr JUE LIU
Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences


