### Accession
PXD009345

### Title
Human holo-transferrin glycation

### Description
Understanding the effect of glycation on the function of transferrin, the systemic iron transporter, is fundamental to fully grasp the mechanisms leading to the loss of iron homeostasis observed in diabetes mellitus (DM). The spontaneous reaction with protein amino groups is one of the main causes of glucose toxicity, but the site specificity of this reaction is still poorly understood.  Unbalance of iron metabolism has long been described in DM patients, and one of the main features is the occurrence of non-transferrin-bound iron in the blood serum. The presence of these toxic iron species is observed, despite low transferrin saturation levels. Here in, an in vitro approach was used to study human holo-transferrin glycation in detail. Holo-transferrin was incubated with increasing concentration of glucose (10; 20; 100 and 500 mM) and glycation sites were identified using nano-reverse phase – liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry (nLC-MS).  Overall 21 glycation hotspots were identified with lysine residues 103, 312 and 380 proving to be the most reactive sites. Glycation specificity was found to be remarkably different from that described for apo-transferrin.

### Sample Protocol
Human holo-serotransferrin (T4132, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 2.5 g·L-1 (32 µM) was incubated at 37ºC in pH 7.4 buffer containing 20 mM disodium hydrogen phosphate, 25 mM sodium hydrogencarbonate, 0.02% sodium azide and variable concentration of D-glucose (0, 10, 20, 100 and 500 mM). The reaction was stopped after 7 or 14 days incubation period.  Excess glucose was removed using cycles of concentration/dilution in glucose less buffer, utilizing 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) ultra-filtration units (Amicon). After the first centrifugation, the ultra-filtrate was stored, in order to allow quantification of iron released by transferrin during incubation. Triplicate reactions were carried out. In solution tryptic digestion was achieved by a standard protocol. Samples were diluted to a final protein concentration of 1 g·L-1 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.0) containing 8 M urea and 0.1% sodium dodecylsulphate (SDS). Dithiotreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and samples were incubated at 60ºC for 1 h. Alkylation was achieved with 40 mM iodoacetamine (IAA) for 30 min. Finally, samples were diluted to 0.1 g·L-1 protein concentration and MS-grade TPCK-treated porcine trypsin (90057, Thermo Scientific Pierce) was added in a 1:20 protein mass ratio. Digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37º C. Tryptic digests were analyzed with a nanoHPLC system (Dionex, 3000 Ultimate RSLCnano) coupled on-line to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific, EASY-Spray source). Eluent A was aqueous formic acid (0.2%) and eluent B was formic acid (0.2%) in acetonitrile. Samples (1 µg) were injected directly into a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100, 5 μm particle size) and washed over with an isocratic flux of 98% eluent A and 2% eluent B at a flow rate of 30 µL·min-1. After 3 min, the flux was redirected to the analytical column (EASY-Spray C18 PepMap, 100 Å, 150 mm x 75µm ID and 3 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL·min-1. Column temperature was set at 35º C. Peptide separation occurred using a two-step gradient: linear gradient of 2–35% eluent B over 12 min followed by 35–60% eluent B over 45 min. Eluent B was then raised to 90% and the column was washed for 10 min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, with a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a transfer capillary temperature of 250º C. Tube lens voltage was set to 120 V. MS survey scans were acquired at an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000 for an m/z range from 300 to 2000. Tandem MS (MS/MS) data were acquired in the linear ion trap using a data dependent method with dynamic exclusion: The top 3 most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID). CID settings were 35% normalized collision energy, 2 Da isolation window, 30 ms activation time and an activation Q of 0.250. A window of 45 s was used for dynamic exclusion. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was enabled and target values were 1.00e+6 for the Orbitrap and 1.00e+4 for LTQ MSn analysis. Data were recorded with Xcalibur software version 2.1. Two analytical replicas were acquired for each experimental triplicate.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 from Thermo Scientific. Searches were performed against the human proteome on the SwissProt database. Sequest HT algorithm was used, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and mass tolerances 10 ppm for precursor ion and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146) was considered as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99491) and Amadori Product formation (+162.05282) were considered as a variable modification in all database searches. Two database searches were carried out: in the first, only the aforementioned modifications were considered; in the second, formation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) was also taken into account: Amadori compound-1H2O (+144.04226), Amadori compound-2H2O (+126.03169), Pyrraline (+108.02113), Nε-(Carboxymethyl)lysine (+58.00548), Nε-(Carboxyethyl)lysine (+72.02113), Imadazolone B (+142.02661), Argpyrimidine (+80.02621), Nω-(Carboxymethyl)arginine (+58.00548), Nε-(5-Hydro-5-methyl-4-imidazolon-2-yl)ornithine (+54.01057), Nε-(5-Hydro-4-imidazolon-2-yl)ornithine (+39.99429). Glycated peptides identified were manually validated. All results were curated manually and Sequest annotated modifications for which the best PSM was considered not to contain sufficient information to validate the identification were disregarded as false positives. A modification was considered whenever it was identified by the software in any given sample and its presence could be ascertained in its two additional experimental replicates based on accurate mass, chromatographic retention time, and manual interpretation from the tandem mass spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the effect of glycation on the function of transferrin, the systemic iron transporter, is fundamental to fully grasp the mechanisms leading to the loss of iron homeostasis observed in diabetes mellitus (DM). The spontaneous reaction with protein amino groups is one of the main causes of glucose toxicity, but the site specificity of this reaction is still poorly understood. Here in, an in vitro approach was used to study human holo-transferrin glycation in detail. Lysine residues 103, 312 and 380 proved to be the most reactive sites, and overall glycation specificity was found to be remarkably different from that described for apo-transferrin. A computational biochemistry approach was subsequently applied to rationalize lysine reactivity. Even though pK<sub>a</sub> values, solvent accessible surface area, hydrogen bonds or the presence of nearby charged/polar residues could be related to lysine reactivity, these parameters do not suffice to describe glycation site specificity in holo-transferrin. Furthermore, analysis of the most reactive residues suggests that the correct lysine side chain orientation may play a fundamental role in reactivity. Nevertheless, in holo-transferrin, glycation occurs away from the iron-binding sites and, despite the observed iron release, the modification of apo-transferrin should play a more relevant role for the loss of iron-binding capacity observed in the blood serum of DM patients.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Holo-transferrin, Lc-ms/ms, Blood serum, Glycation

### Affiliations
REQUIMTE/LAQV, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
REQUIMTE-LAQV, DEP. DE QUÍMICA E BIOQUÍMICA, FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS DA UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO, RUA DO CAMPO ALEGRE, S/N, 4169-007 PORTO (PORTUGAL)

### Submitter
André Silva

### Lab Head
Dr André Moreira Neto da Silva
REQUIMTE-LAQV, DEP. DE QUÍMICA E BIOQUÍMICA, FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS DA UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO, RUA DO CAMPO ALEGRE, S/N, 4169-007 PORTO (PORTUGAL)


