### Accession
PXD007039

### Title
Picky - a simple online method designer for targeted proteomics

### Description
Picky is an online method designer for targeted proteomics. To assess the performance of PRM methods designed by Picky we carried out a benchmark experiment. As reference samples we used different amounts of human proteins spiked into 1.4 µg yeast lysate. These sample where analyzed in PRM and DDA mode. All methods inlcuded a shotgun method (top10 for DDA and top3 for PRM) and can therefore all be analyzed by MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Universal Protein Standard 1 (UPS1) (Sigma Aldrich) was spiked at different amounts (30 amol, 300 amol, 3 fmol and 30 fmol with the labels 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively) into 1.4 µg total yeast protein. Yeast proteins were extracted from S. cerevisiae (strain BJ2168). Proteins were digested with trypsin and stage-tipped. Peptides were separated on a reverse phase HPLC system using a self packed column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ material; Dr. Maisch, GmbH; 3 h gradient; 5 to 75 % Acetonitrile). Peptides were ionized using an ESI source and analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Fisher). Samples were analyzed with a top10 data-dependent mode acquisition method (DDA) and parallel reaction monitoring method (PRM). For DDA settings were briefly: Resolution 70 000 for MS1 (target value: 3,000,000 ions; maximum injection time of 20 ms); 17,500 for MS2 (maximum ion collection time of 60 ms with a target of reaching 1,000,000 ions; 2 Da isolation width). MS2 in PRM mode were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, AGC target at 200,000 ions, maximum injection time at 50 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z). Inclusion lists with 118 transitions were obtained from Picky using default settings and querying all 48 UPS1 proteins. Maximal number of in parallel monitored features was set to 60 resulting in a cycle time between 3 and 4 seconds. A false positive control inclusion list was generated with Picky. 48 random human proteins different from the UPS1 set were queried in Picky and analyzed using the described settings.

### Data Protocol
DDA runs were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.8.0 [Cox, J. and Mann, M. (2008) Nature Biotechnology, 26, 1367-72. http://doi:10.1038/nbt.1511] using default settings (multiplicity=0;Enzyme=Trypsin, including cut after proline; Oxidation (M) and N-terminal Acetylation set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification; database: uniprot yeast database from october 2014 and ups1 database as provided from Sigma Aldrich; Peptide and Protein FDR set to 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Benchmark, Prm

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin


