### Accession
PXD020138

### Title
Unique organization of photosystem II supercomplexes and megacomplexes in Norway spruce.

### Description
Photosystem II (PSII) complexes are organized into large supercomplexes with variable amounts of light-harvesting proteins (Lhcb). A typical PSII supercomplex in plants is formed by four trimers of Lhcb proteins (LHCII trimers), which are bound to the PSII core dimer via monomeric antenna proteins. However, the architecture of PSII supercomplexes in Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst.) is different, most likely due to a lack of two Lhcb proteins, Lhcb6 and Lhcb3. Interestingly, the spruce PSII supercomplex shares similar structural features with its counterpart in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Kouřil et al.: New Phytol. 210, 808-814, 2016). Here we present a single-particle electron microscopy study of isolated PSII supercomplexes from Norway spruce that revealed binding of a variable amount of LHCII trimers to the PSII core dimer at positions that have never been observed in any other plant species so far. The largest spruce PSII supercomplex, which was found to bind 8 LHCII trimers, is even larger than the current largest known PSII supercomplex from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. We have also shown that the spruce PSII supercomplexes can form various types of PSII megacomplexes, which were also identified in intact grana membranes. Some of these large PSII supercomplexes and megacomplexes were identified also in Pinus sylvestris, another representative of Pinaceae family. The structural variability and complexity of LHCII organization in Pinaceae seems to be related to the absence of Lhcb6 and Lhcb3 in this family and may be beneficial for the optimization of light-harvesting under varying environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The photosystems II complexes were isolated from illuminated Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst.) seedlings. The thylakoid membranes were prepared and solubilized membranes were electrophoretically separated using CN-PAGE according to a protocol described by Nosek et al.2017. Electro-eluted PSII supercomplex and megacomplex samples from the band I and band II (Fig. 1) were mixed with 200 µL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0 (TEAB) containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 0.1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (DOC) and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g and RT for 15 min in an Amicon® Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Germany) with 3KDa cut-off. The whole procedure was repeated two more times. Then, the concentrates (a total volume of 60 µL) were split into 20 µL aliquots. To characterize the protein composition of the investigated complexes, a 20 µL sample aliquot (for both band I and band II concentrated sample) was used for in-solution protein digestion as described previously (León et al., 2013). Briefly, protein complexes were reduced using 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at RT for 30 min, alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 30 min, diluted to 200 µL with 20mM TEAB containing 0.1% (w/v) DOC and digested with the use of 1 µg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) at 37 °C overnight. Then the digested samples were acidified with formic acid (FA; final concentration of 5% (v/v) and pH of ~2.0) and centrifuged at 20,000 g and RT for 10 min. The supernatants were recovered and the resultant peptides were desalted and fractionated employing a home-made reversed-phase micro column (PTFE capillary, id 200 µm, filled with ReproSil Gold C18, 5 µm particles; Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected to a 25-µL gas-tight micro syringe (Hamilton, NV, USA) according to Franc et al., (2012). First, the whole system was wetted with 25 µL of isopropanol and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile and equilibrated twice with 25 μL of 5% (v/v) FA. The acidified digest was subsequently aspirated into the syringe and loaded on the micro column. Before sample fractionation, the micro syringe was filled consecutively with seven mobile phases consisting of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) with gradually decreasing acetonitrile content (48-32-24-20-16-12-8% (v/v)). Seven fractions (4 µL each) were subsequently collected, mixed with 21 µL with 5% (v/v) FA and directly analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS). MS analysis was performed employing a tandem mass spectrometer UHR-QTOF maXis (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) connected to a nanoflow capillary liquid chromatography system RSLCnano (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) via on-line nanoESI source (Bruker Daltonik, Germany). The chromatography system and the mass analyzer were operated with the settings published by Simerský et al. (2017).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with an instrument parameter setting called “Bruker QTOF” (Beck et al., 2015) and Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and searched against Picea abies-specific protein database (Grebe et al., 2019) complemented with 247 sequences of common laboratory contaminant proteins (SI Table 2). All detailed parameters and settings are summarized in parameters text file included in the supplementary data SI_Data_1.zip. Search parameters for Andromeda engine were as follows: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. The search results were combined and filtered for protein inference and 1% FDR at both peptide and protein level. For the evaluation of abundances of the identified proteins (SI Table 1), the well-established iBAQ method (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) based on summed peak intensities of all peptides matching to a particular protein was applied. Missing annotations for the identified proteins were assigned by pBLAST homology searches against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database with the restriction for Arabidopsis thaliana as an organism of choice.

### Publication Abstract
Photosystem II (PSII) complexes are organized into large supercomplexes with variable amounts of light-harvesting proteins (Lhcb). A typical PSII supercomplex in plants is formed by four trimers of Lhcb proteins (LHCII trimers), which are bound to the PSII core dimer via monomeric antenna proteins. However, the architecture of PSII supercomplexes in Norway spruce[Picea abies (L.) Karst.] is different, most likely due to a lack of two Lhcb proteins, Lhcb6 and Lhcb3. Interestingly, the spruce PSII supercomplex shares similar structural features with its counterpart in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [Kou&#x159;il et al. (2016) New Phytol. 210, 808-814]. Here we present a single-particle electron microscopy study of isolated PSII supercomplexes from Norway spruce that revealed binding of a variable amount of LHCII trimers to the PSII core dimer at positions that have never been observed in any other plant species so far. The largest spruce PSII supercomplex, which was found to bind eight LHCII trimers, is even larger than the current largest known PSII supercomplex from C. reinhardtii. We have also shown that the spruce PSII supercomplexes can form various types of PSII megacomplexes, which were also identified in intact grana membranes. Some of these large PSII supercomplexes and megacomplexes were identified also in Pinus sylvestris, another representative of the Pinaceae family. The structural variability and complexity of LHCII organization in Pinaceae seems to be related to the absence of Lhcb6 and Lhcb3 in this family, and may be beneficial for the optimization of light-harvesting under varying environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Spruce, Plant, Photosystem, Lc-msms, Membrane, Complex

### Affiliations
Department of Biophysics, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University, Šlechtitelů 27, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic
Palacky University in Olomouc, Department of protein biochemistry and proteomics

### Submitter
René Lenobel

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Kouřil
Department of Biophysics, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University, Šlechtitelů 27, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic


