### Accession
PXD019034

### Title
Assembly defects of the human tRNA splicing endonuclease contribute to impaired pre-tRNA processing in pontocerebellar hypoplasia

### Description
To gain functional insights into human TSEN/CLP1, we designed an expression vector series based on the MultiBac system that allows combinatorial protein complex production in insect and mammalian cells by utilizing a CMV/p10 dual promoter. Using this system, we were able to assemble and purify functional heterotetrameric TSEN and a heteropentameric complex including the RNA kinase CLP1 from infected insect cells. Individual proteins of the complexes were identified using in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. To gain atomistic insights into the molecular architecture of the human TSEN complex, we set out to characterize the TSEN15–34 heterodimer by X-ray crystallography. Despite extensive crystallization trials, full-length TSEN15–34 did not yield any crystals. To define a crystallizable core complex, we subjected the full-length complex to limited proteolysis with subsequent size exclusion chromatography. Primarily, we observed two comigrating polypeptide species. The two polypeptide species were identified using in-gel digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. This led to the identification of the polypeptide species corresponding to residues 23 to 170 of TSEN15 and residues 208 to 310 of TSEN34 covering the predicted conserved nuclease domains.

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis was performed using 4-12 % NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels according to manufacturer’s protocols (NuPAGE system, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein gel bands were excised and the proteins were hydrolyzed as described. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and hydrolyzed with Trypsin. Extracted peptides were dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and separated using a DionexUltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). For this, the peptides were first loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 pre-column (μ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, C18, 300 µm I.D., particle size 5 µm pore size). 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used as mobile phase A and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as mobile phase B. The peptides were then separated on a reversed-phase C18 analytical column (HPLC column Acclaim® PepMap 100, 75 µm I.D., 50 cm, 3 µm pore size) with a gradient of 4 - 90% B over 70 min at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. Peptides were directly eluted into a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data acquisition was performed in data-dependent and positive ion modes. Mass spectrometric conditions were: capillary voltage, 2.8 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized collision energy, 30%; MS scan range in the Orbitrap. m/z 350–1600; MS resolution, 70,000; automatic gain control (AGC) target, 3e6. The 20 most intense peaks were selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell at an AGC target of 1e5. MS/MS resolution, 17,500. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s and singly charged ions and ions with unrecognized charge states were also excluded. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap was performed using the lock mass m/z 445.120025.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were converted to .mgf files and were searched against the SwissProt database using the Mascot search engine 2.5.1 (Matrix Science)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tsen

### Affiliations
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
IWE ZIK HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
IWE ZIK HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany


