### Accession
PXD021360

### Title
Interaction of 7SK with the Smn complex modulates snRNP production

### Description
Gene expression requires tight coordination of the molecular machineries that mediate transcription and splicing. While the interplay between transcription kinetics and spliceosome fidelity has been investigated before, less is known about mechanisms regulating the assembly of the spliceosomal machinery in response to transcription changes. Here we report an association of the Smn complex, which mediates spliceosomal snRNP biogenesis, with the 7SK complex involved in transcriptional regulation. We found that Smn interacts with the 7SK core components Larp7 and Mepce and specifically associates with 7SK subcomplexes containing hnRNP R.  The association between Smn and 7SK complexes is enhanced upon transcriptional inhibition leading to reduced production of snRNPs. Taken together, our findings reveal a functional association of Smn and 7SK complexes that is governed by global changes in transcription. Thus, in addition to its canonical nuclear role in transcriptional regulation, 7SK has cytosolic functions in fine-tuning spliceosome production according to transcriptional demand.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown of endogenous 7SK NSC-34 cells were grown in 10 cm dishes until 80-90% confluency. Cells were washed once with ice-cold Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS, without MgCl2, CaCl2; Sigma) and collected by scraping. Cells were lysed in 1 ml lysis buffer B [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40] on ice for 15 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000×g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. 150 pmol of biotinylated RNA oligonucleotide (Biotin-scr: 5'-Biotin-CAAUCAUACUGCUCACU-3'; Biotin-pd7SK: 5'-Biotin-GACAGAUGUCGCAGCCA-3') were added to 600 µl NSC-34 lysate followed by rotation end-over-end for 2 h at 4°C. Then 30 µl streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce) were added followed by rotation for 30 min at 4°C. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml lysis buffer B and twice with lysis buffer A [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2]. Buffer was removed completely and beads were snap-frozen in liquid N2 for mass spectrometry analysis.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS Beads were thawed and RNA was degraded by Benzonase. For this purpose 20 µl of 375 U/ml Benzonase in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with 2 mM MgCl2 was added to each tube and incubated for 1 h. Beads were kept in solution by shaking at 750 rpm at all steps. Proteins were denatured by adding 150 µl of 8 M urea 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 solution and 5 µl of 30 µM dithiothreitol and then digested by LysC (0.25 µg/sample) at RT. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 to permit trypsin digestion and chloroacetamide at a final concentration of 5 mM was added to alkylate cysteines. Trypsin (0.25 µg/sample) was added and samples were digested at RT in the dark overnight. The digest was terminated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (final 1% v/v) and the beads were settled by centrifugation. Half of the supernatant was further processed by desalting chromatography on three disks of C18 material using the STAGE-tip format (Kulak et al., 2014). Briefly, STAGE-tips were washed with 100 µl buffer B (50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), conditioned with 100 µl methanol, washed twice with 100 µl buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), loaded with sample peptides, washed twice with 100 µl buffer A, and subjected to peptide elution by 60 µl of buffer B. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were re-suspended in 10 µl 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid and stored at -20°C and 2 µl were later used for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing and bioinformatic analysis To process MS raw files, we employed the MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.15 (Cox and Mann, 2008), searching against the UniProtKB mouse FASTA database using canonical and isoform protein sequences. Default search parameters were utilized unless stated differently. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. The search feature “Match between runs,”, which allows the transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of sequencing after nonlinear retention time alignment, was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min. Protein abundances were normalized with the MaxLFQ label-free normalization algorithm (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression requires tight coordination of the molecular machineries that mediate transcription and splicing. While the interplay between transcription kinetics and spliceosome fidelity has been investigated before, less is known about mechanisms regulating the assembly of the spliceosomal machinery in response to transcription changes. Here, we report an association of the Smn complex, which mediates spliceosomal snRNP biogenesis, with the 7SK complex involved in transcriptional regulation. We found that Smn interacts with the 7SK core components Larp7 and Mepce and specifically associates with 7SK subcomplexes containing hnRNP R. The association between Smn and 7SK complexes is enhanced upon transcriptional inhibition leading to reduced production of snRNPs. Taken together, our findings reveal a functional association of Smn and 7SK complexes that is governed by global changes in transcription. Thus, in addition to its canonical nuclear role in transcriptional regulation, 7SK has cytosolic functions in fine-tuning spliceosome production according to transcriptional demand.

### Keywords
Transcription, Interaction, Smn complex, 7sk

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


