### Accession
PXD031774

### Title
A proteomic landscape of Candida albicans in the stepwise evolution to fluconazole resistance

### Description
As an opportunistic fungal pathogen, Candida albicans is a major cause of superficial and systemic infections in immunocompromised patients. The increasing rate of azole resistance in C. albicans has brought further challenges to clinical therapy. In this study, we collect five isogenic C. albicans strains recovered over discrete intervals from an HIV-infected patient who suffered a two-year recurrent oropharyngeal candidiasis. Azole resistance was known from the clinical history to have developed gradually in this patient, and this was confirmed by MIC assay of each strain. Proteomic techniques can be used to investigate more comprehensively how resistance develops in pathogenic fungi over time. Our study is the first using tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling combined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) technology to investigate the acquired resistance mechanisms of serial C. albicans isolates at the proteomic level. A total of 4029 proteins have been identified, of which 3766 have been quantified. Compared with Ca1, bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially expressed proteins were mainly associated with the following aspects: down-regulation of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pyruvate metabolism, fatty acid degradation and oxidative stress response proteins in all four subsequent strains, but – remarkably – activation of amino acids metabolism in Ca8 and Ca14; increase in the protection against osmotic stress or excessive copper toxicity, up-regulation of respiratory chain activity, and suppression of iron transport in Ca17. By tracing proteomic alterations in this set of isogenic resistance isolates, we acquire mechanistic insight into the steps involved in the acquisition of azole resistance in C. albicans.

### Sample Protocol
Strains Ca1, Ca2, Ca8, Ca14 and Ca17 were obtained from T. C. White (School of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri at Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA). All of these five strains were retrieved from an AIDS patient who suffered from recurrent oropharyngeal candidiasis over a period of 2 years. The sensitivity of each strain to fluconazole and the established drug resistance mechanism are shown in Table 1. In this series, fluconazole resistance was considered to be gradually acquired in vivo and was related to the doses given to the patient. Moreover, molecular analyses confirmed these isolates represent a single C. albicans strain and the resistance levels is stable over 600 generations. Five C. albicans isolates were grown at 28 °C overnight in YPD medium with constant shaking at 220 rpm and used as seed cultures. Next, 10mL of seed culture was inoculated into 100mL fresh YPD liquid medium, which was then cultured at 28 °C for 4 h (220 rpm) until OD600 reached 0.8. The cultured cells were centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min (4°C) and washed twice by cold PBS. Each treatment was performed in triplicate. Protein extraction and digestion Samples were ground with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to each cell powders. And then, samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min (4°C). Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h (-20°C). After centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min (4°C), the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed 3 times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was measured with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced at 56 °C for 30 min with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated for 15 min with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at the mass ratio of 1:50 trypsin-to-protein for the first digestion overnight and the mass ratio of 1:100 trypsin-to-protein for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT labeling After the trypsin was digested, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT-6plex kit. In brief, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstructed in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). In short, peptides were first separated into 60 fractions with a gradient of 8-32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. The peptides were then combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 24 min, 25% to 40% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. For full scan, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. And intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 20 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Candida albicans database (17,719 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. Bioinformatics analyses Annotation Methods Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The wolfpsort soft was used to predict subcellular localization.  Functional Enrichment analysis  A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway and protein domain with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant.  Enrichment-based Clustering  The enrichment-based clustering analysis was performed using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.  Dynamic cluster analysis  For dynamic cluster analysis, the relative expression quantitative data between the different comparison groups is combined according to the protein ID, form a protein expression amount data matrix. Then, the obtained data matrix was transformed by logarithmic log2 and then normalized, so that the expression amount of each protein between different comparison groups was a group of numbers with 0 as the mean value and 1 as the standard deviation. Finally, the normalized data set uses the Mufzz toolset to make cluster analysis. Analysis parameters included the following: cluster number “c” was 4, and clustering ambiguity “m” was 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Quantitative proteomics, Acquired azole resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Nana Song

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofang Li
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


