### Accession
PXD022652

### Title
A WDR35-dependent coatomer transports ciliary membrane proteins from the Golgi to the cilia

### Description
Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is a highly conserved mechanism for motor-driven transport of cargo inside cilia. However, the mechanism of selective transport of cargo to cilia and entry across the diffusion barrier is not well understood. WDR35/IFT121 is a component of the IFT-A complex, best known for ciliary retrograde transport. Small Wdr35 mutant cilia are formed but fail to enrich in diverse classes of ciliary membrane proteins. Whilst the assembly of the IFT-B complex is unaffected, these exhibit retrograde trafficking defects in Wdr35 mutants. In contrast, the IFT-A peripheral components are degraded and core components remain stuck at the cilia base. The deep sequence homology and structural similarity of WDR35 and other IFT-As to the coatomer COPI proteins α and ß’, and accumulation of electron-light vesicles around Wdr35 mutant cilia, suggest that WDR35 is required to form coated vesicles delivering cargo from the Golgi necessary for cilia elongation. This is the first insitu proof towards a novel coatomer function for WDR35 and likely other IFT-A proteins in transporting ciliary membrane proteins from the Golgi.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purified proteins were subjected to limited proteolysis on-beads in 2M urea, 100mM tris, 1mM DTT and 0.3 ug trypsin, at 27C for 30 minutes.  Supernatant was then removed and incubated overnight at 37C to complete the digets.  Excess iodoacetamide alkylated the librated peptides, which were then desalted on stage-tips and separated with online nano-hplc. Loading was with 0.1% TFA and separation on gradient 4-29% acetonitrile in 40 minutes then to 80% in 6 minutes with 0.5% acetic acid throughout. Data acquisition on Q Exactive Plus in data dependent mode with precursor scan 300-1650 @70k, MS2 isloation 1.4, NCE 28 and dynamic exclusion 10s.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4/1.5.6.5/1.5.7.4 and uniprot mouse proteome release 2017_08/2016_11/2017_01

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ifta, Ciliary membrane, Wdr35, Cilia

### Affiliations
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Jimi Wills

### Lab Head
Dr Pleasantine Mill
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU


