### Accession
PXD008691

### Title
Translation deficits drive C9orf72 associated poly-GR/PR toxicity

### Description
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients with the C9orf72 mutation show predominantly cytoplasmic aggregates of poly-GR and poly-PR proteins that are acutely toxic in various model systems. To identify the molecular mediators of neurotoxicity of poly-GR/PR, we analyzed their interactomes in primary neurons. GFP-(GR)149 and (PR)175-GFP preferentially interacted with RNA-binding proteins, including stress granule-associated and nucleolar proteins, as well as ribosomes. Overexpression of the poly-GR/PR interactors Staufen 1/2 (STAU1/2) and YBX1 led to cytoplasmic aggregation of poly-GR/PR into large stress granule-like inclusions, while the poly-GR/PR interactor nucleophosmin (NPM1) recruited poly-GR into the nucleolus. In addition, poly-PR expression reduced ribosome levels and translation, which is consistent with the widespread reduction of synaptic proteins detected by proteomics. Surprisingly, only GFP-(GR)53, but not GFP-(GR)149, localized to the nucleolus and reduced ribosome levels and translation in neurons, suggesting impaired ribosome biogenesis is driving the acute toxicity commonly observed in vitro. In C9orf72 patient brains, we detected co-aggregation of poly-GR/PR inclusions with ribosomes, but not stress granules. Partial sequestration of ribosomes may chronically impair protein synthesis and contribute to C9orf72 ALS/FTD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of poly-GR and poly-PR aggregates in neurons and HEK293FT Quadruplicates of GFP-(GR)149, (PR)175-GFP or GFP infected cortical neurons (DIV7+8) and transfected HEK293FT cells were harvested in Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma) containing lysis buffer (2% TritonX-100, 750 mM NaCl, 1 mM KH2PO4). Cell lysates were rotated for 45 minutes at 4°C. 10% was kept for whole proteome analysis while the remaining samples were centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C. With GFP antibody (clone N86/38, Neuromab, Davis, CA, USA) pre-incubated Protein-G Dynabeads (Life Technologies) were added to the rest of the supernatant and incubated for 3 h at 4°C. After three washing steps (in 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol) and used for further sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis.   LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated on a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) via in-house packed columns (75 μm inner diameter, 30 cm length, 1.9 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) in a gradient of buffer A (0.5% formic acid in H20) to buffer B (0.5% formic acid, in H2O and 80% acetonitrile) at 300 nL/mL flowrate. For IPs we increased the content of buffer B from 2% to 30% in 85 min before increasing the concentration of buffer B to 95% to wash the column. For complete proteomes we increased the content of buffer B from 5% to 30% in 155 min before increasing the concentration of buffer B to 95% to wash the column. The column temperature was set to 60°C. A Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Scheltema et al. 2014) (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was directly coupled to the LC via nano electrospray source. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scan range was set from 300 to 1,650 m/z, with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to the 15 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2 were subjected to collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.4 Th and a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion to minimize resequencing was set to 30 s (proteome) or 20 s (IP). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis and statistics To process MS raw files, we employed the MaxQuant software (v 1.5.3.54 for HEK data, 1.5.4.3 for neuron data) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011), against the UniProtKB Rat FASTA database (08/2015) and UniProtKB human FASTA (08/2015), respectively, using default settings. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing cleavage N-terminally to proline and up to 2 mis-cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, acetylation (N-terminus) and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. For rat neuron data, the FDR was independently calculated and applied for IP samples and complete proteomes by setting individual parameter groups in MaxQuant. ‘Match between runs’, which allows the transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of sequencing after nonlinear retention time alignment, was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min. Protein identification required at least one razor peptide. Data were filtered for common contaminants (n=247). Peptides only identified by site-modification were excluded from further analysis. Proteins were normalized with MaxLFQ label free normalization. For bioinformatic analysis as well as visualization we used the open PERSEUS (v 1.5.2.12, 1.5.3.4, 1.5.4.2, 1.5.5.5, 1.5.8.7) environment (Tyanova et al., 2016), MaxQuant (neurons: 1.5.4.3, HEK: 1.5.3.54) and the R framework (Team, R Development Core, 2008). Imputation of missing values was performed with a normal distribution (width = 0.3; shift = 1.8). For pairwise comparison of proteomes and determination of significant differences in protein abundances, t-test statistics were applied with a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% and S0 of 1 (Tusher et al., 2001), requiring at least 66% valid values in at least one group per comparison. For the 1D and 2D annotation we first matched gene ontology data (GOMF name, GOCC name, GOCC slim name, GOBP slim name, Kegg and Uniprot Keywords) to the protein identifiers (Major ID) in Perseus. Moreover, the annotation for stress granule proteins identified by Jain et al. (Jain et al., 2016) for humans was assigned both for HEK and rat neuron data. Stress granule annotations were transferred from human to rat for genes with identical gene names in both species. The 1D and 2D annotation enrichment was performed on the Welch-test difference in the Perseus environment. FDR control was performed using the Benjamini Hochberg (BH) correction separately within each annotation category, e.g. GOCC or GOBP. Accordingly, the FDR cutoff (q-value < 5%) relates to slightly different p-values in the different annotation categories, thereby leading to significant (black) and insignificant (grey) populations slightly overlapping in the –log10(p-value) dimension in the 1D annotation plots (figure S4 B). The 2D annotation plots show annotation terms with q-values smaller than 0.1. Both 1D and 2D annotation terms were filtered for terms comprising at least six proteins quantified by mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Ribosome, Interactome, Ftld, Proteomics, Als, Nucleolus, Dpr proteins, Stress granules, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Proteomics
DZNE: German center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Munich, https://www.dzne.de/index.php?id=105&L=1

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Edbauer
DZNE: German center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Munich, https://www.dzne.de/index.php?id=105&L=1


