### Accession
PXD014008

### Title
A MYC2, MYC3, MYC4-dependent transcription factor network regulates touch responses in plants

### Description
Plants are continuously exposed to environmental triggers, including mechanical stimulation. Our results demonstrate that jasmonic acid (JA)-signalling plays a key role in very early gene expression changes, well before it leads to touch-induced developmental changes. We show that the JA-activated transcription factors MYC2/MYC3/MYC4 co-regulate touch-induced gene expression of 266 genes, many of which peak in induction around 25 minutes and then rapidly decline by 40-60 minutes. ChIP-seq shows that MYC2 dynamically binds hundreds of touch-induced promoters within 25 minutes. Promoter activation assays confirm that MYC2 directly activates these touch-induced promoters. By combining multi-omic data, we have identified a core MYC2/3/4-dependent ‘touch regulon’, containing many previously-unknown MYC2 targets like bHLH19 and ERF109. We show bHLH19 can in turn directly activate the ORA47 promoter, indicating that MYC2/3/4 initiate a hierarchical network of downstream transcription factors. Through hormone profiling we reveal the rapid touch-induced accumulation of JA/JA-isoleucine is directly controlled by MYC2/3/4 in a positive amplification loop regulating JA-biosynthesis genes.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 200mg of ground seedlings were resuspended in 400 ul of 125m mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 7% SDS, 0.5% PVP-40, 25 mM DTT, 1 mM complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and vortexed repeatedly over the course of 5 minutes. Debris was pelleted by centrifugation and 250 ul of supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. chloroform:methanol extraction was performed79 and the protein layer washed twice in methanol. The pellet was then treated with -20°C 90 % acetone for 2h with the acteone being changed after 1 hour. Pellets were resuspended in 1 % SDS, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT and treated with 25 mM iodoacetic acid for 30 min in the dark before digestion with trypsin (life Sciences) 1:20. Samples were cleaned up by combined J4-SDS2 (Nest group) and C18 (Waters) HPLC columns before drying down in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide samples were analysed on a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Fusion over the course of 240 minutes using a 75 um * 20 mm trap column (ThermoFisher) and a 75 um * 500 mm analytical column (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Data files were converted to *.mzML (Msconvert 3.0.9992) before spectral matching through CometMS (2017.01 rev. 4) with reversed decoy database (TAIR10). Peptide scores were cut off at a false discovery rate of 2% and rescored through PeptideProphet (TPP v5.0.0 Typhoon) and protein lists assembled with ProteinProphet (TPP v5.0.0 Typhoon). Relative abundance measurements were assembled with Abacus80 and statistical analysis conducted through the DESeq2 packages77 in the R statistical computing environment (3.5.1). Proteins with at least an average of 5 spectral counts per replicate in at least one time point, and a median of the average spectral counts per time point higher than 3, were deemed as reliably quantified and retained for statistical analysis (4243 proteins,; Supplemental Table 15). Proteins with a fold change >1.5x and adjusted p-value < 0.05 (DESeq2) were retained as significantly differential. Additional MS1 data was extracted for a subset of proteins through the MS1 filtering workflow in Skyline (4.1.0.11796).

### Publication Abstract
Mechanical stimuli, such as wind, rain, and touch affect plant development, growth, pest resistance, and ultimately reproductive success. Using water spray to simulate rain, we demonstrate that jasmonic acid (JA) signaling plays a key role in early gene-expression changes, well before it leads to developmental changes in flowering and plant architecture. The JA-activated transcription factors MYC2/MYC3/MYC4 modulate transiently induced expression of 266 genes, most of which peak within 30 min, and control 52% of genes induced &gt;100-fold. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing analysis indicates that MYC2 dynamically binds &gt;1,300 promoters and <i>trans</i>-activation assays show that MYC2 activates these promoters. By mining our multiomic datasets, we identified a core MYC2/MYC3/MYC4-dependent "regulon" of 82 genes containing many previously unknown MYC2 targets, including transcription factors <i>bHLH19</i> and <i>ERF109</i> bHLH19 can in turn directly activate the <i>ORA47</i> promoter, indicating that MYC2/MYC3/MYC4 initiate a hierarchical network of downstream transcription factors. Finally, we also reveal that rapid water spray-induced accumulation of JA and JA-isoleucine is directly controlled by MYC2/MYC3/MYC4 through a positive amplification loop that regulates JA-biosynthesis genes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Touch respose, Myc2

### Affiliations
Lund University Sölvegatan 35 223 62 – Lund Sweden
UWA

### Submitter
Owen Duncan

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Van Aken
Lund University Sölvegatan 35 223 62 – Lund Sweden


