### Accession
PXD033111

### Title
An organotypic model of human skin simulates the dermonecrotic effects of Naja nigricollis envenoming

### Description
Snakebite envenoming is a neglected tropical disease that kills and maims hundreds of thousands annually. Naja nigricollis, the black-necked spitting cobra, has a cytotoxin-rich venom that is able to cause severe dermonecrosis and is not efficiently neutralized by current antivenoms. Here, we introduce an organotypic model of human skin to study the effects of exposure to N. nigricollis venom on human cells and compare it to the currently available in vivo mouse model. Histologically, the organotypic model simulates the severe necrotic lesions observed in mice. Proteomically, we show that among widespread global changes in protein abundance, many pathways involved in skin homeostasis and wound healing are specifically affected in both models. These results are the first to suggest that this organotypic model can simulate dermonecrosis caused by N. nigricollis venom and could thus be used to bridge the gap between in vitro and animal-based experiments for the study of the venom-induced cytotoxicity. This is an initial step towards replacing such animal-based experiments, which are associated with pain and tissue damage. The organotypic model may also find utility in evaluating the efficacy of new therapeutics against the severe and long-lasting consequences of snakebite envenoming in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Two-to-three mg of the organotypic models and mouse skin samples (both controls and venom-subjected samples) were placed into PCT microtubes containing 30 μL of 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and homogenized in a Barocycler (Pressure Bioscences, Inc) for 60 cycles of 20 sec at 45 kpsi and 10 sec at atmospheric pressure, at 33 ˚C. The homogenates were reduced and alkylated by adding 1 μL of 400 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 3 μL of 200 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubated for 30 min at ambient temperature with 600 rpm shaking. The samples were digested using Lys-C at a ratio of 1:100 Lys-C:Protein (w:w), with the microtubes placed into the Barocycler for 45 cycles of 50 sec at 20 kpsi and 10 sec at atmospheric pressure, at 33 ˚C. After that, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:20 trypsin:protein (w:w), and the microtubes were placed back into the Barocycler for 90 cycles of 50 sec at 20 kpsi and 10 sec at atmospheric pressure, at 33 ˚C. Digestion was stopped by acidifying with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for a final concentration of 1%. The digests were desalted using tips packed with Empore C18 discs (ThermoFisher Scientific, 13-110-019) with approximately 5-10 μg/plug peptide capacity. The C18 membrane was activated with 100% methanol (MeOH), and equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid (FA). The samples were loaded onto the column, washed twice with 0.1% FA, and then eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% TFA. The eluate was dried under vacuum at 30 °C, re-suspended in LC–MS buffer (2% ACN, 1% TFA), and the peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop One Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Mass spectrometry data were collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated for 140 min on a 50 cm × 75 μm microcapillary PepMap RSLC C18 resin (2 μm, ThermoFisher Scientific, TF164711), packed inside an EasySpray ES803A column. For analysis, 500 ng of samples were loaded onto the analytical column. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3 × 106 or a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1,750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained with a top 10 method at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 × 106 or maximum injection time of 60 ms, normalised collision energy of 25, and an intensity threshold of 1 × 103. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s, and ions with a charge state 1 were filtered out. The gradient started with 10% buffer B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) and increased to 23% buffer B in 85 min. It further increased to 38% buffer B in 30 minutes, before finally going to 60% buffer B in 10 minutes. A washing step with 95% buffer B was then performed for 15 min. Mobile phase buffer A contained ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from the analysis of the organotypic samples were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software. The Sequest engine was used for assigning spectra to peptides, with human proteins included as the target database (reviewed human proteome database was downloaded from UniProt, accessed September 14th, 2017, 42,157 sequences ). Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide minimum length was set to 6 residues, while maximum length was 144. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) was added as static modification, while methionine oxidation (+15.995) and the protein N-terminal modifications acetylation (+42.011), methionine loss (-131.040 Da), and methionine loss plus acetylation (-89.030 Da) were included as variable modifications. Only b and y fragment ions were considered for precursor identification. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was controlled with the Percolator node, and protein and peptide target FDRs were set to 1% and 5% for strict and relaxed targets, respectively. For label-free quantification, the Minora Feature Detector node was added in the processing workflow, and the Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier were added in the consensus workflow. Unique and razor peptides were considered for protein quantification, and normalization mode was set to total peptide amount. All other node settings were set to default values. The raw data from mouse samples were searched with the same settings, with the exception of the FASTA database used in the Sequest node, which was set to the mouse UniProt proteome (reviewed murine proteome database was downloaded from UniProt, accessed September 9th, 2020, 25,101 sequences ). Search results were exported for further post-processing.

### Publication Abstract
Snakebite envenoming was reintroduced as a Category A Neglected Tropical Disease by the World Health Organization in 2017. Since then, increased attention has been directed towards this affliction and towards the development of a deeper understanding of how snake venoms exert their toxic effects and how antivenoms can counter them. However, most of our in vivo generated knowledge stems from the use of animal models which do not always accurately reflect how the pathogenic effects of snake venoms manifest in humans. Moreover, animal experiments are associated with pain, distress, and eventually animal sacrifice due to the toxic nature of snake venoms. Related to this, the implementation of the 3Rs principle (Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement) in the use of experimental animals in snakebite envenoming research is recommended by the World Health Organization. Therefore, more humane experimental designs and new in vitro/ex vivo alternatives for experimental animals are sought after. Here, we report the use of an organotypic model of human skin to further elucidate the pathophysiology of the dermonecrotic effects caused by the venom of the black-necked spitting cobra, Naja nigricollis, in humans. The goal of this study is to expand the repertoire of available models that can be used to study the local tissue damages induced by cytotoxic venoms.

### Keywords
Skin organotypic, 3d cell culture, Dda, Naja nigricollis, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Keratinocyte, Dermonecrosis, Cytotoxin, Snakebite envenoming

### Affiliations
DTU Bioengineering
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
DTU Bioengineering


