### Accession
PXD034932

### Title
Data for demonstrating new features in compareMS2 2.0

### Description
This submission contains datasets from several species used to demonstrate new features in compareMS2 2.0.  Tandem mass spectrometry data from California sea lion, chimpanzee, dog, human, rock hyrax, and white-tailed deer sera were graciously provided with permission from an ongoing collaboration with Dr. Michael G. Janech (College of Charleston) as part of the CoMPARe Program (Comparative Mammalian Proteome Aggregator Resource). Specifically, the California sea lion sera were provided by The Marine Mammal Center (Sausalito, CA), the chimpanzee, rock hyrax, and white-tailed deer sera were provided by The Chattanooga Zoo, and the dog serum from Gus (Ohlandt Veterinary Clinic, Charleston, SC). In addition to institutional and NMFS permits and approval, data collection was performed under NIST ACUC MML-AR20-0001. The identification of certain commercial equipment, instruments, software, or materials does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the products identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

### Sample Protocol
All datasets are from blood sera, reduced (DTT), alkylated (iodoacetamide), digested with trypsin and analyzed by reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using different mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using compareMS2 version 2.0.0. However, for the PRIDE submission, all data was also searched against the human reference proteome from UniProt (reviewed sequences only) using Comet version 2018.01 rev. 4 in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
It has long been known that biological species can be identified from mass spectrometry data alone. Ten years ago, we described a method and software tool, compareMS2, for calculating a distance between sets of tandem mass spectra, as routinely collected in proteomics. This method has seen use in species identification and mixture characterization in food and feed products, as well as other applications. Here, we present the first major update of this software, including a new metric, a graphical user interface and additional functionality. The data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with dataset identifier PXD034932.

### Keywords
Molecular phylogenetics, Serum

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics

### Submitter
Magnus Palmblad

### Lab Head
Dr Magnus Palmblad
Leiden University Medical Center


