### Accession
PXD001340

### Title
PIP4kγ is a substrate for mTORC1

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate 4-kinases (PIP4ks) are a family of lipid kinases that specifically use PI-5-P as a substrate to synthesize PI-4,5-P2. Suppression of PIP4k function in Drosophila results in smaller cells and reduced target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) signaling. We showed that the γ isoform of PIP4k stimulated signaling through mammalian TORC1 (mTORC1). Knockdown of PIP4kγ reduced cell mass in cells in which mTORC1 is constitutively activated by Tsc2 deficiency. In Tsc2 null cells mTORC1 activation was partially independent of amino acids or glucose and glutamine. PIP4kγ knockdown inhibited the nutrient-independent activation of mTORC1 in Tsc2 knockdown cells and reduced basal mTORC1 signaling in wild-type cells. PIP4kγ was phosphorylated by mTORC1 and associated with the complex. Phosphorylated PIP4kγ was enriched in light microsomal vesicles, whereas the unphosphorylated form was enriched in heavy microsomal vesicles associated with the Golgi. Furthermore, basal mTORC1 signaling was enhanced by overexpression of an unphosphorylated wild-type PIP4kγ and phosphorylation-defective mutant and decreased by overexpression of a phosphorylation mimetic mutant. Together these results demonstrate that PIP4kγ and mTORC1 interact in a self-regulated feedback loop to maintain low and tightly regulated mTORC1 activation during starvation.

### Sample Protocol
PIP4kγ immunoprecipitates were separated using SDS-PAGE, the gel was stained with Coomassie blue, and the PIP4kγ band was excised. Samples were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and in-gel digestion with trypsin or chymotrypsin overnight at pH 8.3, followed by reversed-phase microcapillary/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS was performed using an Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a self-packed 75 µm id x 15 cm C18 column connected to a hybrid linear ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent acquisition and positive ion mode at 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra collected via collision induced dissociation in the ion trap were searched against the concatenated target and decoy (reversed) Swiss-Prot and PIP4kγ  single entry protein databases using Sequest with differential modifications for Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.97) and the sample processing artifacts Met oxidation (+15.99), deamidation of Asn and Gln (+0.984) and Cys alkylation (+57.029) as affixed modification. Phosphorylated and unphosphorylated peptide sequences were identified if they initially passed the following Sequest scoring thresholds against the target database: 1+ ions, Xcorr ≥ 2.0 Sf ≥ 0.4, P ≥ 5; 2+ ions, Xcorr ≥ 2.0, Sf ≥ 0.4, P ≥ 5; 3+ ions, Xcorr ≥ 2.60, Sf ≥ 0.4, P ≥ 5 against the target protein database.  Passing MS/MS spectra were manually inspected to be sure that all b- and y- fragmentions aligned with the assigned sequence and modification sites. Determination of the exact sites of phosphorylation was aided using FuzzyIons and GraphMod software (Proteomics Browser Software suite, Harvard University). False discovery rates (FDR) of peptide hits were estimated below 1.2% based on reversed database hits.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate 4-kinases (PIP4ks) are a family of lipid kinases that specifically use phosphatidylinositol 5-monophosphate (PI-5-P) as a substrate to synthesize phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2]. Suppression of PIP4k function in Drosophila results in smaller cells and reduced target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) signaling. We showed that the &#x3b3; isoform of PIP4k stimulated signaling through mammalian TORC1 (mTORC1). Knockdown of PIP4k&#x3b3; reduced cell mass in cells in which mTORC1 is constitutively activated by Tsc2 deficiency. In Tsc2 null cells, mTORC1 activation was partially independent of amino acids or glucose and glutamine. PIP4k&#x3b3; knockdown inhibited the nutrient-independent activation of mTORC1 in Tsc2 knockdown cells and reduced basal mTORC1 signaling in wild-type cells. PIP4k&#x3b3; was phosphorylated by mTORC1 and associated with the complex. Phosphorylated PIP4k&#x3b3; was enriched in light microsomal vesicles, whereas the unphosphorylated form was enriched in heavy microsomal vesicles associated with the Golgi. Furthermore, basal mTORC1 signaling was enhanced by overexpression of unphosphorylated wild-type PIP4k&#x3b3; or a phosphorylation-defective mutant and decreased by overexpression of a phosphorylation-mimetic mutant. Together, these results demonstrate that PIP4k&#x3b3; and mTORC1 interact in a self-regulated feedback loop to maintain low and tightly regulated mTORC1 activation during starvation.

### Keywords
Phosphoinositide, Mtorc1, Pip4k, Pip4kγ, Phossphatidylinositol-5-phosphate 4-kinase

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine Department of Medicine Boston, MA  02118 USA
BBRI

### Submitter
Deborah Sarkes

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia E. Rameh
Boston University School of Medicine Department of Medicine Boston, MA  02118 USA


