### Accession
PXD012694

### Title
RASSF1A controls Tissue Stiffness and Cancer Stem-like Cells in Lung Adenocarcinoma

### Description
Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death due to poor treatment responses and resistance arising from tumor heterogeneity. Here we show that adverse prognosis associated with epigenetic silencing of the tumour suppressor RASSF1A is due to increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), tumour stiffness and metastatic dissemination in vitro and in vivo. We find that lung cancer cells with RASSF1A promoter methylation display constitutive nuclear YAP1 and expression of collagen prolylhydroxylase (P4HA2) which increases collagen deposition. Furthermore, we identify that elevated collagen creates a stiff-ECM which in turn triggers cancer stem-like programming and metastatic dissemination in vivo. Re-expression of RASSF1A or inhibition of P4HA2 activity reverse these effects and increase markers of lung differentiation (TTF-1, Mucin5B). Our study identifies RASSF1A as a clinical biomarker associated with mechanical properties of ECM which increases levels of cancer stemness and risk of metastatic progression in lung adenocarcinoma. Moreover, we highlight P4HA2 as a potential target for uncoupling ECM signals that support cancer stemness.

### Sample Protocol
1299 cells expressing empty pcDNA3 or RASSF1A vector were growing for 2 weeks in presence of 100μg/ml L-ascorbic acid. ECM was extracted by 0.5% DOC (Unsöld et al, 2001) and incubated with 0.5 M acetic solution overnight at 4°C. Collected ECM in acetic acid was reduced by 20mM DTT Sigma), followed by incubation in 30mM iodoacetamide alkylating reagent (Sigma). Proteins from ECM were precipitated via methanol/chloroform extraction and re-suspended in 6M urea in 0.1M Tris pH7.8 by vortexing and sonication. Final protein concentration was measured by BCA. Thirty micrograms of protein was further diluted to bring urea <1M and digested with immobilised trypsin (Fisher Scientific) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by acidification of the solution with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Fisher Scientific). After digestion, samples were desalted by solid phase using C18+carbon Spin tip and dried down using a Speed Vac. Dried tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 20 μl of 2% acetonitrile-98%H2O and 0.1% TFA and subsequently analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was searched against the Human UniProt database (November 2015; containing 20274 human sequences) using Mascot data search engine (v2.3). The search was carried out by enabling the Decoy function, whilst selecting trypsin as enzyme (allowing 1 missed cleavage), peptide charge of +2, +3, +4 ions, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS of 0.05 Da; #13C at 1; Carboamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; and Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation on (STY) as a variable modification. MASCOT data search results were filtered using ion score cut off at 20 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A qualitative analysis of proteins identified was performed using a Venn diagram and only proteins identified with two or more peptides were taken into consideration.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hippo pathway, Extracellular matrix., Stiffness, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
Dept. of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Eric O'Neil
Dept. of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK


