### Accession
PXD044504

### Title
Structural analysis of PLD3 reveals insights into the mechanism of lysosomal 5' exonuclease-mediated nucleic acid degradation

### Description
The phospholipase D (PLD) family is comprised of enzymes bearing phospholipase activity towards lipids or endo- and exonuclease activity towards nucleic acids. PLD3 is synthesized as a type II transmembrane protein and proteolytically cleaved in lysosomes yielding a soluble active form. The deficiency of PLD3 leads to the slowed degradation of nucleic acids in lysosomes and chronic activation of nucleic acid-specific intracellular toll-like receptors. While the mechanism of PLD phospholipase activity has been extensively characterized, not much is known about how PLDs bind and hydrolyze nucleic acids. Here, we determined the high-resolution crystal structure of the luminal N-glycosylated domain of human PLD3 in its apo- and single-stranded DNA-bound forms. PLD3 has a typical phospholipase fold and forms homodimers with two independent catalytic centers via a newly identified dimerization interface. The structure of PLD3 in complex with an ssDNA-derived thymidine product in the catalytic center provides insights into the substrate binding mode of nucleic acids in the PLD family. Our structural data suggest a mechanism for substrate binding and nuclease activity in the PLD family and provide the structural basis to design immunomodulatory drugs targeting PLD3.

### Sample Protocol
After incubation of hPLD3 with mouse liver lysosomes followed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining, gel bands (0 h and 18 h) were excised from the gel and split into two halves to be processed by the two proteases pepsin and elastase, respectively. The halves were further cut into 2 mm3 cubes and destained with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 30% acetonitrile (ACN), 50 mM ABC and 100% ACN. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 65 °C for 30 min and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Gel bands were dehydrated using ACN, and then the buffer was exchanged using HEPES buffer (100 mM pH 7.0) and dehydrated again. Reductive dimethylation of free amino groups was performed using 30 mM formaldehyde and 15 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (200 mM HEPES, pH 7) for 8 h at 37 °C. The reaction was quenched by adding 0.9 M Tris buffer (overnight). Gel pieces were then washed, dehydrated, and the protein deglycosylated by the addition of PNGaseF (100 Units) overnight in the presence of ABC buffer at 37 °C. Gel pieces were dehydrated and then incubated (overnight, 37 °C) with 200 ng of either pepsin in the presence of 10 mM HCl or elastase in the presence of ABC buffer. Eluted peptides were then subjected to LC-MS analysis. Protein digests were injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). The samples were washed on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) for 2 min with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex). A flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05%  formic acid (FA)) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% FA) was used for gradient separation (5-40% B). Spray voltage was applied on a metal-coated PicoTip emitter (10 μm tip size, New Objective, Woburn, Massachusetts, US) with a source temperature of 250 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 300 and 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the top 10 most intense precursors with charge state greater than 2+ were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and with HCD normalized collision energies of 27 at a resolution of 17,500. Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (20 s) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2, and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a database containing common contaminants, PNGaseF, recombinant PLD3, and the mouse database. The enzyme specificity was set to unspecific. An MS1 tolerance of 15 ppm and an MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. Oxidation (15.995 Da) of methionine residues, deamidated asparagine (0.0984 Da), dimethylation (28.031 Da), and glutamine to pyroglutamate (-17.027 Da) at the N-terminus were set as a variable modification. Carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues was set as a static modification. Dimethylation on lysine residues was set either as a fixed modification on lysine residues or as a variable modification. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. In addition to the above-mentioned variable modifications, the spectra were also searched for cysteine oxidation, cysteine sulfonate, i.e., trioxidation (47.9847 Da) was set as a variable modification along with carbamidomethylation

### Publication Abstract
The phospholipase D (PLD) family is comprised of enzymes bearing phospholipase activity towards lipids or endo- and exonuclease activity towards nucleic acids. PLD3 is synthesized as a type II transmembrane protein and proteolytically cleaved in lysosomes, yielding a soluble active form. The deficiency of PLD3 leads to the slowed degradation of nucleic acids in lysosomes and chronic activation of nucleic acid-specific intracellular toll-like receptors. While the mechanism of PLD phospholipase activity has been extensively characterized, not much is known about how PLDs bind and hydrolyze nucleic acids. Here, we determined the high-resolution crystal structure of the luminal N-glycosylated domain of human PLD3 in its apo- and single-stranded DNA-bound forms. PLD3 has a typical phospholipase fold and forms homodimers with two independent catalytic centers via a newly identified dimerization interface. The structure of PLD3 in complex with an ssDNA-derived thymidine product in the catalytic center provides insights into the substrate binding mode of nucleic acids in the PLD family. Our structural data suggest a mechanism for substrate binding and nuclease activity in the PLD family and provide the structural basis to design immunomodulatory drugs targeting PLD3.

### Keywords
Lysosome, 5' exonuclease, Dna/rna degradation, Phospholipase d, Structural biology, Pld3

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany


