### Accession
PXD002775

### Title
Extrarenal α-klotho expression in human tissues

### Description
α-Klotho has emerged as a powerful regulator of the ageing process. To-date, the expression profile of α-Klotho in human tissues is unknown and its existence in some human tissue types is subject to much controversy. Objective: This is the first study to characterize system-wide tissue expression of transmembrane α-Klotho in humans. We have employed next generation targeted proteomic analysis using Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) in parallel with conventional antibody-based methods to determine the expression and spatial distribution of human α-Klotho expression in health. Results: The distribution of α-Klotho in human tissues from various organ systems, including arterial, epithelial, endocrine, reproductive and neuronal tissues was first identified by immunohistochemistry. Kidney tissues showed strong α-Klotho expression, while liver did not reveal a detectable signal. These results were next confirmed by western blotting of both whole tissues and primary cells. To validate our antibody-based results, α-Klotho expressing tissues were subjected to PRM mass spectrometry identifying peptides specific for the full length, transmembrane α-Klotho isoform. Conclusions: The data presented confirms α-Klotho expression in the kidney tubule and in artery, and provides evidence of α-Klotho expression across organ systems and cell-types that have not previously been described in humans.

### Sample Protocol
All protein samples (50microg) were fractionated on pre-cast SDS PAGE gels (Biorad, 456-1083, 4-15%, 10 well) and stained with Coomassie blue stain. All samples were either run with an empty lane in between or on separate gels to avoid sample-to-sample contamination.  In order to restrict analyses to the full length protein, only the gel band between 75kDa and 150kDa was resected for analysis, thus excluding Sα-Klotho (Figure 1A). Gel fractions were macerated with a sterile blade and subjected to in-gel digestion. Gel fractions were de-stained by 3 washes with 80microl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/50mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate, and washed with 100% ACN. The alkylation step was omitted, given the absence of Cysteine residues from target α-Klotho peptides. Tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37C with 60microl of trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade modified, V511A) in 50mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate (0.005microg/microl). This process yielded 25μl, of which 5μl (1μl for rh-α-Klotho) was subjected to nano-LC ESI-MS/MS and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) analysis in an Orbitrap nano-ESI Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a nanoLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC).  Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) A top10 DDA MS/MS analysis was performed first to assess sample quality. Samples were trapped on a 100μm × 2cm, C18, 5μm, 100Ȧ trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100) in ulPickUp Injection mode at 4 μL/min flow rate for 10 minutes. Samples were then loaded on a RSLC, 75μm × 50cm, nanoViper, C18, 3μm, 100Ȧ column (Acclaim, PepMap) retrofitted to an EASY-Spray source with a flow rate of 350nl/min (buffer A: HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. 60 minutes gradient; 0-5 min: 5% buffer B, 5-45 min: 5->56% buffer B, 45.1-50 min: 56%->95% buffer B, 50.1-60 min: 5% buffer B). Peptides were transferred to the gaseous phase with positive ion electrospray ionization at 1.8kV. In DDA the top10 precursors were acquired between 400 and 1600 m/z with a 2Th (Thomson) selection window, dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds, normalised collision energy (NCE) of 25 and resolution of 70,000. For PRM, precursors were targeted in a 2Th selection window around the m/z of interest. Precursors were fragmented in HCD mode with NCE energy dependent on the target peptide. MS1 was performed at a 70,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum C-trap fill time of 200ms; MS/MS was performed at 35,000 resolution, an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum C-trap fill time of 100ms. Spectra were analysed using Skyline and/or MASCOT, with manual validation. A peptide was considered present when at least one fragment ion was detected by Skyline, in addition to the identification of a clear isotope pattern of the fragment ion in the raw data, at the expected retention time for the parent peptide.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and statistical analysis  Skyline analysis utilised .raw Thermo files. For MASCOT searches, .mgf files were generated from .raw Thermo files using MSconvert, uploaded in MASCOT and searched against a human database (Uniprot 2013) using the following settings: carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification; 25 ppm peptide tolerance, 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; maximum of 2 missed cleavages, peptide selection charge of +2, +3 or +4 and selection of a decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Prm, Ontogeny, Klotho

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Laurent Gatto

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics University of Cambridge


