### Accession
PXD033607

### Title
Dairying enabled Early Bronze Age Yamnaya steppe expansions - additional files

### Description
This project explores dietary proteins in human dental calculus through shotgun proteomics. These files are in addition to those accidentally not included in the original publication, Dairying enabled Early Bronze Age Yamnaya steppe expansions . DOI https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03798-4. Files include raw, mgf, and mzid files from the two Botai individuals: DA092 (Botai 2A), DA089 (CII(3) 30-40), and additional files from Russian sites: DA431, DA431 (Lebyazhinka 5, LEB N-0), Z333 (Khvalynsk 2, KHA2 N-12), and Z444 (Murziha 2, MUR2 N-128) as well as the blanks used in the experiments. It also inlcludes the corresponding files for DA436, as in the previous upload an under-injected sample was included as the MDF.

### Sample Protocol
We used a single pot, solid phase sample extraction (SP3) modified for ancient human dental calculus. Digestion with trypsin and then peptides were measured via LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to MGFs and searched in Mascot. Results were further filtered with MS-MARGE, a custom R script. See original paper for info on how to download and use MS-MARGE.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms archaeology dental calculus milk

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Histoy, Department of Archaeology
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Shevan Wilkin

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Boivin
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Histoy, Department of Archaeology


