### Accession
PXD022364

### Title
In vitro phosphorylated GR LBD LC-MSMS

### Description
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand dependent transcription factor that plays a central role in inflammation. Part of a complex cellular network, GR activity is further modulated via protein–protein interactions . The regulation of GR by 14-3-3 proteins has been previously reported, though with differing sites of phosphorylation identified and variable consequences assigned. Hence, we sought to examine this protein–protein interaction and, using phosphorylated GR peptides, biophysical studies and X-ray crystallography, we identified key residues within the ligand binding domain of GR, T524 and S617, whose phosphorylation results in recognition by 14-3-3. Investigation of the kinases responsible for phosphorylation of these sites assigned a key role for MINK1 and cell-based approaches confirmed the importance of these two GR phosphosites and MINK1 in GR–14-3-3 binding. Together our results provide a molecular-level insight into 14-3-3 regulation of GR and highlight both MINK1 and the GR–14-3-3 axis as potential targets for future therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
The protein samples were phosphorylated with non-radioactive ATP. 10, 5, 3, 1 µg of protein sample, supplemented with 25% NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (4 ×) and 10% NuPAGE™ Sample Reducing Agent (10 ×), was run on a NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, 1.0 mm with MOPS buffer and the bands were reveal using Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Bands of interest were cut from the gel to be washed with water, 1:1 acetonitrile/water, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1:1 acetonitrile/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate successively for 10 min. The bands were reduced and alkylated with a solution of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at 65 °C followed by a solution of 50 mM iodoacetamide in ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min in the dark. The samples were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1:1 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile successively for 10 min and dried. The bands were digested with 10 ng/µL trypsin and 12.5 ng/µL chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature overnight. The material was extracted twice with 0.1% TFA/60% acetonitrile then dried before being analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The data files generated were searched against the in-house or Swissprot database using the software Mascot Daemon. The searches were then manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that plays a central role in inflammation. The GR activity is also modulated via protein-protein interactions, including binding of 14-3-3 proteins induced by GR phosphorylation. However, the specific phosphorylation sites on the GR that trigger these interactions and their functional consequences are less clear. Hence, we sought to examine this system in more detail. We used phosphorylated GR peptides, biophysical studies, and X-ray crystallography to identify key residues within the ligand-binding domain of the GR, T524 and S617, whose phosphorylation results in binding of the representative 14-3-3 protein 14-3-3&#x3b6;. A kinase screen identified misshapen-like kinase 1 (MINK1) as responsible for phosphorylating T524 and Rho-associated protein kinase 1 for phosphorylating S617; cell-based approaches confirmed the importance of both GR phosphosites and MINK1 but not Rho-associated protein kinase 1 alone in inducing GR-14-3-3 binding. Together our results provide molecular-level insight into 14-3-3-mediated regulation of the GR and highlight both MINK1 and the GR-14-3-3 axis as potential targets for future therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Mst2, In vitro phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Mink1, Mst1, Glucocorticoid receptor, Rock1, Ligand binding domain, Map4k4

### Affiliations
Research and Early Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden
Research and Early Development, Respiratory & Immunology, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.

### Submitter
Claire Munier

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew W. D. Perry
Research and Early Development, Respiratory & Immunology, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.


