### Accession
PXD019950

### Title
Targeted multiplexed proteomics of SARS-CoV-2 peptides in ALI cells

### Description
Human air-liquid-interface cultured cells (ALI) were infected with SARS-CoV-2 in presence or absence of the drug aprotinin. Targeted proteomics were performed on previously identified peptides modified with TMTpro.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). Dependent scans were performed on precursors matching a mass list of viral peptides modified with TMTpro reagents and their charge states (mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for matching precursors). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 40% B over 30 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 10 most intense precursors matching the target list per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 10”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.4 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a maximum injection time of 300 ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and a fixed first mass of 110 m/z. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds and 10 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software. HCD fragmented spectra were searched against a SARS-CoV-2 proteome FASTA file (UniProt pre-realease) by SequestHT and FDR was calculated using a target/decoy based approach. TMTpro reporter abundances were extracted and used for plotting and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of the current coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic. Protease inhibitors are under consideration as virus entry inhibitors that prevent the cleavage of the coronavirus spike (S) protein by cellular proteases. Herein, we showed that the protease inhibitor aprotinin (but not the protease inhibitor SERPINA1/alpha-1 antitrypsin) inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication in therapeutically achievable concentrations. An analysis of proteomics and translatome data indicated that SARS-CoV-2 replication is associated with a downregulation of host cell protease inhibitors. Hence, aprotinin may compensate for downregulated host cell proteases during later virus replication cycles. Aprotinin displayed anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity in different cell types (Caco2, Calu-3, and primary bronchial epithelial cell air-liquid interface cultures) and against four virus isolates. In conclusion, therapeutic aprotinin concentrations exert anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity. An approved aprotinin aerosol may have potential for the early local control of SARS-CoV-2 replication and the prevention of COVID-19 progression to a severe, systemic disease.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Targeted, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


