### Accession
PXD000892

### Title
Reproducible Automated Phosphopeptide Enrichment using Magnetic TiO2 and Ti-IMAC

### Description
We describe the application of magnetic TiO2 and Ti-IMAC for uniform automated phosphopeptide enrichment. Combining hyper-porous magnetic microspheres with a magnetic particle-handling robot enables rapid (45 minutes), reproducible (r2 = 0.80) and high-fidelity (> 90% purity) phosphopeptide purification in a 96-well format.

### Sample Protocol
Pdx1-Cre; KRASG12D/+; p53R172H/+ (KPC) pancreatic cancer cells (a kind gift from Dr. Owen Sansom, Beatson Institute, Glasgow) were maintained in DMEM (Gibco 41966052) +10% (v/v) FBS at 37ºC, 5% CO2. For “Heavy” SILAC isotopic labeling, KPC cells were grown in K/R-free DMEM (Caisson DMP49) supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS, 2.5 mM +8 Da L-lysine (Sigma Isotec 608041) and 2.5 mM +10 Da L-Arginine (Sigma Isotec 608033). “Light” KPC cells were grown to confluency in a 15cm dish, treated for 5 minutes with 100 ng/mL EGF (R&D Systems 236-EG), lysed in 6M urea buffer (6 M urea, 10 mM NaPPi, 20 mM HEPES pH 8), sonicated, centrifuged to clear cell debris and protein concentration was determined by BCA (Pierce 23225). “Heavy” KPC cells were treated identically but without the EGF stimulation. 10 mg of each protein lysate was digested with 100 μg Lys-C (Wako 125-05061) (24 hours) and 100 μg Trypsin (Worthington) (24 hours) using the FASP method. All experiments were performed with a KingFisher™ Flex (Thermo Scientific) magnetic particle-processing robot. The automated phosphopeptide enrichment program was developed using BindIt Software 3.0 (Thermo Scientific). The program file has been uploaded alongside the MS/MS data with the identifier: Automated_Phosphopeptide_Enrichment.msz. This program can be freely downloaded and run on any KingFisher™ Flex system. All samples subjected to data dependent analysis (DDA) were run on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a NanoLC-Ultra 2D (Eksigent). Reverse-phase chromatographic separation was carried out on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm packed with C18, 5 µm bead size, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific), and a 75µm i.d. x 30cm column packed in house with C18 (5 µm bead size, Reprosil-Gold, Dr Maisch) using a 120 minute gradient of 3-40% solvent B (MeCN 100% + 0.1% FA) against solvent A (H2O 100% + 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 106 ions. The 10 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using the HCD and scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 8 seconds. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.120025) as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files produced in Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt mouse database (2011_03 release, 15,082,690 entries) using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine / glutamine, isotopomeric labeled lysine and arginine (+8/+10 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold ≤0.05, a peptide ion Score ≥20 and a FDR ≤0.01 (evaluated by Percolator). Localization probabilities for the phosphorylated residue(s) were calculated with phosphoRS 3.1.

### Publication Abstract
Reproducible, comprehensive phosphopeptide enrichment is essential for studying phosphorylation-regulated processes. Here, we describe the application of hyper-porous magnetic TiO2 and Ti-IMAC microspheres for uniform automated phosphopeptide enrichment. Combining magnetic microspheres with a magnetic particle-handling robot enables rapid (45 min), reproducible (r2 &#x2265; 0.80) and high-fidelity (&gt;90% purity) phosphopeptide purification in a 96-well format. Automated phosphopeptide enrichment demonstrates reproducible synthetic phosphopeptide recovery across 2 orders of magnitude, "well-to-well" quantitative reproducibility indistinguishable to internal SILAC standards, and robust "plate-to-plate" reproducibility across 5 days of independent enrichments. As a result, automated phosphopeptide enrichment enables statistical analysis of label-free phosphoproteomic samples in a high-throughput manner. This technique uses commercially available, off-the-shelf components and can be easily adopted by any laboratory interested in phosphoproteomic analysis. We provide a free downloadable automated phosphopeptide enrichment program to facilitate uniform interlaboratory collaboration and exchange of phosphoproteomic data sets.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics automation

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Christopher Tape

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jørgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute


