### Accession
PXD014873

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum exported proteins co-immunoprecipitation LC-MS/MS

### Description
The malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, traffics the virulence protein P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) to the surface of infected red blood cells (RBCs) via membranous organelles known as the Maurer’s clefts. We developed a method for efficient enrichment of Maurer’s clefts and profiled the protein composition of this trafficking organelle. We identified 18 previously uncharacterised or poorly characterised Maurer’s cleft proteins. Transfectants expressing GFP-fusions of 7 of these proteins and confirmed their Maurer’s cleft location. Co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry identified interacting partners of these Maurer’s clefts proteins, providing a network map of protein-protein associations. We identified two key clusters of proteins that may function in the loading and unloading of PfEMP1 into and out of the Maurer’s clefts.

### Sample Protocol
Agarose beads were washed twice in 1 mM Tris-HCl prior to elution of bound proteins. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis as previously described (Batinovic et al., 2017). Briefly, proteins were eluted from GFP-Trap beads by the addition of 20% (v/v) trifluoroethanol in formic acid (0.1%, pH 2.4) and were incubated at 50°C for 5 min. The eluate was reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and neutralised with TEAB (tetraethylammonium bromide). Samples were digested with trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37 °C. Samples were analysed by ESI LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Elite (purified Maurer’s clefts) or Q Exactive (co-immunoprecipitations) mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra (ProteoWizard) were searched against a custom database containing the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 and UniProt human proteomes. Searches were performed on MASCOT (Matrix Science), with the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, three allowed missed cleavages and allowing for oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
The malaria parasite <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> traffics the virulence protein <i>P. falciparum</i> erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (<i>Pf</i>EMP1) to the surface of infected red blood cells (RBCs) via membranous organelles, known as the Maurer's clefts. We developed a method for efficient enrichment of Maurer's clefts and profiled the protein composition of this trafficking organelle. We identified 13 previously uncharacterized or poorly characterized Maurer's cleft proteins. We generated transfectants expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions of 7 proteins and confirmed their Maurer's cleft location. Using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we generated an interaction map of proteins at the Maurer's clefts. We identified two key clusters that may function in the loading and unloading of <i>Pf</i>EMP1 into and out of the Maurer's clefts. We focus on a putative <i>Pf</i>EMP1 loading complex that includes the protein GEXP07/CX3CL1-binding protein 2 (CBP2). Disruption of GEXP07 causes Maurer's cleft fragmentation, aberrant knobs, ablation of <i>Pf</i>EMP1 surface expression, and loss of the <i>Pf</i>EMP1-mediated adhesion. &#x394;GEXP07 parasites have a growth advantage compared to wild-type parasites, and the infected RBCs are more deformable and more osmotically fragile.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The trafficking of the virulence antigen <i>Pf</i>EMP1 and its presentation at the knob structures at the surface of parasite-infected RBCs are central to severe adhesion-related pathologies such as cerebral and placental malaria. This work adds to our understanding of how PfEMP1 is trafficked to the RBC membrane by defining the protein-protein interaction networks that function at the Maurer's clefts controlling PfEMP1 loading and unloading. We characterize a protein needed for virulence protein trafficking and provide new insights into the mechanisms for host cell remodeling, parasite survival within the host, and virulence.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Maurer's clefts

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Emma McHugh

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew WA Dixon
University of Melbourne


