### Accession
PXD021001

### Title
Novel carfilzomib-based combinations as potential therapeutic strategies for liposarcomas

### Description
Proteasome inhibitors, such as bortezomib and carfilzomib, have shown efficacy in anti-cancer therapy in hematological diseases but not in solid cancers. Here, we found that liposarcomas (LPS) are susceptible to proteasome inhibition, and identified drugs that synergize with carfilzomib, such as selinexor, an inhibitor of XPO1-mediated nuclear export. Through quantitative nuclear protein profiling and phospho-kinase arrays, we identified potential mode of actions of this combination, including interference with ribosome biogenesis and inhibition of pro-survival kinase PRAS40. Furthermore, by assessing global protein levels changes, FADS2, a key enzyme regulating fatty acids synthesis, was found down-regulated after proteasome inhibition. Interestingly, SC26196, an inhibitor of FADS2, synergized with carfilzomib. Finally, to identify further combinational options, we performed high-throughput drug screening and uncovered novel drug interactions with carfilzomib. For instance, cyclosporin A, a known immunosuppressive agent, enhanced carfilzomib’s efficacy in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, these results demonstrate that carfilzomib and its combinations could be repurposed for LPS clinical management.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of corresponding heavy or light-labeled DMSO or drug-treated extracts were mixed and 200 µg of protein were used for MS sample preparation. Heavy and light mixed samples were boiled at 95°C prior to separation on a 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min at 170 V. The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and each lane was divided into 8 equal fractions. For in-gel digestion, samples were destained (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasome inhibitors, such as bortezomib and carfilzomib, have shown efficacy in anti-cancer therapy in hematological diseases but not in solid cancers. Here, we found that liposarcomas (LPS) are susceptible to proteasome inhibition, and identified drugs that synergize with carfilzomib, such as selinexor, an inhibitor of XPO1-mediated nuclear export. Through quantitative nuclear protein profiling and phospho-kinase arrays, we identified potential mode of actions of this combination, including interference with ribosome biogenesis and inhibition of pro-survival kinase PRAS40. Furthermore, by assessing global protein levels changes, FADS2, a key enzyme regulating fatty acids synthesis, was found down-regulated after proteasome inhibition. Interestingly, SC26196, an inhibitor of FADS2, synergized with carfilzomib. Finally, to identify further combinational options, we performed high-throughput drug screening and uncovered novel drug interactions with carfilzomib. For instance, cyclosporin A, a known immunosuppressive agent, enhanced carfilzomib's efficacy in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, these results demonstrate that carfilzomib and its combinations could be repurposed for LPS clinical management.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Selinexor, Liposarcoma, Silac, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


