### Accession
PXD028125

### Title
A specific inhibitor of ALDH1A3 regulates retinoic acid biosynthesis in glioma stem cells

### Description
Elevated aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity correlates with poor outcome for many solid tumors as ALDHs potentially regulate cell proliferation and chemoresistance of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Accordingly, potent and selective inhibitors of key ALDHs may represent a novel CSC-directed treatment paradigm for ALDH+ cancer types. Of the many ALDH isoforms, we and others have implicated the elevated expression of ALDH1A3 in mesenchymal glioma stem cells (MES GSCs) as a target for the development of novel therapeutics. To this end, we used our structure of human ALDH1A3 combined with in silico modeling to identify a selective, active-site inhibitor of ALDH1A3. The lead compound, MCI-INI-3, is a selective competitive inhibitor of human ALDH1A3 and shows poor inhibitory effect on the structurally related isoform ALDH1A1. Mass spectrometry-based cellular thermal shift analysis revealed that ALDH1A3 is the primary binding protein for MCI-INI-3 in MES GSC lysates. The inhibitory effect of MCI-INI-3 on retinoic acid biosynthesis is comparable with that of ALDH1A3 knockout, suggesting that effective inhibition of ALDH1A3 is achieved with MCI-INI-3. Further development is warranted to characterize the role of ALDH1A3 and retinoic acid biosynthesis in glioma stem cell growth and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Glioma stem cell lysates were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and the lysate contents were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 25,000xg for 20 min.  Thermal stability experiments were carried out at three independent temperatures (45°C, 50°C and 55°C). Stock solutions of 1mM MCI-INI-3 were prepared in 100% DMSO.  MCI-INI-3 was added to the lysate to a final concentration of 10μM, protein concentration of 1mg/ml, resulting in 0.01% DMSO which was matched for control vehicle treatment. The extracts were incubated with compound at room temperature for one hour and then divided into 50μL aliquots (n=8) of compound and vehicle treated samples. The samples were heated in parallel at a fixed temperature for 10 min, followed by a 5-minute incubation at room temperature.  Samples were then centrifuged at 25,000xg for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant denatured and digested with trypsin utilizing the FASP method (Manza et al. 2005; Wisniewski et al. 2009). Samples were freeze-dried in a vacuum concentrator and upon desiccation resuspended in 10μl formic acid in water (0.1%).   Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate3000 nanoLC (Dionex, Sunnydale, CA). Samples (1μl) were injected via autosampler onto a 25cm x 75uM ID reversed phase column packed with 3μM Reprosil (New Objective, Boston, MA) heated to 50°C.  Peptides were separated and eluted with a gradient from 1% to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 70 minutes at 300nL/min.  Samples were injected online into an LTQ-ORBItrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using a data-dependent top 5 method in positive mode, with spray voltage set at 1.9kV.  Full scan spectra were acquired in the range of m/z 350-1400 at 60,000 resolution using an automatic gain control target of 1x106.  Tandem mass spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with a 32.5% normalized collision energy setting and an MSn ion target of 5x104.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed on the MaxQuant processing suite (version 1.5.2.8). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot reference database using the MaxQuant built-in peptide identification algorithm, Andromeda. Trypsin was specified as the digestion protease with the possibility of two missed cleavages. Acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation of methionine were set as default variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Other database search parameters included 20 ppm and 0.5 Da mass tolerance for precursor and product ions, respectively. Intensities for all peptides were assigned by MaxQuant using full scan mass spectra.  Quantified peptides with large variability were filtered using a minimum occupancy filter, median intensity correction, and outlier filter that removes peptides with intensities greater than 3 standard deviations from the mean.  The MaxQuant Protein Groups file was then analyzed using Microsoft Excel and statistical significance was established using the Student’s t test on log10 intensity values. The GraphPad Prism software was used to generate a volcano scatterplot of the statistical significance versus magnitude of change for each protein group at a given temperature.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity correlates with poor outcome for many solid tumors as ALDHs may regulate cell proliferation and chemoresistance of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Accordingly, potent, and selective inhibitors of key ALDH enzymes may represent a novel CSC-directed treatment paradigm for ALDH<sup>+</sup> cancer types. Of the many ALDH isoforms, we and others have implicated the elevated expression of ALDH1A3 in mesenchymal glioma stem cells (MES GSCs) as a target for the development of novel therapeutics. To this end, our structure of human ALDH1A3 combined with in silico modeling identifies a selective, active-site inhibitor of ALDH1A3. The lead compound, MCI-INI-3, is a selective competitive inhibitor of human ALDH1A3 and shows poor inhibitory effect on the structurally related isoform ALDH1A1. Mass spectrometry-based cellular thermal shift analysis reveals that ALDH1A3 is the primary binding protein for MCI-INI-3 in MES GSC lysates. The inhibitory effect of MCI-INI-3 on retinoic acid biosynthesis is comparable with that of ALDH1A3 knockout, suggesting that effective inhibition of ALDH1A3 is achieved with MCI-INI-3. Further development is warranted to characterize the role of ALDH1A3 and retinoic acid biosynthesis in glioma stem cell growth and differentiation.

### Keywords
Human, Target-id, Small molecule, Cancer

### Affiliations
Scientific Director Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Center University of Pittsburgh
Technical Director Health Sciences Metabolomics and Lipidomics Core Pharmacology and Chemical Biology University Of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Steven Mullett

### Lab Head
Dr Nathan A. Yates
Scientific Director Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Center University of Pittsburgh


