### Accession
PXD027573

### Title
Plasma proteomic analysis to identify potential biomarkers of histologic chorioamnionitis in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes

### Description
Preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), which precedes approximately 30–40% of preterm births, is the main cause of neonatal morbidity, mortality, and long-term sequelae. In particular, almost half of all PPRPM cases are frequently complicated by subclinical acute inflammation in the placenta and fetal tissue, commonly named as acute histologic chorioamnionitis [HCA]. Increasing evidences suggest that HCA carries additional risks to both the pregnant women and their fetuses, including greater risk of imminent preterm birth, as well as sepsis, neurologic morbidity, and mortality in neonates. More accurate and early prenatal predictive markers (especially noninvasive ones) are urgently needed for identifying subclinical HCA in the context of PPROM.To identify potential biomarkers in the plasma that could predict histologic chorioamnionitis (HCA) in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), using shotgun and targeted proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Individual plasma samples from HCA cases (n = 10) and non-HCA controls (n = 10) were used to identify potential plasma protein biomarker candidates. One-step digestion was performed as described previously. The protein digestion procedure was performed with 2 μL of each plasma sample as previously described.3 Briefly, 23 μL of digestion buffer including denaturation, reduction and alkylation reagents (8 M urea, 5 mM TCEP, 20 mM CAA in 0.1 M ABC) were added to 2 μL of blood plasma. The mixture was boiled for 25 min at 60℃ to denature, reduce, and alkylate the proteins. After boiling the proteins, samples were cooled down to room temperature. Then protein digestion was performed at 37℃ overnight using a trypsin at a 100:1 proteins-to-protease ratio. After that process, all peptides were acidified with 10% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then desalted using homemade C18-StageTips method as described.4 The Desalted peptides were vacuum-centrifuged for drying and the stored at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human UniProt protein sequence database (release date: December 2014) using the Andromeda search engine.5 Primary searches were performed using a 6-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamido-methylation was set as a fixed modification. N-Acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion. Peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification levels. All proteins were identified by one or more unique peptides. For label-free quantification of each protein in the plasma was estimated by determining their Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ, the sum of all of the identified peptides peak intensities divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides) values which is embedded algorithm in MaxQuant software.6 To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the ‘Match between Runs’ options on the MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Chorioamnionitis, Lfq

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


