### Accession
PXD006773

### Title
A new method for differential proteomic analysis utilizing native MS-electropherograms: a comparison between plasma and serum proteins by combining native PAGE, whole-gel slicing and quantitative LC-MS/MS

### Description
MS identification has long been used for PAGE-separated protein bands, but global and systematic quantitation utilizing MS after PAGE has remained rare and not been reported for native PAGE.  Here we reported on a new method combining native PAGE, whole-gel slicing and quantitative LC-MS/MS aiming comparative analysis on not only protein abundance, but structures and interactions in different samples.  A pair of human plasma and serum samples were used as test samples and separated on a native PAGE gel.  Six lanes of each sample were cut, each lane was further sliced into thirty-five 1.1 mm x 1.1 mm squares and each square was subjected to standardized procedures of in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS.  The results, comprising 958 data rows that each contains the abundance information of a protein in one square in eleven gel lanes (one plasma lane excluded), showed satisfactory reproducibility of assignment and quantitation.  A total of 315 proteins were assigned and for each protein, the abundance distributions in the plasma and serum gel lanes were reconstructed, respectively (named as ‘native MS-electropherograms’).  Comparison of the electropherograms revealed significant plasma-vs-serum differences in 33 proteins (fold difference > 2 or < 0.5, p < 0.05), among which 18 showed differences in more than one squares.  Many of the differences matched with accumulated knowledge on protein interactions and proteolysis involved in blood coagulation, complement and wound healing processes.  We expect this method would be used to analyze changes or differences between proteomic samples, providing information on both protein abundance and structures.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Sample preparation.  Human blood from a healthy individual (female, 40 years) was taken from the antecubital vein after a 12-hour fast and used for simultaneous preparation of plasma and serum.  Briefly, 5 mL of the blood was transferred into an ice-chilled tube, gently mixed with 0.5 mL of a pre-added solution of 10 mg/mL EDTA.2Na-0.85% w/v NaCl, and centrifuged at 2000 g at 4C for 10 min.  The supernatant plasma was collected and added with sucrose to 40% w/v.  The other 5-mL blood was simply transferred into a 15-mL tube and left undisturbed at room temperature for 4 hours to clot.  The supernatant serum was collected and supplemented with sucrose to 40% w/v.  All the samples were stored at -80C in small aliquots.  (2) Native 1DE.  Slab PAGE gels without denaturants (38 wide x 43 high x 1 mm thick, 4-17.85% T linear pore-size gradient and 5% C) were prepared with an automatic gradient gel former.  Plexiglas acrylic combs were inserted from the mold top before polymerization to form six 4-mm wide wells.  Before electrophoresis, the samples were added with water and sucrose to a final 4-fold dilution of plasma/serum with 12% w/v sucrose.  The samples were loaded at 2 uL/well and native gel electrophoresis was run at 10 mA/gel constant current in a 0.05 M Tris-0.38 M glycine buffer (pH 8.3) until the albumin band, binding with bromophenol blue in the buffer, migrated to 15 mm from the gel bottoms (~50 min).  The gels were stained with CBB R-250 and the pattern was shown in ‘Gel pattern -Jinya 170621.pptx’ (page 1).  (3) Gel slicing and square numbering.  A laboratory-made cutter with razor blades, which has been designed to cut the slab gel vertically at the stained lane positions, was used to simultaneously cut six 1.1 mm-wide gel lanes of plasma and six lanes of serum from a native 1D gel, and then another cutter designed to horizontally cut the gel simultaneously into 35 slices was used, providing 12 sets of 1.1 mm x 1.1 mm square pieces (‘Gel pattern -Jinya 170621.pptx’, page 2).  The apparent masses of the proteins detected in each of the 35 squares, numbered 1 to 35 from the gel top, were estimated from a standard curve of log (apparent mass) vs (migration distance), as we have reported on the analysis of human plasma proteins using nondenaturing 2DE [Jin, Y., Tani, O., Manabe, T., Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 843–863].  It must be noted that proteins with pI values closer to the running buffer (pH 8.3) would have smaller mobility than the estimated apparent masses of the corresponding gel squares.   (4) In-gel digestion.  All the 420 gel pieces were subjected to standardized procedures of detaining, reduction, alkylation and in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described [Jin, Y., et al., Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 843–863] except two modifications, namely, 1) 10 uL 5 ng/uL trypsin was used for each gel, 2) for S1-S3 of each lane, the sonication step to extract tryptic peptides was replaced by shaking for 20 min to avoid the extraction of low-molecular-mass polyacrylamide from the soft gel top.  The tryptic peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifuge at 30C for 10 min and reconstituted with 12 uL 1% v/v formic acid/5% v/v acetonitrile containing 20 fmol/uL Enolase Digest Standard for quantitation.   (5) Nano-UPLC-MS/MS.  The peptides were submitted to nano-UPLC using a nanoACQUITY system equipped with a trap column (Symmetry 5 um C18, 180 um x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoACQUITY 1.7 um BEH130 C18, 100 um x 100 mm) (all from Waters).  Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively.  Each sample, injected in 5-uL full-loop mode, was initially transferred to the trap column with 0.5% mobile phase B at 5 uL/min for 3 min.  The peptides were then eluted from the trap column and separated in the analytical column at 400 nL/min with a gradient as follows; 2% B for 2 mins, ramp to 0% B over 1 min, ramp from 0% to 50% B over 18 mins, ramp to 85% B over 1 min and hold for 5 mins, then ramp back to 2% B over 1 min.  The analytic column was maintained at 35C.  The lock mass compound, 100 fmol/uL [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8426, doubly charged), was delivered at 0.05 uL/min to the reference sprayer of NanoLockspray source via the sample pump of the MS apparatus and sampled via the lock mass channel each 60 sec for m/z calibration.  On-line MS measurement was performed by a Q-TOF MS equipped with a nano-ESI source (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters).  MS was operated in positive ion, resolution and data-independent acquisition mode (MSE) with the capillary voltage set at 3 kV, sampling cone voltage at 50 V, source temperature at 100C, quadrupole profile set as mass 1 as 400 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%), mass 2 as 500 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%) and mass 3 as 600.  MSE data was acquired by alternating low energy (6 V, 0.4 s) and elevated energy (linearly ramped from 20 to 45 V in 0.4 s) over an m/z 50-2000 range.

### Data Protocol
(1) Progenesis QI for Proteomics (QIP) ver. 3.0, a software developed by Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters for quantitative analysis of LC-MSE data, was used for the data analysis.  Briefly, raw LC-MSE data (.raw) from the 420 square gel pieces were imported into QIP in 35 ‘experiments’, each experiment contained the data from the same numbered squares in the 12 gel lanes, e.g. all square 1 in the 12 lanes were grouped in one ‘experiment’ and all square 2 in another.  To avoid confusion, we use ‘square groups’ instead of QIP ‘experiments’ in the following text.  For each square group, lock mass correction was performed during the import and automatic alignment and peak picking were carried out with recommended parameter settings.  Peptide ions were identified with the following settings; thresholds for low energy ions, elevated energy ions and total ion intensity set as 20, 10 and 500 counts, respectively; employ protein grouping, enabled; database, UniProtKB complete proteome dataset of homo sapiens (2016-09-10, 20,191 canonical sequences); digest reagent, trypsin; maximum missed cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modiﬁcations, oxidation at Met; fragment and peptide tolerance, both automatic; false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%; at least 3 fragments per peptide, 7 fragments per protein and 2 peptides per protein.  Following the identification, the function of Hi-N (N=3) quantitation in QIP was used.  The QIP analysis results at protein level from the 35 square groups were provided in ‘Summary of search results -Jinya 170621.xlsx’-Table 1.  The relative abundance values in the table, produced by the normalization function of QIP, were not used because the function could only be performed within each square group, thus would produce different calibration coefficients for different square groups.  Therefore, the raw abundance, the average intensity of the three peptides with the highest intensity (Top 3), was used to calculate the protein molar quantities based on the Top 3 algorithm by referring to the quantity of the added standard (‘Summary of search results -Jinya 170621.xlsx’-Table 2).  Further, five types of entries were removed from the list, including ENO1_YEAST, TRYP_PIG, keratins, hits with only one peptide matched and hits without unique peptide matched (‘Summary of search results -Jinya 170621.xlsx’-Table 3).  The list revealed that the data from Plasma-Lane6 showed much lower total quantities than those of the other 11 lanes (about 1/3 of the average), which we suspected caused by the apparently decreased MS detection sensitivity observed during the assay of this lane samples, and therefore was excluded from subsequent analysis.  To facilitate comparison between different lanes, relative molar abundance in a lane were calculated, as provided in ‘Summary of search results -Jinya 170621.xlsx’-Table 4.  Totally, the table includes 958 data rows consisting of square numbers, UniProtKB entry names and accession numbers, and abundance values in five plasma and six serum gel lanes.    (2) Reconstruction of native MS-electropherograms.  The LC-MS/MS results were re-organized in the order of proteins (Native MS-electropherograms of 315 proteins in human plasma and serum –Jinya 170621.xlsx’ –Table 1).  Since protein grouping was enabled for identification by QIP to handle the problem of shared peptides, there are hits that contained more than one entries.  In such cases, the rows that have the same lead entry were tentatively categorized as the same protein due to the principle of QIP grouping: protein identities derived from peptides that are a subset of an identification based on a larger set are subsumed into that larger set; all relevant identities are listed as a group under the ‘lead’ identity with the greatest coverage (or highest score where coverage is equal); quantitation is performed using the lead identity peptide ion data only (www.nonlinear.com).  The table shows that a total of 315 proteins were assigned, a good proteomic coverage for blood samples without the treatment of depleting abundant proteins.  Native MS-electropherograms of plasma and serum were then reconstructed for each of the assigned protein, as provided in ‘Native MS-electropherograms of 315 proteins in human plasma and serum –Jinya 170621.xlsx’.    (3) Comparison between the plasma and serum MS-electropherograms.  The native MS-electropherograms in plasma and serum for each of the assigned protein were compared in order to obtain more comprehensive information on the differences between the two samples.  Thirty-three proteins in 87 squares were detected to have significant plasma-serum difference (fold difference > 2 or < 0.5 and p < 0.05).  The comparison and the MS-electropherograms of the 33 proteins were provided in ‘Native MS-electropherograms of 33 proteins showing plasma-serum differences -Jin 170620’.

### Publication Abstract
MS identification has long been used for PAGE-separated protein bands, but global and systematic quantitation utilizing MS after PAGE has remained rare and not been reported for native PAGE. Here we reported on a new method combining native PAGE, whole-gel slicing and quantitative LC-MS/MS, aiming at comparative analysis on not only abundance, but also structures and interactions of proteins. A pair of human plasma and serum samples were used as test samples and separated on a native PAGE gel. Six lanes of each sample were cut, each lane was further sliced into thirty-five 1.1 mm &#xd7; 1.1 mm squares and all the squares were subjected to standardized procedures of in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS. The results comprised 958 data rows that each contained abundance values of a protein detected in one square in eleven gel lanes (one plasma lane excluded). The data were evaluated to have satisfactory reproducibility of assignment and quantitation. Totally 315 proteins were assigned, with each protein assigned in 1-28 squares. The abundance distributions in the plasma and serum gel lanes were reconstructed for each protein, named as "native MS-electropherograms". Comparison of the electropherograms revealed significant plasma-versus-serum differences on 33 proteins in 87 squares (fold difference &gt; 2 or &lt; 0.5, p &lt; 0.05). Many of the differences matched with accumulated knowledge on protein interactions and proteolysis involved in blood coagulation, complement and wound healing processes. We expect this method would be useful to provide more comprehensive information in comparative proteomic analysis, on both quantities and structures/interactions.

### Keywords
Human plasma and serum, Quantitative lc-ms/ms, Gel slicing, Native ms-electropherogram, Native 1d-page, Differential proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology


