### Accession
PXD002946

### Title
The Functions of Serine 687 Phosphorylation of Human DNA Polymerase eta in UV Damage Tolerance

### Description
DNA polymerase  (pol) is a Y-family translesion synthesis polymerase that plays a key role in the cellular tolerance toward UV irradiation-induced DNA damage. Here, we identified, for the first time, the phosphorylation of serine 687 (S687), which islocated in the highly conserved nuclear localization signal (NLS) region of human pol and is mediated by cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). We also showed that this phosphorylation is stimulated in human cells upon UV light exposure and results in diminished interaction of pol with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Furthermore, we demonstrated that the phosphorylation of S687 in polconfers cellular protection fromUV irradiation and increases the efficiency in replication across a site-specifically incorporated cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer in human cells. Based on these results, we proposed a mechanistic model where S687 phosphorylation functions in the reverse polymerase switching step of translesion synthesis: The phosphorylation brings negative charges to the NLS of pol, which facilitates its departure from PCNA, thereby resetting the replication fork for highly accurate and processive DNA replication. Thus, our study, together with previous findings, supported that the post-translational modifications of NLS of pol played a dual role in polymerase switching, where K682 deubiquitination promotes the recruitment of pol to PCNA immediately prior to lesion bypass and S687 phosphorylation stimulates its departure from the replication fork immediately after lesion bypass.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of FLAG-Tagged Pol Protein and Mass Spectrometric Analysis -HEK293T cells were grown to 70-80% confluency in a 6-well plate and transfected with 1.5 µg FLAG-tagged pol plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). After a 48-h incubation, the protein was isolated and purified using anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma). The purified protein was digested with trypsin (Roche) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed as previously described (23). Briefly, the peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC II and analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo). The trapping column (150 μm × 50 mm) and separation column (75 μm × 120 mm) were packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm in particle size, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). The peptide samples were firstly loaded onto the trapping column in CH3CN/H2O (2:98, v/v) at a flow rate of 4.0 μL/min, and resolved on the separation column with a 120-min linear gradient of 2–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode, and the spray voltage was 1.8 kV. The full-scan mass spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to a target value of 500,000 in the linear ion trap. MS/MS data were obtained in a data-dependent scan mode where one full MS scan was followed with 20 MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were employed for the identification of polη and its post-translational modifications, which was conducted using Maxquant, version 1.2.0.18 against International Protein Index (IPI) database, version 3.68 with 87,061 entries to which contaminants and reverse sequences were added. The maximum number of miscleavages for trypsin was two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation, lysine ubiquitination, and serine/threonine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The tolerances in mass accuracy for MS and MS/MS were 25 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The required false positive discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels, with the minimal required peptide length being set at 6 amino acids. For quantitative analysis, MS/MS experiments were conducted in selected-ion monitoring mode, and the peak areas found in the selected-ion chromatograms for monitoring the formation of a specific fragment ion from the unmodified and the corresponding modified peptide were employed for estimating the levels of modifications. In particular, the y5 ion (m/z 593.3) and the [MH-Pho]2+ ion (m/z 606.3) were used to assess the relative levels of unmodified (687SPLACTNK694) and phosphorylated (684NPKSphoPLACTNK694) forms of S687-containing peptides, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
DNA polymerase &#x3b7; (pol&#x3b7;) is a Y-family translesion synthesis polymerase that plays a key role in the cellular tolerance toward UV irradiation-induced DNA damage. Here, we identified, for the first time, the phosphorylation of serine 687 (Ser(687)), which is located in the highly conserved nuclear localization signal (NLS) region of human pol&#x3b7; and is mediated by cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). We also showed that this phosphorylation is stimulated in human cells upon UV light exposure and results in diminished interaction of pol&#x3b7; with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Furthermore, we demonstrated that the phosphorylation of Ser(687) in pol&#x3b7; confers cellular protection from UV irradiation and increases the efficiency in replication across a site-specifically incorporated cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer in human cells. Based on these results, we proposed a mechanistic model where Ser(687) phosphorylation functions in the reverse polymerase switching step of translesion synthesis: The phosphorylation brings negative charges to the NLS of pol&#x3b7;, which facilitates its departure from PCNA, thereby resetting the replication fork for highly accurate and processive DNA replication. Thus, our study, together with previous findings, supported that the posttranslational modifications of NLS of pol&#x3b7; played a dual role in polymerase switching, where Lys(682) deubiquitination promotes the recruitment of pol&#x3b7; to PCNA immediately prior to lesion bypass and Ser(687) phosphorylation stimulates its departure from the replication fork immediately after lesion bypass.

### Keywords
Dna polymerase eta, Cdk2, Translesion synthesis

### Affiliations
UCR
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
xiaoxia dai

### Lab Head
Dr Yingsheng Wang
University of California, Riverside


