### Accession
PXD006471

### Title
A Comprehensive map and functional annotation of human pituitary and thyroid proteome

### Description
A Comprehensive map and functional annotation of human pituitary and thyroid proteome

### Sample Protocol
Sample from human thyroid and pituitary were collected and protien were extracted with tissue lysis buffer. Potein were then reduced and alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were seperated to 20 fractios and analysed with Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometry with DDA method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec raw data were acquied with Triple tof 5600 mass spectrometry and analyzed with Mascot (version 2.5) with uniprot/swissprot human database(version 2016_05). Quantification was performed by label free quantitative method.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge about human tissue proteome will provide insights into health organ physiology. To construct a comprehensive data set of human pituitary and thyroid proteins, post-mortem pituitaries and thyroids from 10 normal individuals were used. The pooled samples were prepared using two methods. One part of the sample was processed using 14 high-abundance proteins immunoaffinity column. The other part was directly subjected to digestion. Finally, a total of 7596 proteins in pituitary and 5602 proteins in thyroid with high confidence were identified, with 6623 and 4368 quantified, respectively. A total of 5781 of pituitary and 3178 of thyroid proteins have not been previously reported in the normal pituitary and thyroid proteome. Comparison of pituitary and thyroid proteome indicated that thyroid prefers to be involved in nerve system regeneration and metabolic regulation, while pituitary mainly performs functions of signal transduction and cancer modulation. Our results, for the first time, comprehensively profiled and functionally annotated the largest high-confidence data set of proteome of two important endocrine glands, pituitary and thyroid, which is important for further studies on biomarker identification and molecular mechanisms of pituitary and thyroid disorders. The mapping results can be freely downloaded at http://www.urimarker.com/pituitary/ and http://www.urimarker.com/thyroid/ . The raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006471.

### Keywords
Human, Pituitary, Thyroid

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
omicsolution 

### Submitter
Ting Xue

### Lab Head
Dr yang yang
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


