### Accession
PXD032893

### Title
A Dual-Acting Nitric Oxide Donor and Phosphodiesterase 5 Inhibitor Activates Autophagy in Primary Skin Fibroblasts

### Description
In the project “A Dual-Acting Nitric Oxide Donor and Phosphodiesterase 5 Inhibitor Activates Autophagy in Primary Skin Fibroblasts» by Esther Martínez-Martínez and Joern Dengjel, we performed expression proteomics analyzing the response of normal human fibroblasts (NHF) isolated from healthy skin to the drug TOP-N53.

### Sample Protocol
NHF were cultured in 10 cm2 plates and let them grow until they reached ~70% confluence. NHF were serum starved (0.25% FBS) prior to the treatment with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or TOP-N53 0.1 M for 24 h. Cells were lysed with 1% Na-deoxycholate prepared in 50mM ABC buffer (50mM Ammonium bicarbonate, pH7.5). 1 M of benzonase was added to the cell lysates to digest nucleic acids. Protein concentration was determined by pierce BCA protein assay kit and samples containing 75 g protein were prepared. Samples were reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and they were digested with trypsin HPLC-grade (Promega AG, Dübendorf, Switzerland) overnight. Next, Na-deoxycholate was precipitated with 1% v/v of formic acid and eliminated by 10 min centrifugation at 13000 rpm. The resulting peptide solutions (supernatants) were desalted on C18-based STAGE tips as previously described and analyzed by liquid chromatography-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Peak detection and relative quantification of peptides and proteins was conducted by MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10. Peaks were searched against a full-length human Uniprot database from March 2016. Enzyme specificity was assigned to trypsin/P and quantitation was based on Label Free Quantification (LFQ). Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, and protein amino-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm. A maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. Proteins were identified with a minimum of one unique peptide. For protein quantification, a ratio count of two was set. Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins was based on a reverse-database with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Peptide length had to be at least 7 amino acids. Identified peptides were re-quantified. For enhanced identification, runs were matched with a match time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
Wound healing pathologies are an increasing problem in ageing societies. Chronic, non-healing wounds, which cause high morbidity and severely reduce the quality of life of affected individuals, are frequently observed in aged individuals and people suffering from diseases affected by the Western lifestyle, such as diabetes. Causal treatments that support proper wound healing are still scarce. Here, we performed expression proteomics to study the effects of the small molecule TOP-N53 on primary human skin fibroblasts and keratinocytes. TOP-N53 is a dual-acting nitric oxide donor and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor increasing cGMP levels to support proper wound healing. In contrast to keratinocytes, which did not exhibit global proteome alterations, TOP-N53 had profound effects on the proteome of skin fibroblasts. In fibroblasts, TOP-N53 activated the cytoprotective, lysosomal degradation pathway autophagy and induced the expression of the selective autophagy receptor p62/SQSTM1. Thus, activation of autophagy might in part be responsible for beneficial effects of TOP-N53.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Skin, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


