### Accession
PXD032102

### Title
Calmodulin proximal interacting proteins revealed through BioID technology in the tachyzoite stage of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an apicomplexan parasite infecting human and animals, causing huge health concerns and economic losses. Calcium ion, a critical second messenger in cells, can regulate related vital activities, particularly in parasite invasion and escape processes. Calmodulin (CaM) is a short, highly conserved Ca2+ binding protein found in all eukaryotic cells, including apicomplexan parasites. After binding to Ca2+, CaM can be activated to interact with a variety of proteins (such as enzymes). Nevertheless, CaM-interacting proteins have not been identified in T. gondii. We report here the use of T. gondii strain RH△hxgprt expressing the proximity-labeling enzyme BirA* fused to CaM, in combination with LC-MS/MS to specifically identify CaM-interacting proteins. Our study revealed over three hundred of CaM’s proximal interacting proteins in T. gondii. These CaM partners were broadly dispersed throughout the parasite. The majority of their CRISPR fitness scores were below zero, indicating CaM's essential functions in parasites.

### Sample Protocol
The RH∆hxgprt-CaM-BirA* strain was used to infect HFF cells for about 24 h and then pretreated with or without150 µM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in ddH2O for an additional 24 h. The parasite samples were collected by manual scraping, washed in PBS, and lysed in RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 1% Triton X-100; 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)] supplemented with protease inhibitor (ThermoFisher, USA) for the affinity purification of biotinylated proteins. Lysates were centrifuged at 12000g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were incubated with MyOneTM Streptavidin magnetic beads T1 (ThermoFisher, USA) for six hours at 4 °C with gentle tube rotation. Magnetic beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer, then boiled for 10 min in 1× SDS-loading buffer to release biotinylated proteins. Ten percent of each sample was analyzed by western blotting using HRP-labeled streptavidin (Beyotime, China), while the remainder was loaded to 12% SDS-PAGE gel and separated for about 10 min. The top gel containing biotinylated proteins was cut, freeze-dried, and used for LC-MS/MS. The gel band samples were reduced, alkylated, and then washed with ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile to remove stain and SDS. Trypsin was added, and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces, dried down, and re-dissolved in 2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Each digest was run by nanoLC-MS/MS using a two-hour gradient on a 0.075mmx250mm C18 column feeding into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1). Mascot was set up to search the cRAP_20150130.fasta; Tgondii_GT1_20170914 database (8,462 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.060 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is a pathogen belonging to the apicomplexan phylum, and it threatens human and animal health. Calcium ions, a critical second messenger in cells, can regulate important biological processes, including parasite invasion and egress. Calmodulin (CaM) is a small, highly conserved, Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding protein found in all eukaryotic cells. After binding to Ca<sup>2+</sup>, CaM can be activated to interact with various proteins. However, little is known about CaM's function and its interacting proteins in T. gondii. In this study, we successfully knocked down CaM in the T. gondii parent strain TATI using a tetracycline-off system with the <i>Toxoplasma</i> CaM promoter. The results indicated that CaM was required for tachyzoite proliferation, invasion, and egress and that CaM depletion resulted in apicoplast loss, thus threatening parasite survival in the next lytic cycle. In the tachyzoite stage, CaM loss caused significant anomalies in the parasite's basal constriction, motility, and parasite rosette-like arrangement in the parasitophorous vacuole (PV). These phenotypic defects caused by CaM depletion indicate the importance of CaM in T. gondii. Therefore, it is important to identify the CaM-interacting proteins in T. gondii. Applying BioID technology, more than 300 CaM's proximal interacting proteins were identified from T. gondii. These CaM partners were broadly distributed throughout the parasite. Furthermore, the protein interactome and transcriptome analyses indicated the potential role of CaM in ion binding, cation binding, metal ion binding, calcium ion binding, and oxidation-reduction. Our findings shed light on the CaM function and CaM-interactome in T. gondii and other eukaryotes. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular pathogen that threatens human and animal health. This unicellular parasite is active in many biological processes, such as egress and invasion. The implementation efficiency of T. gondii biological processes is dependent on signal transmission. Ca<sup>2+</sup>, as a second messenger, is essential for the parasite's life cycle. Calmodulin, a ubiquitous Ca<sup>2+</sup> receptor protein, is highly conserved and mediates numerous Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent events in eukaryotes. Few CaM functions or regulated partners have been characterized in T. gondii tachyzoites. Here, we reported the essential functions of calmodulin in T. gondii tachyzoite and the identification of its interacting partners using BioID technology, shedding light on the CaM function and CaM-interactome in Toxoplasma gondii and other eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Proximity-labeling, Lc-ms/ms, Calmodulin

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, PR China

### Submitter
Yongle Song

### Lab Head
Dr Yanqin Zhou
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, PR China


