### Accession
PXD021199

### Title
PLEKHM1 is a direct target for both mTOR and MAPK pathways

### Description
The lysosome is a cellular signalling hub at the point of convergence of endocytic and autophagic pathways, where the contents are degraded and recycled. Previously, we identified the adaptor protein PLEKHM1, which facilitates the fusion of endocytic and autophagic vesicles with the lysosome. It is unclear how the function of PLEKHM1 at the lysosome is controlled. Herein, we show that PLEKHM1 co-precipitates with mTOR and its regulatory partners. PLEKHM1 is directly phosphorylated by mTOR at a proline-directed dual serine motif. Using a phospho-specific antibody that recognizes PLEKHM1 when phosphorylated at Serine432/Ser435, we show that the same motif is a direct target for ERK2-mediated phosphorylation in a growth factor-dependent manner. This dual regulation of PLEKHM1 at a highly conserved region points to a convergence of both growth factor- and amino acid-sensing pathways, placing PLEKHM1 at a critical juncture of two major cellular metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa FlpIn TREx PLEKHM1-GFP cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with either L-arginine 12C6 14N4 (Arg0) and L-lysine12C6 14N2 (Lys0) or L-arginine 13C6 15N4 (Arg10) and L-lysine-U13C6 15N2 (Lys8) as previously described (Ong et al., 2002). SILAC-labelled cells were lysed in CHAPS lysis buffer. PLEKHM1-GFP expression was induced for 16h with doxycycline, and HeLa FlpIn TREx cells, cultured in light SILAC-labelled medium, were treated in EBSS for 4 hours to starve cells of amino acids. PLEKHM1-GFP was immunoprecipitated using GFP-TRAP, and eluates were mixed 1:1 (v/v) and run on an SDS-PAGE gel. After excision of individual gel bands and de-staining according to manufacturer´s instructions, proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 45 minutes at 56°C and alkylated with 55mM Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT under light-protection. After digestion with Trypsin at 37°C over-night, tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces consecutively with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 3% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA and finally 100% ACN for 30 minutes each. Extraction solutions were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation before reconstitution in 0.1% Formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.Peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC II (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 20 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 3 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 8-40% acetonitrile over 240 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer via a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 106 charges. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated in the ion-trap using a 2 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired in rapid mode using a maximum injection time of 25 ms and an AGC target value of 5 x 103. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion settings were 1 repeat count and 30s repeat duration as well as an exclusion duration of 90s in order to minimise repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed with MaxQuant (v 1.3.0.5) applying default parameters. Acquired spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (09-2012) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
The lysosome is a cellular signalling hub at the point of convergence of endocytic and autophagic pathways, where the contents are degraded and recycled. Pleckstrin homology domain-containing family member 1 (PLEKHM1) acts as an adaptor to facilitate the fusion of endocytic and autophagic vesicles with the lysosome. However, it is unclear how PLEKHM1 function at the lysosome is controlled. Herein, we show that PLEKHM1 coprecipitates with, and is directly phosphorylated by, mTOR. Using a phosphospecific antibody against Ser432/S435 of PLEKHM1, we show that the same motif is a direct target for ERK2-mediated phosphorylation in a growth factor-dependent manner. This dual regulation of PLEKHM1 at a highly conserved region points to a convergence of both growth factor- and amino acid-sensing pathways, placing PLEKHM1 at a critical juncture of cellular metabolism.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Gfp-trap pull-down, Silac, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
institute of biochemistry 2 (IBC2)

### Submitter
Marina Hoffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany


