### Accession
PXD023909

### Title
Exosomal Proteins and Brown Fat Activation

### Description
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a promising weapon to combat obesity and metabolic disease. BAT is thermogenic and consumes substantial amounts of glucose and fatty acids as fuel for thermogenesis and energy expenditure. To study BAT function in large human longitudinal cohorts, safe and precise detection methodologies are needed. Although regarded a gold standard, the foray of PET-CT into BAT research and clinical applications is limited by its high ionizing radiation doses. Here, we show that brown adipocytes release exosomes in blood plasma which can be utilized to assess BAT activity. In this study, we investigated circulating protein biomarkers that can accurately and reliably reflect BAT activation triggered by cold exposure, capsinoids ingestion and thyroid hormone excess in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled plasma were collected from the three groups (cold, capsinoids, hyperthyroid). For the purpose of selecting the BAT-positive samples in the TACTICAL-II study: N=3-5 subjects’ samples from the strongest PET-SUV response were pooled together to form 4 respective tubes, each containing at least 5mL pooled plasma for optimal exosome enrichment and mass spectrometry consisting of 1 tube pre-cold stimulation pooled plasma, 1 tube post-cold stimulation pooled plasma, 1 tube of pre-capsinoids pooled plasma and 1 tube of post-capsinoids pooled plasma. For TRIBUTE samples: N=3-5 patients with the strongest PET SUV were pooled to get 1 tube of 5 mL pooled plasma taken when they were pre-treated in the hyperthyroid state and 1 tube of 5 mL pooled plasma after the same patients were rendered euthyroid with carbimazole. Both studies were conducted according to the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and all procedures were approved by the Domain-Specific Review Board of National Healthcare Group, Singapore (IRB codes C/2015/00715 and C/2015/00718). Written and witnessed informed consent was obtained from all subjects before their formal participation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data generated by Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS was analyzed by ProteomeDiscoverer with Sequest HT and Mascot software (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA). The initial dataset was filtered through stringent elimination criteria of <1% false discovery rate (FDR) to obtain confident identification, CV < 10% and p-value <0.05 to get rid of the technical variations during quantization. Stringent statistical analysis such as volcano plot will be used to determine the significant cut-off value of fold-change. Proteins with significant fold-changes that passed the stringent filtering criteria were then be taken for further data mining and bioinformatics analysis such as gene ontology and pathway analysis. Potential candidate biomarkers were shortlisted from the significant expression changed proteins that are in critical nodes or switches of obesity pathology or WAT/BAT physiology.

### Publication Abstract
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a promising weapon to combat obesity and metabolic disease. BAT is thermogenic and consumes substantial amounts of glucose and fatty acids as fuel for thermogenesis and energy expenditure. To study BAT function in large human longitudinal cohorts, safe and precise detection methodologies are needed. Although regarded a gold standard, the foray of PET-CT into BAT research and clinical applications is limited by its high ionizing radiation doses. Here, we show that brown adipocytes release exosomes in blood plasma that can be utilized to assess BAT activity. In the present study, we investigated circulating protein biomarkers that can accurately and reliably reflect BAT activation triggered by cold exposure, capsinoids ingestion and thyroid hormone excess in humans. We discovered an exosomal protein, methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (NADP+ dependent) 1-like (MTHFD1L), to be overexpressed and detectable in plasma for all three modes of BAT activation in human subjects. This mitochondrial protein is packaged as a cargo within multivesicular bodies of the endosomal compartment and secreted as exosomes via exocytosis from activated brown adipocytes into the circulation. To support MTHFD1L as a conserved BAT activation response in other vertebrates, we examined a rodent model and also proved its presence in blood of rats following BAT activation by cold exposure. Plasma concentration of exosomal MTHFD1L correlated with human BAT activity as confirmed by PET-MR in humans and supported by data from rats. Thus, we deduce that MTHFD1L appears to be overexpressed in activated BAT compared to BAT in the basal nonstimulated state.

### Keywords
Brown fat, Biomarkers, Exosomes

### Affiliations
1Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 2 Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore 3 Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore 4Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore 5 Department of Endocrinology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital (TTSH), Singapore
Singapore Insitute of Clinical Sciences

### Submitter
Narasimhan Kothandaraman

### Lab Head
Dr Melvin Khee Shing Leow
1Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 2 Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore 3 Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore 4Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore 5 Department of Endocrinology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital (TTSH), Singapore


