### Accession
PXD012798

### Title
Variability in exosomal protein cargo of human lung adenocarcinoma cells

### Description
Exosomal protein cargo has been shown to have a significant implication in lung cancer research. Our study deals with three lung cancer cell line exosomes. The purpose of this project is to analyze the qualitative and quantitative variability in replicates (TRs and Brs). We performed various statistical tests to analyze bioinformatically generated qualitative and quantitative data from LC/MS/MS experiement. In conclusion, these results will have a significant impact on exosomes proteomics research.

### Sample Protocol
The cells used in the current study were human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines and were cultured in their respective media. Ten percent fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Atlanta biologicals, S11150) was added to all the media. Cells were grown to 85-95% confluency in eight 150mm cell culture dishes (NuncTM, 157150), trypsinized (using 0.25% trypsin EDTA (Gibco, 25200114) for A549, H1993 and H1975 cells), counted with a hemocytometer and seeded in 3 corning 224mm cell culture dishes with 10% exosome depleted FBS (SBI, EXO-FBS-250A-1). Cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24hours.  A 100ug of total protein of exosomes and cells was heated with 4x SDS loading buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, NP0007) for 10min at 70°C and loaded on a 4-12% Bis-tris protein gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, NP0335). Gels were then prefixed in 1:2:1 methanol, acetic acid and water overnight followed by staining with Brilliant blue G solution (Sigma, B8522) for 2hours and further destained in 10% acetic acid for 4hours. The protein bands were then excised, placed in 1.5ml individual centrifuge tubes with 100ul 5% acetic acid and sent for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) performed at the Michigan State University (MSU) Proteomics Core Facility. The experimental protocol was as follows: Gel bands were digested in-gel with modifications according to a previously reported study . Briefly, the gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated with 10mM dithiothreitol in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH~8, at 56°C for 45min. The gel bands were dehydrated again in 100% ACN to force out all aqueous buffers and allow the addition of 50mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate to equilibrate all the protein and incubated in the dark for 20min. The gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again in 100% ACN followed by an overnight incubation at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, V5111) prepared in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and added at ~1:50 ratio. Peptides were then extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% ACN and 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum dried to ~2uL. Dried peptides were then re-suspended in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA to 25uL. From this, 5uL was automatically injected by a Thermo EASYnLC 1000 liquid chromatography system onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (0.1mm x 20mm, 5um, 100A) and washed with buffer A (99.9% water/0.1% formic Acid) for ~5min. Bound peptides were then eluted onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 resolving column (0.075mm x 500mm, 3um, 100A) over 125min with a gradient of 5% buffer B to 28% buffer B (99.9% ACN/0.1% formic acid) for 114 min, ramping to 90% buffer B at 115min and held at 90% buffer B for the duration of the run at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. Eluted peptides were sprayed into a Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a FlexSpray nano-spray ion source. Survey scans were taken by the ion trap, a second mass analyzer of the mass spectrometer i.e. the Orbitrap (70,000 resolutions, determined at m/z 200). In each survey scan, the top ten most intense peptide ions were automatically selected and subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation with fragment spectra acquired at 17,500 resolutions. Conversion of MS/MS spectra to peak lists was done using Mascot Distiller version 2.6.1 (www.matrixscience.com). Peptide-to-spectrum matching was done using the Mascot search algorithm version 2.6, against a database containing all human protein sequences available from UniProt (www.uniprot.org, downloaded 11-13-2017) and appended with common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org). The search output was then analyzed using Scaffold Q+S version 4.8.4 (www.proteomesoftware.com) to probabilistically validate protein identification and quantification. Assignments validated using the default confidence filter of 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at the protein level in order to allow maximum discovery at reasonable stringency were considered true. Mascot parameters for all databases were as follows: allow up to 2 missed tryptic sites, fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl Cysteine, variable modification of Oxidation of Methionine,  peptide tolerance of +/- 10ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.3 Da, peptide charge state limited to +2/+3.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative intensity (LFQ) values were generated using “.raw” files provided by the MSU proteomics facility with the tool MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.0)  (www.biochem.mpg.de/5111795/maxquant) and searching against a Uniprot human database (Feb 2018). The parameters in MaxQuant were set as follows: Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. The option for proteases was chosen as trypsin/P (proline)  which marks the cleavage at the carboxyl side of the lysine and arginine amino acids with two missed cleavages allowed. The parameter for label-free modification to check for protein presence was selected as LFQ values. The FDR with a p-value less than 0.01 was determined as significant. For protein quantification firstly, label minimum ratio count was set to 2 secondly, both unique and razor peptides were selected and thirdly, the modifications were once again set to oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation, along with their unmodified peptides. The obtained proteingroups.xlsx output file was sorted by descending LFQ values and used as an LFQ value reference list for further bioinformatics analysis in addition to which the LFQ values were processed with custom shell scripts for further biostatistical analysis of qualitative data. Absolute protein expression (APEX) values were generated using “protXML” files, a required file format by the APEX tool . For this, “.sf3” files provided by the MSU proteomics facility were processed to generate “protXML” files using the Scaffold 4.8.4  (www.proteomesoftware.com) software set with a cut off corresponding to a peptide and protein FDR corrected p-value of <0.01. The peptide FDR was calculated by the tool as a percentage of the sum of the exclusive spectral counts of decoy proteins divided by the sum of exclusive spectral counts of target proteins. The protein FDR was calculated as a percentage of the number of decoy proteins divided by the number of target proteins. The “protXML” files and the Uniprot human database (Feb 2018) was used to calculate the APEX values by following the apex protocol  using the tool APEX_1_1_0 (https://sourceforge.net/projects/apexqpt/). The top 50 proteins from the LFQ intensity list from MaxQuant were considered to build a reference list for use with the APEX tool to generate a “.apex” file.  The protein’s abundance was usually presented as relative to all protein within the sample, here the multiplicative normalization factor C which multiplies the protein’s abundance by C places the abundance values into absolute terms where C corresponds to “1.0E8”. The “.apex” file was further processed with custom shell scripts to proceed with biostatical analysis. The absolute counts obtained in a “.apex” file are directly proportional to the protein levels, and used for biostatistical analysis of quantitative data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative data, Biological replicates (brs), A549 cell line, H1975 cell line, Technical replicates (trs), Qualitative data, H1993 cell line

### Affiliations
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
Department of Pathology, Biological Sciences Division, The University of Chicago, Chicago 60637, Illinois, USA

### Submitter
SUMA TIRUVAYIPATI

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Schuger
Department of Pathology, Biological Sciences Division, The University of Chicago, Chicago 60637, Illinois, USA


