### Accession
PXD008681

### Title
Human HeLa cells LC MS/MSLC-MSMS

### Description
We developed a reagent of 10-plex isobaric tags (IBT) with high stability and low cost. The labeled peptides were sensitively detected on Orbitrap Q Exactive MS with MS2 resolution of 35000 at 30% NCE, while the peptides were efficiently labelled over 97% by IBT at ratio of 20:1 of reagent/peptide (w/w) in 200mM TEAB buffer within 2h. The IBT labeling was demonstrated in a wide dynamic range of 50 folds but without obvious matrix effect on quantification. Importantly, there was little quantification bias found among the individual IBT tags, indicating that the peptides labeled by different tags were quantitatively comparable. The IBT 10-plex reagents were applied for dynamically monitoring the quantitative responses of phosphoproteome ignited by EGF treatment in Hela cells. Total 5361 unique phosphopeptides were identified, which reached a similar conclusion as other reported. The IBT reagents were therefore experimentally proven as a new type of isobaric labeling peptides and useful for a large quantity peptides of quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The IBT-labeled phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 beads following the previous published protocol with a minor modification14. In brief, the peptides and TiO2 beads were mixed at the ratio of 1:4 (w/w) in the loading buffer of 5% TFA, 80% ACN and 30mg/ml Glutamine for 1h at 37°C. The flowthrough was re-enriched by a new batch of TiO2 beads. The two batches of TiO2 beads were combined and washed by 5% TFA and 80% ACN to remove nonspecific binding of non-phosphopeptides. The phosphopeptides were sequentially eluted by the elution buffer 2% and 4% ammonium hydroxide in 40% ACN. The eluted phosphopeptides were combined and further fractionated by a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (20mg, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, lL). The fractionation was performed using a stepwise elution with different ACN concentrations, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 25, and 50% ACN in triethylamine. The 12 fractions were further combined to 6 fractions for peptide identification using mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were then searched by three search engines (MyriMatch v2.2.10165, X!Tandem v2017.2.1.2 and MS-GF+ v2017.01.13) against the human Swiss-Prot database (20183 sequences) with decoy sequences. Several parameters were set for database searching: cysteine carbamidomethyl, IBT labeling of lysines and peptide n-termini were specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, IBT labeling of tyrosine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for protein identification on MS was 20 ppm, and the product ion tolerance for MS/MS was 0.1 Da. Full cleavage by trypsin was used, with one missed cleavages permitted. The results from the three search engines were then integrated by IPeak which is a tool that combines multiple search engine results. The phosphosite localization and phosphopeptide quantification were performed by IQuant.The false discovery rate (FDR) of PSM was set as less than 1% and the probability of phosphosite localization was set as greater than 0.75 using phosphoRS.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, the commercial reagents for isobaric peptides labeling (TMT and iTRAQ) have some drawbacks, such as high cost in experiments, especially in quantitation for the modified peptides, and inconvenient handling for variable sizes of samples. Herein, we developed a set of 10-plex isobaric tags (IBT) with high stability and low cost. The labeled peptides were sensitively detected on Orbitrap Q Exactive MS with an MS2 resolution of 35&#x202f;000 at 30% NCE, while the peptides were efficiently labeled over 97% by IBT at a ratio of 10:1 of reagent/peptide (w/w) in 200 mM TEAB buffer for 2 h. The IBT labeling was demonstrated with a wide dynamic range of 50-fold without obvious matrix effects on quantification. Importantly, there was little quantification bias found among the individual IBT tags, indicating that the peptides labeled by different tags were quantitatively comparable. The IBT 10-plex reagents were applied for dynamically monitoring the quantitative responses of phosphoproteome stimulated by EGF treatment in HeLa cells. In total, 5&#x202f;361 unique phosphopeptides were identified, which reached a similar conclusion as others reported. The IBT reagents were therefore experimentally proven as a new type of reagents for isobaric peptides labeling and useful in a large quantity peptides of quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
Hela cells, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
BGI
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
He Yanbin

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen


