### Accession
PXD021997

### Title
Proteomic profile of human stem cells from dental pulp and periodontal ligament

### Description
Dental stem cells isolated from oral tissues have been shown to provide with high proliferation ability and multi-lineage differentiation potential. Although the dental stem cells possess the potential of nerve regeneration, the specific expression profile of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) are still unclear. Here, DPSCs and PDLSCs, collected from the same tooth with 3 donors, were tested for high-throughput protein profiles by combining two-dimensional gel proteomics and TMT-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Dental stem cells isolated from oral tissues have been shown to provide with high proliferation ability and multi-lineage differentiation potential. Although the dental stem cells possess the potential of nerve regeneration, the specific expression profile of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) are still unclear. Here, DPSCs and PDLSCs, collected from the same tooth with 3 donors, were tested for high-throughput protein profiles by combining two-dimensional gel proteomics and TMT-based proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Dental stem cells isolated from oral tissues have been shown to provide with high proliferation ability and multi-lineage differentiation potential. Although the dental stem cells possess the potential of nerve regeneration, the specific expression profile of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) are still unclear. Here, DPSCs and PDLSCs, collected from the same tooth with 3 donors, were tested for high-throughput protein profiles by combining two-dimensional gel proteomics and TMT-based proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Background The study of molecular profiling of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) contributes to understanding the high proliferation ability and multi-lineage differentiation potential. Objectives The aim of the study was to compare the protein abundance and specific markers of DPSCs and PDLSCs by protein profiles. Material and methods The DPSCs and PDLSCs extracted from the same tooth were lysed with 3 biological replicates and the protein was collected. Two-dimensional electrophoresis technology and TMT proteomics were used to separate and identify proteins. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021997. The RT-qPCR detection of mRNA expression revealed a special marker for distinguishing two kinds of dental stem cells. Results Compared with PDLSCs, 962 differential proteins (DAPs) were up-regulated, and 127 were down-regulated in DPSCs. In the up-regulated DAPs, two high-scoring sub-networks were detected for neural-related molecules, which encode cell vesicle transport and mitochondrial energy transfer to regulate cell proliferation and secretion factors. A large number of cell adhesion molecules were distinguished among the highly expressed molecules of PDLSCs, supporting that stem cells provide cell attachment functions. It was interpreted ENPL, HS90A and HS90B were highly expressed in DPSCs, while CKB was highly abundant in PDLSCs. Another cell group confirmed that these molecules can be used as special biomarkers to identify and distinguish between DPSCs and PDLSCs. Conclusions This study can promote the basic research and clinical application of dental stem cells. Significance The high-throughput protein profiles were tested by combining two-dimensional gel proteomics and TMT-based proteomics. The proteomics of DPSCs and PDLSCs without individual difference demonstrated an accurate and comprehensive molecular expression profiles and interpretation of neural application potential, this study promotes the basic research of dental stem cells and clinical application.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; 2de; dpscs; pdlscs; nerve regeneration

### Affiliations
University of science and technology beijing

### Submitter
Tong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Tong Lei
University of science and technology beijing


