### Accession
PXD024222

### Title
Homozygous KIAA1033/WASHC4 mutation in siblings with a syndromic phenotype defined by intellectual disability, sensorineural hearing loss, dysmorphisms and muscle fiber vulnerability

### Description
The Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein (WASP) family is known for its participation in cytoskeleton reorganization (Marchand et al., 2001 and Jia et al., 2010). In 2007, the human subtelomeric MGC52000 genes were renamed as Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein and SCAR Homolog (WASH). Human WASH proteins are part of the WASP protein family and colocalize with actin in cells and promote Arp2/3-dependent actin polymerization in vitro (Linardopoulou et al., 2007). WASH multiprotein complex consists of seven subunits: notable to mention Strumpelin and Was Protein Family Homolog (WASH)-interacting protein (SWIP), which is encoded by KIAA1033/WASHC4 gene, FAM21 and Arp2/3. The Arp2/3 dependent actin polymerization from G-actin to F-actin is an important step in regulation of the cytoskeleton, enabling multiple endosomal transport processes (Kelleher et al., 1995 and Derivery et al., 2010). Linardopoulou and colleagues have also shown in an animal model (Drosophila), that the single WASH ortholog is essential for viability (Linardopoulou et al., 2007), strengthening the concept, that WASHC4 plays a crucial role in muscle cell integrity and function. A link between autosomal recessive intellectual disability (ARID) and mutations in the KIAA1033/WASHC4 gene was first recognized in 2011 by Ropers and colleagues. Very recently, Assoum and colleagues reported three additional patients (from two unrelated families) with syndromic ID. Two of them being sisters (8 and 6 years), both presenting with learning disabilities, macrocephaly, dysmorphic features, skeletal anomalies and subependymal heterotopic nodules due to a compound heterozygous mutation of the KIAA1033/WASHC4 gene (p.[Gln442*] and p.[Asp1048Gly]). In this study, we precisely describe the clinical phenotype of the two siblings and provide additional information (histological and proteomic data) derived from the muscle biopsy of the elder sibling to confirm the pathogenicity of the reported variant and establish the function of WASHC4 as relevant for muscle homeostasis. Which, as far as the authors know, has not yet been described in literature.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen fibroblasts were lysed in a buffer containing 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.8 and cOmplete™ ULTRA protease inhibitor using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 minutes (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, 10 cycles) at 4 °C. Afterwards, 20 µl of each sample was taken and diluted 1:4 with 10 mM ammoniumbicarbonate buffer, pH 7.8 (ABC) to conduct a BCA-based determination of protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce BCA protein assay kit). Reduction and carbamidomethylation of the remaining samples were carried out using 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP) for 30 min at 37 °C followed by application of 15 mM Iodacetamide (IAA) for further 30 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were further processed using the S-Trap™ (Protifi) sample preparation procedure: after acidifying the samples by adding 12% aqueous phosphoric acid, they were diluted with S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol (MeOH), triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 100 mM, pH 7.1). Protein-loading to S-Trap columns including centrifugation steps was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Filter-based tryptic digestion was carried out for 2 h at 47 °C using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20. Afterwards, peptides were eluted by applying multiple eluting steps starting with 10 mM ABC followed by elution with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and last with 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Drying of the eluted peptides was performed in a vacuum concentrator followed by dissolving of peptides in 0.1% TFA for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis or 10 mM ammonium acetate with 0.4 mM FA (pH 8.0) for subsequent pH8 reversed phase fractionation. All proteolytic digests were analyzed using monolithic column separation system (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an inert Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) by direct injection of 1 μg sample to proof effectiveness of tryptic digestion. A binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% TFA, solvent B: 0.08% TFA, 84% ACN) ranging from 5-12% B in 5 min and then from 12-50% B in 15 min at a flow rate of 2.2 μl/min and at 60 °C, was applied. UV traces were acquired at 214 nm.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of the samples acquired with nano-LC-MS/MS in DIA mode, the data was introduced to the Spectronaut software and analyzed with a library-based search. As library, the above created spectral library was used. Search and extraction settings were kept as standard (BGS Factory settings). As background proteome, same data were used as selected for the establishment of the spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Washc4, Vcp, Muscle autophagy, Fibroblast proteomics

### Affiliations
Translational Analytics, ISAS, Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hentschel
Translational Analytics, ISAS, Dortmund, Germany


