### Accession
PXD021844

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Brugia malayi microfilaria-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
We have previously shown that the microfilarial (mf) stage of Brugia malayi can inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR; a conserved serine/threonine kinase critical for immune regulation and cellular growth) in human dendritic cells (DC) and we have proposed that this mTOR inhibition is associated with the DC dysfunction seen in filarial infections. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) contain many proteins and nucleic acids including microRNAs (miRNAs) that might affect a variety of intracellular pathways. Thus, EVs secreted from mf may elucidate the mechanism by which the parasite is able to modulate the host immune response during infection. EVs, purified from mf of Brugia malayi and confirmed by size through nanoparticle tracking analysis, were assessed by miRNA microarrays and shown to be enriched (>2fold, p-value<0.05, FDR=0.05) for miR100, miR71, miR34, and miR7. The microarray analysis compared mf-derived EVs and mf supernatant. After confirming their presence in EVs using qPCR for these miRNA targets, web-based target predictions (using MIRPathv3, TarBAse and MicroT-CD) predicted that miR100 targeted mTOR and its downstream regulatory protein 4E-BP1 respectively. Our previous data with live parasites demonstrated that mf downregulate the phosphorylation of mTOR and its downstream effectors. Additionally, our proteomic analysis of the mf-derived EVs revealed the presence of proteins commonly found in these vesicles. We confirmed internalization of mf-derived EVs by human DCs and monocytes using confocal microscopy and flow cytometry, and further demonstrated through flow cytometry, that mf-derived EVs downregulate the phosphorylation of mTOR in human monocytes (THP-1 cells) to the same degree that rapamycin (a known mTOR inhibitor) does. Our data collectively suggest that mf release EVs that interact with host cells, such as DC, to modulate host responses.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic analysis of the purified EV samples was performed by Bioproximity, a mass spectrometry and proteomic service company (Manassas, VA). We sent Bioproximity four purified EV samples, each containing 2ug of protein. The four samples were from independent mf shipments. Purified mf-derived EV preparations were reconstituted in 5% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mM TCEP, 20 mM CAA and heated to 100 degrees Celsius, 10 min. Samples were cooled, probe sonicated and centrifuged to clarify. Samples were digested with trypsin using the SP3 method. Bead eluates were vacuum centrifuged to dryness and resuspended in mobile phase A (97% MilliQ water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Each digestion mixture was analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS. Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo). MGF files were generated from mzML using OpenMS.

### Data Protocol
All searches were performed using the PEAKS 7 studio (version 7, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc) using a combined database of B. malayi and human proteins and decoy sequences containing both forward and reverse sequences as well as a common contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) using default parameters. Dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as well as fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine were included in the database search. Only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 and threshold-based filtering of -10logP scores of 30 for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously shown that the microfilarial (mf) stage of Brugia malayi can inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR; a conserved serine/threonine kinase critical for immune regulation and cellular growth) in human dendritic cells (DC) and we have proposed that this mTOR inhibition is associated with the DC dysfunction seen in filarial infections. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) contain many proteins and nucleic acids including microRNAs (miRNAs) that might affect a variety of intracellular pathways. Thus, EVs secreted from mf may elucidate the mechanism by which the parasite is able to modulate the host immune response during infection. EVs, purified from mf of Brugia malayi and confirmed by size through nanoparticle tracking analysis, were assessed by miRNA microarrays (accession number GSE157226) and shown to be enriched (&gt;2-fold, p-value&lt;0.05, FDR = 0.05) for miR100, miR71, miR34, and miR7. The microarray analysis compared mf-derived EVs and mf supernatant. After confirming their presence in EVs using qPCR for these miRNA targets, web-based target predictions (using MIRPathv3, TarBAse and MicroT-CD) predicted that miR100 targeted mTOR and its downstream regulatory protein 4E-BP1. Our previous data with live parasites demonstrated that mf downregulate the phosphorylation of mTOR and its downstream effectors. Additionally, our proteomic analysis of the mf-derived EVs revealed the presence of proteins commonly found in these vesicles (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021844). We confirmed internalization of mf-derived EVs by human DCs and monocytes using confocal microscopy and flow cytometry, and further demonstrated through flow cytometry, that mf-derived EVs downregulate the phosphorylation of mTOR in human monocytes (THP-1 cells) to the same degree that rapamycin (a known mTOR inhibitor) does. Our data collectively suggest that mf release EVs that interact with host cells, such as DC, to modulate host responses.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Brugia malayi, Extracelluar vesicles, Microfilaria

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health
NIAID
Thomas B. Nutman, M.D. Chief, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases Bldg 4  Room 211C 4 Center Dr. National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD  20892-0425

### Submitter
Alessandra Ricciardi 

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Thomas Nutman
Thomas B. Nutman, M.D. Chief, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases Bldg 4  Room 211C 4 Center Dr. National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD  20892-0425


