### Accession
PXD022991

### Title
In vivo protein-protein crosslinking in human lens through lys or protein N-terminus with Gln/Glu residues

### Description
In this study we identified protein-protein crosslinking through lys or protein N-terminus with Gln/Glu residues in aged human lens tissues. Such crosslinks could be reproduced experimentally by incubation of Glu- or Gln-containing peptides and their formation were consistent with an amino group attacking a glutarimide intermediate.

### Sample Protocol
Different regions of the human lens were dissected and proteins in the samples were digested by trypsin and tryptic pepitdes were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched by pLink against a custom human lens database for identification of crosslinked peptides. All reported crosslinked peptides were manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
Long-lived proteins (LLPs) are susceptible to the accumulation of both enzymatic and spontaneous post-translational modifications (PTMs). A prominent PTM observed in LLPs is covalent protein-protein crosslinking. In this study, we examined aged human lenses and found several proteins to be crosslinked at Glu and Gln residues. This new covalent bond involves the amino group of Lys or an &#x3b1;-amino group. A number of these crosslinks were found in intermediate filament proteins. Such crosslinks could be reproduced experimentally by incubation of Glu- or Gln-containing peptides and their formation was consistent with an amino group attacking a glutarimide intermediate. These findings show that both Gln and Glu residues can act as sites for spontaneous covalent crosslinking in LLPs and they provide a mechanistic explanation for an otherwise puzzling observation, that a major fraction of A&#x3b2; in the human brain is crosslinked via Glu 22 and the N-terminal amino group.

### Keywords
Protein-protein crosslinking, Human lens, Glutarimide

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Zhen Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin L Schey
Vanderbilt University


