### Accession
PXD034443

### Title
Chronic intermittent ethanol exposure selectively impairs behavioral flexibility in aged rats compared to adult rats and modifies protein and protein pathways related to Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Repeated excessive alcohol consumption increases the risk of developing cognitive decline and dementia. Hazardous drinking among older adults further increases such vulnerabilities. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying alcohol-induced cognitive deficits in older adults, we performed a chronic intermittent ethanol exposure paradigm (ethanol or water gavage every other day 10 times) in 8-week-old young adult and 70-week-old aged rats. While spatial memory retrieval ascertained by probe trials in the Morris water maze was not significantly different between ethanol-treated and water-treated rats in both age groups after the fifth and tenth gavages, behavioral flexibility was impaired in ethanol-treated rats than water-treated rats in the aged group but not in the young adult group. Further proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses on their hippocampal tissues by tandem mass tag mass spectrometry revealed ethanol-treatment-associated proteomic and phosphoproteomic differences distinct to the aged rats, including the upregulations of Prkcd protein level, several of its phosphosites, and its kinase activity and the same aspects in Camk2a but downregulated, and were enriched in pathways involved in neurotransmission regulation, synaptic plasticity, neuronal apoptosis, and insulin receptor signaling. In conclusion, our behavioral and proteomic results added several candidate proteins and pathways potentially associated with alcohol-induced cognitive decline in aged adults.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal tissue was homogenized with homogenizing buffer (20 mM HEPES/8M urea, pH 8.2) and 200 mg disruptor beads in Bioruptor Plus TPX tubes (Diagenode, Denville, NJ, USA) using a Bioruptor Plus sonication device (Diagenode; 30 cycles of 30 sec on and 30 sec off). The homogenates were then transferred to LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 15 min at 4ºC. Protein levels in the supernatant were measured by BCA protein assay and the volume corresponding to 200 μg protein was brought up to 100 μL by adding homogenizing buffer. The samples were then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 9 mM iodoacetamide before dilution with 850 μL 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2, and digestion with 10 μg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 24 hr at 32ºC.

### Data Protocol
Both proteomic and phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Port Rattus norvegicus database (8135 entries; UniPort UP000002494; downloaded February 2021; setup for MS2 reporter ion quantification with TMTpro 16plex isobaric labels) with the Andromeda peptide search engine embedded in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Repeated excessive alcohol consumption increases the risk of developing cognitive decline and dementia. Hazardous drinking among older adults further increases such vulnerabilities. To investigate whether alcohol induces cognitive deficits in older adults, we performed a chronic intermittent ethanol exposure paradigm (ethanol or water gavage every other day 10 times) in 8-week-old young adult and 70-week-old aged rats. While spatial memory retrieval ascertained by probe trials in the Morris water maze was not significantly different between ethanol-treated and water-treated rats in both age groups after the fifth and tenth gavages, behavioral flexibility was impaired in ethanol-treated rats compared to water-treated rats in the aged group but not in the young adult group. We then examined ethanol-treatment-associated hippocampal proteomic and phosphoproteomic differences distinct in the aged rats. We identified several ethanol-treatment-related proteins, including the upregulations of the Prkcd protein level, several of its phosphosites, and its kinase activity and downregulation in the Camk2a protein level. Our bioinformatic analysis revealed notable changes in pathways involved in neurotransmission regulation, synaptic plasticity, neuronal apoptosis, and insulin receptor signaling. In conclusion, our behavioral and proteomic results identified several candidate proteins and pathways potentially associated with alcohol-induced cognitive decline in aged adults.

### Keywords
Chronic ethanol intermittent exposure, Phosphoproteomics, Behavioral flexibility, Proteomics, Water maze, Rats, Hippocampus, Spatial memory

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic, Research Associate
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Benjamin Madden

### Lab Head
Dr Ada Ho
Mayo Clinic, Research Associate


