### Accession
PXD000814

### Title
Proteomics study of chaperone network in Escherichia coli

### Description
Proteomics study on the periplasmic chaperone network in Escherichia coli

### Sample Protocol
Frozen E. coli cellular pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA-free mixture (Roche Applied Science), one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Roche Applied Science) and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 10 mL of lysis buffer) and cells were then lysed by 10 rapid passages through a 23-gauge hypodermic syringe needle and by sonication on ice. After centrifugation (20,000 × g 30 min at 4°C), the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT at 56 °C for 25 min, alkylated with 4 mM iodacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark and reduced again with 2 mM DTT at room temperature to prevent over-alkylation. A first enzymatic digestion step was performed in 8 M urea lysis buffer using Lys-C at 37 °C for 4 h (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). The sample was diluted four times with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and digested overnight  at 37 °C with trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). Finally, the digestion was quenched with 5% formic acid. The resulting peptides were chemically labeled using stable isotope dimethyl labeling

### Data Protocol
All MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific) with standardized workflows. The generated peak list with Proteome Discoverer was searched using Mascot software (version 2.3 Matrix Science, U.K.) against Escherichia coli K12 MC4100 database downloaded from UniProt on 6th March 2013. The database search was performed with the following parameters: a mass tolerance of ±50 ppm for precursor masses; ±0.05 Da for MS/MS, allowing two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The enzyme was specified as trypsin and the fragment ion type was specified as electrospray ionization ESI-QUAD-TOF for the mass spectra. A decoy search was enabled. The resulting results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the PSMs level utilizing the percolator-based algorithm {{536 Kall,L. 2007;}}. In addition, only PSMs with Mascot score ≥20 were accepted and a minimum peptide length was set to 6 aa. Protein ratios were normalized by protein median, spectra were manually inspected and the corresponding ratios modified accordingly.

### Publication Abstract
How proteins are trafficked, folded, and assembled into functional units in the cell envelope of Gram-negative bacteria is of significant interest. A number of chaperones have been identified, however, the molecular roles of these chaperones are often enigmatic because it has been challenging to assign substrates. Recently we discovered a novel periplasmic chaperone, called YfgM, which associates with PpiD and the SecYEG translocon and operates in a network that contains Skp and SurA. The aim of the study presented here was to identify putative substrates of YfgM. We reasoned that substrates would be incorrectly folded or trafficked when YfgM was absent from the cell, and thus more prone to proteolysis (the loss-of-function rationale). We therefore used a comparative proteomic approach to identify cell envelope proteins that were lower in abundance in a strain lacking yfgM, and strains lacking yfgM together with either skp or surA. Sixteen putative substrates were identified. The list contained nine inner membrane proteins (CusS, EvgS, MalF, OsmC, TdcB, TdcC, WrbA, YfhB, and YtfH) and seven periplasmic proteins (HdeA, HdeB, AnsB, Ggt, MalE, YcgK, and YnjE), but it did not include any lipoproteins or outer membrane proteins. Significantly, AnsB (an asparaginase) and HdeB (a protein involved in the acid stress response), were lower in abundance in all three strains lacking yfgM. For both genes, we ruled out the possibility that they were transcriptionally down-regulated, so it is highly likely that the corresponding proteins are misfolded/mistargeted and turned-over in the absence of YfgM. For HdeB we validated this conclusion in a pulse-chase experiment. The identification of HdeB and other cell envelope proteins as potential substrates will be a valuable resource for follow-up experiments that aim to delineate molecular the function of YfgM.

### Keywords
E. coli; periplasmic chaperone network; yfgm

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


