### Accession
PXD011276

### Title
The Synovial Fluid Proteome Differentiates between Septic and Nonseptic Articular Pathologies

### Description
Presently few studies have investigated the proteomic profile of equine synovial fluid (SF) using high mass resolution mass spectrometer and in-solution trypsin digestion and to our knowledge none have investigated protein profile changes septic SF in any species. In this study we have used mass spectrometry and label-free quantification to identify potential protein biomarkers that allow differentiation between equine articular joint pathologies, potentially aiding accurate diagnosis and enabling increased understanding of the effect of septic synovitis on the joint environment. Identification of characteristic proteomic profiles in synovial sepsis would increase the understanding of the molecular basis of the condition and also allow the identification of potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and treatment of the disease. We hypothesised that proteomic profile characteristics will distinguish septic from non-septic equine arthropathies and between the non-septic common arthropathies osteochondrosis and OA.

### Sample Protocol
SF was thawed and treated with 1µg/ml hyaluronidase as previously described and centrifuged at 10000g for 10 min to remove any particulates.  Protein concentrations of SF were determined by Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). A volume of sample equivalent to 5mg of protein was added to 10 µL of beads.  SF samples were enriched for low abundance proteins using ProteoMiner™ beads (BioRad, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Beads were re-suspended in 80µL of 25mM ambic and 5 µL of 1% (w/v) Rapigest SF (Waters, UK) added and the sample heated at 80˚C for 10 min. On bead trypsin digestion was undertaken.   Tryptic digests (samples were diluted 5-fold in 0.1% (v/v) TFA/3% (v/v) ACN and 2uL loaded) were subjected to LC-MS/MS, using a 2h gradient.  Data-dependent LC-MSMS analyses were conducted on a QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Hemel Hempstead, UK). Sample digests were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using a loading buffer of 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 7 min at a flow rate of 12 µL min-1.  The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) and the peptides eluted using a linear gradient of 96.2 % A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid):3.8 % B (0.1 % [v/v[ formic acid in water:acetonitrile [80:20] [v/v]) to 50 % A:50 % B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1, followed by washing at 1% A:99 % B for 5 min and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions.  The column was maintained at 40oC, and the effluent introduced directly into the integrated nano-electrospray ionisation source operating in positive ion mode.  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with survey scans between m/z 350-2000 acquired at a mass resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200.  The maximum injection time was 100 ms, and the automatic gain control was set to 3e6.  The 12 most intense precursor ions with charges states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units.  The maximum injection time was 100 ms, and the automatic gain control was set to 1e5.  Fragmentation of the peptides was by higher-energy collisional dissociation using normalised collision energy of 30%.  Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the raw files of the acquired spectra were analysed by the ProgenesisQI™ software (Waters, Manchester, UK) which aligns the files and then peak picks for quantification by peptide abundance. Briefly, the top five spectra for each feature were exported from ProgenesisQI™ and utilised for peptide identification with our local Mascot server (Version 2.6.2), searching against the Unihorse database with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable mod, peptide mass tolerance of 10ppm and MSMS tolerance of 0.01Da. In this study we define differentially expressed (DE) proteins with an FDR adjusted p value of <0.05, were identified with at least two unique peptides and had a greater than 2 fold change in expression.

### Publication Abstract
Articular conditions are common in horses and can result in loss of function, chronic pain and/or inability to work. Common conditions include osteoarthritis, osteochondrosis and synovial sepsis, which can be life-threatening, but despite the high clinical prevalence of these conditions, rapid and specific diagnosis, monitoring and prognostication remains a challenge for practicing veterinarians. Synovial fluid from a range of arthropathies was enriched for low abundance proteins using combinatorial peptide ligand ProteoMiner&#x2122; beads and analysed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Changes in protein abundances were analysed using label-free quantification. Principle component analysis of differentially expressed proteins identified groupings associated with joint pathology. Findings were validated using ELISA. Lactotransferrin (LTF) abundance was increased in sepsis compared to all other groups and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 6 (IGFBP6) abundance decreased in sepsis compared to other disease groups. Pathway analysis identified upregulation of the complement system in synovial joint sepsis and the downregulation of eukaryotic translation initiation factors and mTOR signalling pathways in both OA and OC compared to the healthy group. Overall, we have identified a catalogue of proteins which we propose to be involved in osteoarthritis, osteochondrosis and synovial sepsis pathogenesis. SIGNIFICANCE: Osteoarthritis, osteochondrosis and synovial sepsis, which can be life-threatening, are common articular conditions in which rapid and specific diagnosis, monitoring and prognostication remains a challenge for practicing veterinarians. This study has identified that the equine synovial fluid proteome exhibits distinctive profile changes between osteoarthritis, osteochondrosis, synovial sepsis and healthy joints. Elevated synovial abundance of lactotransferrin and decreased insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 6 were both found to distinguish synovial sepsis from all other study groups. Thus, these protein markers may have a future role in clinical practice to enable an earlier and reliable diagnosis of synovial sepsis.

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Proteomics, Sepsis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Aibek Smagul

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom


