### Accession
PXD026453

### Title
BioID samples ARS2/ARS2c1/ARS2c2

### Description
BioID data. LC-MS/MS. Hek293T cell line. Biotinylation

### Sample Protocol
Purification of biotinylated proteins was performed as outlined by50. Flp-In T-REx cells stably expressing tetracycline inducible ARS2n-BirA/control or BioID2-ARS2n/ARS2c1/ARS2c2/control, were treated for 24h with 10-200ng/ml of tetracycline. HEK 293T cells were transfected with BIOD2-ARS2n/ARS2c1/ARS2c2/-3xFLAG or control and incubated for 24h. All the conditions were incubated an additional 24h in complete DMEM media supplemented with 50uM of biotin (Sigma). Five individually treated 10 cm2 dishes, corresponding to around 50x106 total cells were pooled together and considered 1 biological replicate. One biological replicate (5x10cm2 dishes) was used for tetracycline inducible BioID2-ARS2n/ARS2c1/ARS2c2/control, and three biological replicates (15x10cm2 dishes) were used for the rest of the evaluated conditions (tetracycline inducible ARS2n-BirA/control and BIOD2-ARS2n/ARS2c1/ARS2c2/-3xFLAG/control overexpression). Cells were washed three times in PBS and lysed directly on the plate with 500ul Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors cocktail). Triton X-100 was added to a final volume of 2%. Lysates were sonicated on 30% amplitude for 2 cycles of 30 seconds with 2 minutes rest, using a sonic dismembrator (Fisher Scientific). Lysates were diluted in chilled 50mMTris pH7.4 and subjected to a final round of sonication. Insoluble cellular debris was cleared by centrifugation at 16 000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Cleared extracts were incubated with 200 ul of Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher) and incubated overnight at 4°C. The following morning, beads were washed two times with Wash Buffer 1 (2% SDS), once with Wash Buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholic acid, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES ph7.5 and 1% Triton X-100), once in Wash Buffer 3 (10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholic acid, and 1mM EDTA), and finally two times with Wash Buffer 4 (50 mM Tris pH 7.4 and 50 mM NaCl), pelleting beads using a magnetic rack. For western blotting, beads were resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer supplemented with 50 uM biotin, incubated for 10 minutes, and boiled for 10 minutes before loading on an SDS-PAGE gel. Total protein was detected using Silver Stain kit (Thermofisher) or Coomasie stain, and BIOD2-ARS2n/ARS2c1/ARS2c2/control concentration was estimated by extrapolation on a BSA curve ran on the same gel. Equal amounts of proteins were used as input for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were created by XCalibur 4.3.73.11 (Thermo Scientific) software and analyzed with PEAKS Client 7.0 software suite (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Database search parameters as follows:  precursor tolerance 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.035 Da; Trypsin enzyme 2 missed cleavages; Orbi-TRAP instrument type; fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (K, N-term) Biotinylation.  SwissProt_20200305 Database (561911Sequences /202173710 residues)52. To identify significant interactors with the different ARS2 isoforms, we tested for differences in unique peptide counts across different baits using triplicate replicates of each bait condition, as well as additional negative controls from25,53. Unique peptide counts were used as input for SAINTexpress (v3.6.3; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1874391913005381). For each bait, significant prey were defined as those with a SAINT score > 0.7 and > 2 average unique peptides across conditions. Over-representation analysis of prey for each bait was conducted using the enricher function of ClusterProfiler (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22455463/). Data visualizations were generated in R (v > 4.0), using the ComplexHeatmap (https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/32/18/2847/1743594) package. Functional annotation maps of ARS2 isoform interactomes were generated by mining for enriched GO ‘‘Biological Process’’ terms using the CluoGo plugin27 within the Cytoscape framework54. ClueGO is a user-friendly plugin that allows the decoding and visualization of functionally grouped GO terms in the form of networks. The size of the nodes shows the term significance after Bonferroni correction. Only GO terms with a P-value < 0.01 were considered significant. A kappa score was calculated reflecting the relationships between the terms based on the similarity of their associated genes, which was set to 0.5 as the threshold in this study. The Organic algorithm that determines node positions based on their connectivity was used for laying out the networks. Protein-Protein interaction networks were generated using STRING55. Saint analyses are reported in Supplemental tables 2-4.

### Publication Abstract
The life of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) transcripts is shaped by the dynamic formation of mutually exclusive ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) that direct transcript biogenesis and turnover. A key regulator&#xa0;of RNA metabolism in the nucleus is the scaffold protein ARS2 (arsenic resistance protein 2), bound to the cap binding complex (CBC). We report here that alternative splicing of ARS2's intron 5, generates cytoplasmic isoforms that lack 270 amino acids from the N-terminal of the protein and are functionally distinct from nuclear ARS2. Switching of ARS2 isoforms within the CBC in the cytoplasm has dramatic functional consequences, changing ARS2 from a NMD inhibitor to a NMD promoter that enhances the binding of UPF1 to NCBP1 and ERF1, favouring SURF complex formation, SMG7 recruitment and transcript degradation. ARS2 isoform exchange is also relevant during arsenic stress, where cytoplasmic ARS2 promotes a global response to arsenic in a CBC-independent manner. We propose that ARS2 isoform switching promotes the proper recruitment of RNP complexes during NMD and the cellular response to arsenic stress. The existence of non-redundant ARS2 isoforms is relevant for cell homeostasis, and stress response.

### Keywords
Bioid data

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
monica mesa

### Lab Head
Dr Perry Howard
University of Victoria


