### Accession
PXD004207

### Title
Mouse VSMC LC-MSMS -  Functional and Proteomic Investigations Reveal Major Royal Jelly Protein 1 Associated with Anti-hypertension Activity in Mouse Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells

### Description
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are a major cell type of the arterial wall and their functionality is associated with blood pressure regulation. Although royal jelly (RJ) has reported effects on anti-hypertension, the mechanism of blood pressure regulation by major royal jelly protein 1 (MRJP1), the most abundant RJ protein, is still unknown. Therefore, mrjp1 gene was delivered into mouse VSMCs to investigate how MRJP1 influences the VSMC functionality by functional and proteomic analysis.The data here are the proteomic analysis of triplicated control and MRJP1 expressing VSMCs.

### Sample Protocol
The total proteins of both control and MRJP1 expressing VSMCs were extracted as below: VSMCs were ultrasonicated on ice and lysated in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4%  3-[(3- cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 20 mM Tris-base and 30 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by centrifugation of 15000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to obtain a protein supernatant. The proteins were precipitated by acetone for 30 min at -20°C prior to being centrifuged twice at 15000 g, 4 °C for 10 min. The precipitated pellets were redissolved in 40mM NH4HCO3. The final protein concentration was quantified using a Bradford assay. The protein samples were reduced with a solution of 10 mM DTT for 1 h. Then the samples were incubated in 50 mM iodoacetamide for alkylation in the dark for 1 h. Proteins were digested using trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37 °C in a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. The enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 1 μL of formic acid. Finally, peptides were vacuum-dried using a SpeedVac system (RVC 2-18, Marin Christ, Osterod, Germany) for the following LC-MS analysis. To create the quantitative proteomic profiles of control and MRJP1 expressing VSMCs, peptide samples were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto an LC-MS system with three replicates. The EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) nano liquid chromatography system was coupled with Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) via the nanoelectrospray source. Reverse-phase chromatography and trap column packed with 2 µm C18 (100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) were used for peptide enrichment, and peptides were further separated on a column packed with 2 μm C18 (100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for analysis. The mobile phase buffer consisted of buﬀer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buﬀer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 350 nl/min using the following gradients: from 3 to 8% buffer B for 10 min, from 8 to 20 % buffer B for 80 min, from 20 to 30% buffer B for 20 min, from 30 to 90% buffer B for 5 min, and 90% buffer B for 10 min. Ion signals were collected in a data-dependent mode with the following settings: full scan resolution at 70,000, scan range: m/z 300-1,800; MS/MS scan resolution at 17,500, isolation window: 2 m/z, normalized collision energy: 27, loop count 10, and dynamic exclusion was also used (charge exclusion: unassigned 1, >8; peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 10 s).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were retrieved using Xcalibur software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, the extracted spectra were searched by in-house PEAKS software (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) against the mouse database generated from UNIPROT containing 76079 protein sequences (released in August 2015). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 15.0 ppm, and fragmention tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. The following modifications were applied: carbamidomethylation (C)/+57.02 Da was selected fixed modification, and oxidation (M)/+15.99 Da was selected as variable modifications. The other parameters used were the following: enzyme, trypsin; allowing a nonspecific cleavage at neither end of the peptide; maximum missed cleavages per peptide, 2; maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide, 2. A fusion target-decoy approach was used for the estimation of the false discovery rate (FDR) and controlled at ≤1.0% (−10 log P ≥20.0) at both protein and peptide levels.  Protein identifications were used only if at least two spectra were identified in one sample. The relative quantification was performed through the label-free approach in the Q module of PEAKS by using the expectation-maximization algorithm. Peptide features and proteins (whose peptides detected in all 6 samples were selected) of fold change ≥1.5 and statistical p value< 0.05 were considered significantly different between groups.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are a major cell type of the arterial wall and their functionality is associated with blood pressure regulation. Although royal jelly (RJ) has reported effects on anti-hypertension, the mechanism of blood pressure regulation by major royal jelly protein 1 (MRJP1), the most abundant RJ protein, is still unknown. The mrjp1 gene was inserted into mouse VSMCs to investigate how MRJP1 influences VSMC functionality by functional and proteomic analysis. The expression of MRJP1 in VSMCs significantly reduced cell contraction, migration, and proliferation, suggesting a potential role in decreasing hypertension via action on VSMCs. These anti-hypertension activities were further observed in the changes of the proteome setting of mouse VSMCs. Among 675 different proteins after MRJP1 expression, 646 were down-regulated and significantly enriched in pathways implicated in VSMC contraction and migration, which suggest MRJP1 lowers VSMC contraction and migration by inhibiting muscle filament movement. The down-regulated proteins also enriched pathways in proliferation, indicating that MRJP1 hinders VSMC proliferation by reducing the supply of energy and genetic material. This is the first report integrating MRJP1 into VSMC, revealing the function and mechanism correlated with anti-hypertensive activity. This offers a therapeutic potential to control hypertension by gene-therapy using bee-products.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mrjp1, Lc-msms, Vsmc

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
CAAS

### Submitter
Pei Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


