### Accession
PXD037486

### Title
In-depth serum proteomics of hospitalized COVID-19 patients and PCR-negative healthy controls with HiRIEF LC-MS/MS

### Description
We performed in-depth MS-based plasma-proteome profiling in 20 hospitalised patients with COVID-19 and 7 healthy controls (PCR- and sero-negative for SARS-CoV-2) by high-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) coupled with liquid chromatography and mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR‐confirmed patients from Karolinska University Hospital in Stockholm, Sweden, were included in the study in April 2020. Data from the cohort and methodology of clinical and immunological assays has been previously described in detail elsewhere (Varnaitė et al., 2020). The study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm, Sweden and by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority, and is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All COVID-19 patients and healthy controls included in this study provided written informed consent. The cohort is described in detail elsewhere (Varnaitė et al., 2020)  Reference: Varnaitė, R., García, M., Glans, H., Maleki, K.T., Sandberg, J.T., Tynell, J., Christ, W., Lagerqvist, N., Asgeirsson, H., Ljunggren, H.-G., et al. (2020). Expansion of SARS-CoV-2-Specific Antibody-Secreting Cells and Generation of  Neutralizing Antibodies in Hospitalized COVID-19 Patients. J. Immunol. 205, 2437–2446.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Serum was collected from COVID-19 patients and healthy controls in BD Vacutainer serum tubes with spray-coated silica (BD Biosciences). After coagulation for up to 2 hours at room temperature (RT), serum was isolated by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 10 min and immediately stored at −80°C for later analysis.  Sample isolation for proteomics High Abundant Protein Depletion Depletions were performed using the High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein mini columns (Thermofisher), according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, 10 μL of serum were applied to each Mini column and incubated at room temperature with gentle end-over-end mixing, for 20 min. Post depleted samples were then heated at 56 °C for 30 min for viral inactivation. Depleted flowthroughs were recovered by centrifugation. The depleted serum flow-through was concentrated on 5 kDa molecular weight cut off filter followed by buffer exchange to 50 mM HEPES pH7.6 as previously described (Cao et al., 2021).  MS Sample Preparation  Depleted serum was denatured at 60 °C for 1 h followed by reduction with DTT at 95 °C for 30 min and alkylation with chloroacetamide at room temperature for 20 min at end concentrations of 4 mM. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight. TMT-16-plex labelling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions and labelling efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS on pooled samples using 30 min gradients to ensure >95% labelling of peptides before pooling. After pooling samples, 1 mL Strata X-C 33u columns (Phenomenex) were used for sample clean-up. The peptides were subsequently dried in a SpeedVac. HiRIEF was performed as previously described (Branca et al., 2014; Pernemalm et al., 2019). Briefly, the samples were rehydrated in 8 M urea with bromophenol blue and 1% IPG buffer, and subsequently loaded to the immobilized 3-10 pH gradient (IPG) strip and run according to previously published isoelectric focusing (IEF) protocols (Pernemalm et al., 2019). After IEF, the IPG strip was eluted into 72 fractions using in-house robot. The obtained fractions were dried using SpeedVac and frozen at −20 °C until MS analysis.  LC-ESI-MS/MS Q-Exactive HF Q-Exactive Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each of the 72 plate wells was dissolved in 20 μL solvent A and 10 μL were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μL min–1, the curved gradient went from 6 to 10% B up to 40% B in each fraction in a dynamic range of gradient length, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolutions (and mass range 300–1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1 × 106 for MS1 and 1 × 105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 400 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ∼2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  References: Cao, X., Sandberg, A., Araújo, J.E., Cvetkovski, F., Berglund, E., Eriksson, L.E., and Pernemalm, M. (2021). Evaluation of Spin Columns for Human Plasma Depletion to Facilitate MS-Based  Proteomics Analysis of Plasma. J. Proteome Res. 20, 4610–4620. Branca, R.M.M., Orre, L.M., Johansson, H.J., Granholm, V., Huss, M., Perez-Bercoff, A., Forshed, J., Kall, L., and Lehtio, J. (2014). HiRIEF LC-MS enables deep proteome coverage and unbiased proteogenomics. Nat. Methods 11, 59–62. Pernemalm, M. (2021). Evaluation of Spin Columns for Human Plasma Depletion to Facilitate MS-Based  Proteomics Analysis of Plasma. J. Proteome Res. 20, 4610–4620.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Chambers et al., 2012).  Spectra were searched using MSGF+ search engine (v2020.03.14) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v3.04.0) (Granholm et al., 2014)  for Percolator target-decoy scoring.  All searches were done against the Human protein coding subset of Ensembl version 105 using our proteomics workflow (https://github.com/lehtiolab/ddamsproteomics, vs.2.7), which was run with Nextflow (v20.01.0). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMTpro-16-plex on lysine and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues.  Quantification of TMTpro-16-plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project’s IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.5) (Röst et al., 2016). MS1 feature detection and quantification was performed using Dinosaur (https://github.com/fickludd/dinosaur) (Teleman et al., 2016). PSMs found at 1% FDR were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification by TMTpro-16-plex reporter ions was calculated using medians of log2-transformed PSM channel intensities from which were subtracted the average value of three and two internal channels, for set 1 and 2 respectively. Protein and gene quantification values were then normalized by subtracting their channel medians. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).  References Chambers, M.C., MacLean, B., Burke, R., Amodei, D., Ruderman, D.L., Neumann, S., Gatto, L., Fischer, B., Pratt, B., Egertson, J., et al. (2012). A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012 3010 30, 918–920. Kim, S., and Pevzner, P.A. (2014). MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nat. Commun. 5, 5277. Granholm, V., Kim, S., Navarro, J.C.F., Sjölund, E., Smith, R.D., and Käll, L. (2014). Fast and accurate database searches with MS-GF+percolator. J. Proteome Res. 13, 890–897. Röst, H.L., Sachsenberg, T., Aiche, S., Bielow, C., Weisser, H., Aicheler, F., Andreotti, S., Ehrlich, H.-C., Gutenbrunner, P., Kenar, E., et al. (2016). OpenMS: a flexible open-source software platform for mass spectrometry data analysis. Nat. Methods 13, 741–748. Teleman, J., Chawade, A., Sandin, M., Levander, F., and Malmström, J. (2016). Dinosaur: A Refined Open-Source Peptide MS Feature Detector. J. Proteome Res. 15, 2143–2151. Savitski, M.M., Wilhelm, M., Hahne, H., Kuster, B., and Bantscheff, M. (2015). A Scalable Approach for Protein False Discovery Rate Estimation in Large Proteomic Data Sets. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 14, 2394–2404.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 is characterised by systemic immunological perturbations in the human body, which can lead to multi-organ damage. Many of these processes are considered to be mediated by the blood. Therefore, to better understand the systemic host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we performed systematic analyses of the circulating, soluble proteins in the blood through global proteomics by mass-spectrometry (MS) proteomics. Here, we show that a large part of the soluble&#xa0;blood proteome is altered in COVID-19, among them elevated levels of interferon-induced and proteasomal proteins. Some proteins that have alternating levels in human cells after a SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro and in different organs of COVID-19 patients are deregulated in the blood, suggesting shared infection-related changes.The availability of different public proteomic resources on soluble blood proteome alterations leaves uncertainty about the change of a given protein during COVID-19. Hence, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of MS global proteomics studies of soluble blood proteomes, including up to 1706 individuals (1039 COVID-19 patients), to provide concluding estimates for the alteration of 1517 soluble blood proteins in COVID-19. Finally, based on the meta-analysis we developed CoViMAPP, an open-access resource for effect sizes of alterations and diagnostic potential of soluble blood proteins in COVID-19, which is publicly available for the research, clinical, and academic community.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Hirief, Plasma, Covid-19, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Science for Life Laboratory; Department of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
1. Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm;
2. Proteogenomics Facility, Science for Life Laboratory

### Submitter
Haris Babačić

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Science for Life Laboratory; Department of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden


