### Accession
PXD037250

### Title
Proteomic and in silico analyses of the influence of dextran synthesis on the adaptation of Leuconostoc lactis AV1n to temperature change

### Description
Leuconostoc lactis is found in vegetables, fruits, and meat and is used by the food industry in the preparation of dairy products, wines and sugars. We have previously demonstrated, that the dextransucrase (DsrLL) of Lc. lactis AV1n produces a high molecular weight dextran from sucrose, indicating its potential use as a dextran forming starter culture. We have also shown that this bacterium was able to produce 10-fold higher levels of dextran at 20 °C than at 37 °C, at the former temperature accompanied by an increase of dsrLL gene expression. However, the general physiological response of Lc. lactis AV1n to cold temperature in the presence of sucrose, leading to an increased production of dextran has not been yet investigated. Therefore, we have here used a quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the cold temperature-induced changes in the proteomic profile of this strain in comparison to its proteomic response at 37 °C. In total, 337 proteins were found to be differentially expressed at the applied significance criteria (FDR-adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 and with a fold change ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67) with 204 proteins overexpressed, among which 13% were involved in protein as well as cell wall, and envelope component biosynthesis including DsrLL as RNA chaperones. Proteins implicated in cold stress were expressed at high level at 20 °C and possibly play a role in the upregulation of DsrLL allowing efficient synthesis of the protein essential for its adaptation to cold. Post-transcriptional regulation of DsrLL expression also seems to take place through the interplay of exonucleases and endonucleases overexpressed at 20 °C, that would influence the half-life of the dsrLL transcript. Furthermore, the mechanism of cold resistance of Lc. lactis AV1n seems to be also based on energy saving through a decrease in growth rate mediated by a decrease in carbohydrate metabolism and its orientation towards the production pathways for storage molecules. Thus, this better understanding of the responses to low temperature and mechanisms for environmental adaptation of Lc. lactis could be exploited for industrial use of strains belonging to this species.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extraction and quantification For the protein’s extraction, the pellet stored at -80 °C was thawed at 4 °C and resuspended in 291 µL of 10 % SDS. Then the mixture was transferred into a cryotube, filled with glass beads, Ribolyser® (Hybaid) previously cooled to 0 °C, and subjected to two cycles of 45 s at a speed of 6, to break the cells. The tubes were then centrifuged (11,269 x g, 20 min, 4 °C) and the upper suspension containing the proteins was collected and stored at -80 °C. Protein quantification was performed using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit and the Qubit® 1.0 fluorometer. Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  For the analysis of the proteomic profile in the different culture conditions, protein extracts were fractionated in SDS-PAGE (10% polyacrylamide) till the whole proteome had penetrated in the resolving gel (about 1 cm of total migration). Gels were stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen). Each proteome was excised and cut in small pieces prior to manual in-gel digestion with trypsin. Excised bands were separately detained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50% acetonitrile (ACN), (Fisher Chemical). Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Bio-Rad) in 50 mM ABC and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) in 50 mM ABC. Then, gel pieces were digested with porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), at a final concentration 12.5 ng/ml in 50 mM ABC, overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted using 100% ACN and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, (Sigma-Aldrich), purified using a Zip Tip (Millipore, Sigma-Aldrich), and dried. Finally, samples were reconstituted in 12 μl of 0.1% formic acid in water (Fisher Chemical) and the peptide quantification was performed using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit and the Qubit® 1.0 fluorometer.  Mass spectrometry Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). For each analysis, the sample was loaded into an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and eluted through a rapid-separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientiﬁc) (50cm long, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm particle size). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A), (Fisher Chemical) and 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile (solvent B), (Fisher Chemical). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5–35% solvent B for 100 min, 35–45% solvent B for 20 min, 45%-100% solvent B for 5 min and 100% solvent B for 15 min. Four microliters (1µg) of sample were injected. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and 300 °C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400–1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software, version 1.6.5.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using standardized protocols (Tyanova et al., 2016). Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the Leuconostoc lactis (UniProtKB/Swiss- Prot/TrEMBL, July 2019, 6259 sequences) protein database, supplemented with the Cherry Protein Sequence. In the search parameters, the methionine oxidation was established as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR; peptide and protein level) and subsequently the MaxQuant output file (proteinGroup.txt) was loaded in Perseus Software, version 1.6.5.0 (Tyanova et al, 2016) for further statistical analysis. A minimum of 66% label-free quantification valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities for proteins expressed differentially but that for "presence-absence" proteins were replaced by constant 1 to facilitate statistical analysis. Then, a two-sample Student’s t test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value ≤0.05 and log2 ratio of ≥1.5 or ≤ 0.67 were considered as deregulated.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Leuconostoc lactis</i> is found in vegetables, fruits, and meat and is used by the food industry in the preparation of dairy products, wines, and sugars. We have previously demonstrated that the dextransucrase of <i>Lc. lactis</i> (DsrLL) AV1n produces a high-molecular-weight dextran from sucrose, indicating its potential use as a dextran-forming starter culture. We have also shown that this bacterium was able to produce 10-fold higher levels of dextran at 20&#xb0;C than at 37&#xb0;C, at the former temperature accompanied by an increase in <i>dsrLL</i> gene expression. However, the general physiological response of <i>Lc. lactis</i> AV1n to cold temperature in the presence of sucrose, leading to increased production of dextran, has not been yet investigated. Therefore, we have used a quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the cold temperature-induced changes in the proteomic profile of this strain in comparison to its proteomic response at 37&#xb0;C. In total, 337 proteins were found to be differentially expressed at the applied significance criteria (adjusted <i>p</i>-value &#x2264; 0.05, FDR 5%, and with a fold-change &#x2265; 1.5 or &#x2264; 0.67) with 204 proteins overexpressed, among which 13% were involved in protein as well as cell wall, and envelope component biosynthesis including DsrLL. Proteins implicated in cold stress were expressed at a high level at 20&#xb0;C and possibly play a role in the upregulation of DsrLL, allowing the efficient synthesis of the protein essential for its adaptation to cold. Post-transcriptional regulation of DsrLL expression also seems to take place through the interplay of exonucleases and endonucleases overexpressed at 20&#xb0;C, which would influence the half-life of the <i>dsrLL</i> transcript. Furthermore, the mechanism of cold resistance of <i>Lc. lactis</i> AV1n seems to be also based on energy saving through a decrease in growth rate mediated by a decrease in carbohydrate metabolism and its orientation toward the production pathways for storage molecules. Thus, this better understanding of the responses to low temperature and mechanisms for environmental adaptation of <i>Lc. lactis</i> could be exploited for industrial use of strains belonging to this species.

### Keywords
Dextran, Lactic acid bacteria, Exopolysaccharides, Proteomic, Leuconostoc

### Affiliations
CIB.CSIC
Center for Biological Research (CIB-CSIC)

### Submitter
Vivian de los Rios

### Lab Head
Dr Paloma López
Center for Biological Research (CIB-CSIC)


