### Accession
PXD018174

### Title
Regulation of titin-based cardiac stiffness by unfolded domain oxidation (UnDOx)

### Description
The relationship between oxidative stress and cardiac stiffness is thought to involve modifications to the giant muscle protein titin, which in turn can determine the progression of heart disease. In vitro studies have shown that S-glutathionylation and disulfide bonding of titin fragments could alter the elastic properties of titin; however, whether and where titin becomes oxidized in vivo is less certain. Here we demonstrate, using multiple models of oxidative stress in conjunction with mechanical loading, that immunoglobulin domains preferentially from the distal titin spring region become oxidized in vivo through the mechanism of unfolded domain oxidation (UnDOx). Via oxidation type-specific modification of titin, UnDOx modulates human cardiomyocyte passive force bidirectionally. UnDOx also enhances titin phosphorylation and, importantly, promotes non-constitutive folding and aggregation of unfolded domains. We propose a mechanism whereby UnDOx enables the controlled homotypic interactions within the distal titin spring to stabilize this segment and regulate myocardial passive stiffness.

### Sample Protocol
Male C57BL/6N mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, USA) were used at the age of five weeks, and the heart and skeletal (leg) muscles prepared. All procedures conformed to the institutional guidelines, following the animal care and use protocols. The following models were generated: 1) Langendorff-perfused hearts under control conditions (N=3) or perfused with solution containing 0.1% H2O2 (N=3) or 1 mM DTT (N=3). 2) Afterload-increase model in working-heart mode (13), studied under control conditions (80 mmHg for 15 min; N=4) or after pressure increase to 120 mmHg (15 min; N=4). 3) Preload-increase in vivo model (14, 15) produced by inducing an aortocaval shunt (N=4) and sham-operated mice used as controls (N=3). (4) Stretched or non-stretched skeletal muscles (vastus lateralis) exposed to solution containing 2 mM GSH and 0.5 mM diamide (Stretch-oxidized, N=3; Nonstretch-oxidized, N=3); non-strained, non-oxidized muscles were used as controls (Nonstretched-CTRL; N=3). To determine the cysteine redox state, the OxICAT method was used (12). This method uses the cysteine-specific ICAT (isotope-encoded affinity tag) reagent. Reduced cysteines are specifically, differentially labeled with the 12C-ICAT and oxidized cysteines after their reduction with the 13C-ICAT.  The ICAT-reagent also contains an additional affinity tag allowing tagged peptides to be isolated and concentrated before MS analysis. OxICAT-labelling was performed as previously described, with some modifications (36). For details, see Supplementary Methods.

### Data Protocol
ICAT-labeled peptides were analyzed by reverse phase nano-LC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite MS/MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described (37). Raw data obtained by LC-MS/MS analysis were evaluated with the program MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (38). To identify the peptide sequences from the corresponding fragmentation spectra, the search algorithm Andromeda (integrated into MaxQuant) was used (38). The search was performed against the mouse proteome from the UniProt database (UniProt-ID, UP000000589), with a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide level. The quant module was used for the detection of the isotope patterns and the ICAT pairs of the individual peptides, using the following parameters: trypsin selected as endopeptidase with a maximum of two permissible false cleavages; and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus of proteins considered as variable modifications. ICAT-0 (ICAT in the 12C-form) was chosen for the light labeling and ICAT-9 (ICAT in the 13C-form) for the heavy labeling. To visually evaluate ICAT pairs in the MS spectrum, the program Mass++ 2.7.4 was used.

### Publication Abstract
The relationship between oxidative stress and cardiac stiffness is thought to involve modifications to the giant muscle protein titin, which in turn can determine the progression of heart disease. In vitro studies have shown that S-glutathionylation and disulfide bonding of titin fragments could alter the elastic properties of titin; however, whether and where titin becomes oxidized in vivo is less certain. Here we demonstrate, using multiple models of oxidative stress in conjunction with mechanical loading, that immunoglobulin domains preferentially from the distal titin spring region become oxidized in vivo through the mechanism of unfolded domain oxidation (UnDOx). Via oxidation type-specific modification of titin, UnDOx modulates human cardiomyocyte passive force bidirectionally. UnDOx also enhances titin phosphorylation and, importantly, promotes nonconstitutive folding and aggregation of unfolded domains. We propose a mechanism whereby UnDOx enables the controlled homotypic interactions within the distal titin spring to stabilize this segment and regulate myocardial passive stiffness.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Thiol oxidation, Titin, Skeletal muscle, Heart muscle

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II, University of Münster, Münster, Germany
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Lars Leichert

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang A. Linke
Institute of Physiology II, University of Münster, Münster, Germany


