### Accession
PXD014388

### Title
Candida albicans (ATCC90028 and ATCC10231 yeast) extracellular vesicle and whole cell lysate proteomes

### Description
We performed proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and whole cell lysates (WCL) isolated from the same liquid culture. This was implemented for two different C. albicans strains, ATCC90028 (n = 3) and ATCC10231 (n = 3). This data set is the first label-free quantitative comparative study of the proteins in C. albicans EVs and their parent planktonic (yeast-form) cells. We identified proteins enriched in EVs versus WCL by comparing their LFQ intensities across all samples. After linking these results with EV enrichment data from other strains, we proposed a suite of putative EV marker proteins which were useful for multiple C. albicans strains and morphologies.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid cultures (n = 3) were grown using YPD at 30°C overnight, cells were separated from the culture media by centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 min, then lysed physically using glass beads to generate WCL. The culture media was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min then filtered using a 0.45 µm filter. Finally, EVs were pelleted via two 100,000 g spins and resuspended in PBS. Protein content of EV and WCL samples was determined using a Qubit 4 fluorimeter and then 15 ug was loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was run at 150 V for 6 min, fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 7% (v/v) acetic acid solution, and the samples were excised. Proteins were reduced (2 mM TCEP, 1 h), alkylated (40 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min), and digested (1 µg trypsin, 18 h, 37°C). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 85% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) TFA, lyophilised, then resuspended in 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) TFA.

### Data Protocol
Two injections of 1 ug peptides per biological replicate were analysed using a nanoflow UPLC instrument (Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) attached to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a (C18 PepMap 300 μm ID x 2 cm trapping column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed prior to separation using a 90 min linear ACN gradient on an analytical column (BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å and 75 μm ID x 25 cm, Waters). Data were collected in data-dependent acquisition mode using an MS scan range of m/z 350 – 1500 and resolution of 60,000. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 15 most intense ions per MS scan at 15,000 resolution with a normalised collision energy of 28% and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z.   Raw MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16; doi.org/nprot.2016.136). Andromeda was used to search the data against the UniProt C. albicans reference proteome (UP000000559; downloaded 16/06/2018; 6035 entries) and the common contaminants and decoys list. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerances were 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (main search), and false discovery rate (FDR) cut offs were 0.01 for both proteins and peptides. Minimum and maximum peptide lengths were set to 8 and 25 respectively and match between runs was not selected. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of protein abundances was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591). Fast LFQ was selected and normalisation was skipped.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Fungal extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been implicated in host-pathogen and pathogen-pathogen communication in some fungal diseases. In depth research into fungal EVs has been hindered by the lack of specific protein markers such as those found in mammalian EVs that have enabled sophisticated isolation and analysis techniques. Despite their role in fungal EV biogenesis, ESCRT proteins such as Vps23 (Tsg101) and Bro1 (ALIX) are not present as fungal EV cargo. Furthermore, tetraspanin homologs are yet to be identified in many fungi including the model yeast S. cerevisiae. <b>Objective:</b> We performed de novo identification of EV protein markers for the major human fungal pathogen Candida albicans with adherence to MISEV2018 guidelines. <b>Materials and methods:</b> EVs were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation from DAY286, ATCC90028 and ATCC10231 yeast cells, as well as DAY286 biofilms. Whole cell lysates (WCL) were also obtained from the EV-releasing cells. Label-free quantitative proteomics was performed to determine the set of proteins consistently enriched in EVs compared to WCL. <b>Results:</b> 47 proteins were consistently enriched in C. albicans EVs. We refined these to 22 putative C. albicans EV protein markers including the claudin-like Sur7 family (Pfam: PF06687) proteins Sur7 and Evp1 (orf19.6741). A complementary set of 62 EV depleted proteins was selected as potential negative markers. <b>Conclusions:</b> The marker proteins for C. albicans EVs identified in this study will be useful tools for studies on EV biogenesis and cargo loading in C. albicans and potentially other fungal species and will also assist in elucidating the role of EVs in C. albicans pathogenesis. Many of the proteins identified as putative markers are fungal specific proteins indicating that the pathways of EV biogenesis and cargo loading may be specific to fungi, and that assumptions made based on studies in mammalian cells could be misleading. <b>Abbreviations:</b> A1 - ATCC10231; A9 - ATCC90028; DAY B - DAY286 biofilm; DAY Y - DAY286 yeast; EV - extracellular vesicle; Evp1 - extracellular vesicle protein 1 (orf19.6741); GO - gene ontology; Log<sub>2</sub>(FC) - log<sub>2</sub>(fold change); MCC - membrane compartment of Can1; MDS - multidimensional scaling; MISEV - minimal information for studies of EVs; sEVs - small EVs; SP - signal peptide; TEMs - tetraspanin enriched microdomains; TM - transmembrane; VDM - vesicle-depleted medium; WCL - whole cell lysate.

### Keywords
Ev, Qexactive, Candida, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Charlotte Dawson

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Bleackley
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


