### Accession
PXD025413

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor cereblon targets the C-terminal cyclic imide degron

### Description
Global quantitative proteomics of cells treated with the immunomodulatory drug pomalidomide or dipeptide degrons; global quantitative proteomics of cells treated with heterobifunctional degraders embedded with thalidomide or cyclic imide degrons; gloabl quantitative proteomics of red blood cells to search for the presence of C-terminal cyclic imide modifications on hemoglobin.

### Sample Protocol
After the reduction and alkylation as necessary, cell lysates were acidified and digested by trypsin/Lys-C or trypsin on S-trap micro. The eluted peptides were labeled with TMT-10 or TMT-16pro. The labeled peptides were fractionated following the protocol of Pierce high-pH reverse-phase fractionation kit to 20 or 6 fractions. The first fraction out of 20 fractions was excluded from analysis. The dried samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The analysis was performed by Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer. The raw data were searched against SwissProt human protein database and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. The TMT reporter ions were quantified and normalized such that the summed peptide intensity per channel was equal. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate using Percolator, and to PSMs in only one protein group with an isolation interference under 70%.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon (CRBN) is a target of thalidomide and lenalidomide<sup>1</sup>, therapeutic agents used in the treatment of haematopoietic malignancies<sup>2-4</sup> and as ligands for targeted protein degradation<sup>5-7</sup>. These agents are proposed to mimic a naturally occurring degron; however, the structural motif recognized by the thalidomide-binding domain of CRBN remains unknown. Here we report that C-terminal cyclic imides, post-translational modifications that arise from intramolecular cyclization of glutamine or asparagine residues, are physiological degrons on substrates for CRBN. Dipeptides bearing the C-terminal cyclic imide degron substitute for thalidomide when embedded within bifunctional chemical degraders. Addition of the degron to the C terminus of proteins induces CRBN-dependent ubiquitination and degradation in vitro and in cells. C-terminal cyclic imides form adventitiously on physiologically relevant timescales throughout the human proteome to afford a degron that is endogenously recognized and removed by CRBN. The discovery of the C-terminal cyclic imide degron defines a regulatory process that may affect the physiological function and therapeutic engagement of CRBN.

### Keywords
Degron, Cereblon, Cyclic imide, Imid, E3

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


