### Accession
PXD002198

### Title
Ubiquitin S65 proteomics:  H2O2 phosphorylation response

### Description
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation.  Ubiquitin itself can be post-translationally modified by phosphorylation, with nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue having the potential to be phosphorylated.  However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we performed in vivo and in vitro characterization of the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at position serine 65.  We find ubiquitin S65 phosphorylation to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring in tandem with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state.  Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates.  Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, and substrate targeting.  These results demonstrate that phosphorylation represents an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
H2O2 proteomics.  LSY207 yeast was grown in lysine-free synthetic complete media supplemented with 436 μM K0 lysine, or K8 lysine (13C6, 15N2){Ong:2002tf}.  Cells were grown to a density of ~0.8 (OD600) and then 5 mM H2O2 was added to the K8 culture.  During H2O2 exposure, additional media was added to cultures as needed to maintain log-phase growth.  Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 10, 30, 90, and 240 min after H2O2 addition.  At each timepoint, a volume of 90 mL was collected from both the K0 and K8 labeled cultures.  Samples were lysed and ubiquitin protein conjugates were purified by His-tag affinity chromatography exactly as previously described, with the exception that no reduction and alkylation was performed on purified ubiquitin-conjugated proteins{Boisvert:2012iv, Swaney:2013}.  Additionally, prior to His-tag purification, a 100 μg aliquot was removed from each sample and diluted 5-fold in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.9.  This aliquot, which was used for analysis of cell mixing normalization and ubiquitin protein quantitation, was reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) at RT overnight (Wako).  The resulting peptides were desalted on 50 mg tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters) prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and loaded onto a 100 μm ID x 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted over a 100 μm ID x 30 cm analytical column packed with the same material.  Peptides were eluted into either a Velos Orbitrap or a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an EasyII nLC or Easy1000 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The exact gradient conditions were tailored to the complexity and chemical properties of each sample.  Generally, the gradient was 8-30% acetonitrile in 0.15% formic acid over the course of 90-120min.  All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection, while MS/MS spectra of the 20 most abundant ions were collected either with ion trap detection and resonant excitation collision-activated dissociation (CAD), or with orbitrap detection and beam-type CAD.   Identification and quantification of peptides, protein, and modifications.  All data was searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database supplemented as appropriate with either the His-tagged ubiquitin sequence, or with the S65A and S65E mutated ubiquitin sequence.  Searches and peptide quantifications were performed with the MaxQuant data analysis software{Cox:2008}.  All peptide, protein, and PTM site identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate{Elias:2007}.  To account for any errors in mixing of cells, all quantitative values were normalized such that the median of the protein quantitation distribution was centered at log2 = 0.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation. Ubiquitin can itself be phosphorylated at nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue. However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we characterized the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at serine 65 in vivo and in vitro. We find this post-translational modification to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring concomitantly with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state. Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates. Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, ubiquitin interactions, and substrate targeting. These results demonstrate that phosphorylation is an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of Washington

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


