### Accession
PXD012630

### Title
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) interactome before and after RNAse treatment in human breast cancer cells nuclei

### Description
The Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα), is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of trancriptional regulators that mediates estrogen signaling in hormone-responsive tumors controlling key cellular functions by assembling in large functional multiprotein complexes. Interaction proteomics coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to deeply characterize the nuclear interactors partners whom association with the receptor is mediated by RNAs

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were precipitated with 10% TCA in acetone solution and subjected to in-solution digestion. Trypsin digestion was carried out by adding 0.5 ug trypsin (Promega) for each replicate and incubating at 37°C overnight. Next day additional 0.2 ug trypsin was added and the samples were incubated at 37°C for additional 2 hours. After that, the peptides were acidified with 1% TFA, and desalted and concentrated with C18 ziptips (Pierce) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA / 50% ACN, dried and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length was employed. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files of control MCF-7 cells were submitted for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer (ver 2.1) software with the Mascot (ver 2.6.1) search engine. The search criteria for Mascot searches were: trypsin digestion with two missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The parent mass tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da. Database searches were done against the UniProt Human database was used for the database searches. All of the reported protein identifications were statistically significant (p<0.05) in Mascot, and further filtered in ProteomeDiscoverer to report only high and medium protein FDR confidence Mascot identifications. For the experiment performed in presence or absence of RNase the resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) for protein identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant search was done against the UniProt Human database (September 2018). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. For quantitative analyses, data (INTENSITY) were log10 transformed, filtered to include only proteins identified and quantified in at least two out of three replicates in at least one experimental group, and missing values were imputed with values representing a normal distribution with default settings in Perseus 1.6.1.3

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor that mediates estrogen signaling in hormone-responsive cells, where it controls key cellular functions by assembling in gene-regulatory multiprotein complexes. For this reason, interaction proteomics has been shown to represent a useful tool to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying ER&#x3b1; action in target cells. RNAs have emerged as bridging molecules, involved in both assembly and activity of transcription regulatory protein complexes. By applying Tandem Affinity Purification (TAP) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) before and after RNase digestion in vitro, we generated a dataset of nuclear ER&#x3b1; molecular partners whose association with the receptor involves RNAs. These data provide a useful resource to elucidate the combined role of nuclear RNAs and the proteins identified here in ER&#x3b1; signaling to the genome in breast cancer and other cell types.

### Keywords
Interactome, Rnase treatment, Breast cancer, Estrogen receptor alpha

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


