### Accession
PXD026110

### Title
FASN-dependent de novo lipogenesis is required for brain development

### Description
Fate and behaviour of neural progenitor cells is tightly regulated during mammalian brain development. Metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, that are required for supplying energy and providing molecular building blocks to generate cells, govern progenitor function. However, the role of de novo lipogenesis, which is the conversion of glucose into fatty acids through the multi-enzyme protein fatty acid synthase (FASN), for brain development remains unknown. Using Emx1Cre-mediated, tissue-specific deletion of Fasn in the mouse embryonic telencephalon, we show that loss of FASN causes severe microcephaly, largely due to altered polarity of apical, radial glia progenitors (APs) and reduced progenitor proliferation. Further, genetic deletion and pharmacological inhibition of FASN in human embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived forebrain organoids identifies a conserved role of FASN-dependent lipogenesis for radial glia cell polarity and progenitor expansion in the developing human forebrain. Thus, our data establish a role of de novo lipogenesis for mouse and human brain development and identify a link between progenitor cell polarity and lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were dissociated with Accutase+DNAse at 37ºC in thermal block for 45min, with gentle shaking and pipetting every 10min. Cells were then collected and washed with DPBS. Afterwards, cells were stained at 4ºC in the dark for 30min with APC coupled anti-CD133 antibody. Finally, cells were washed once and resuspended in a solution of DPBS with Hoechst. Cells were sorted kept on ice before being sorted on a FACSAria III sorter. 2.5ul water was freshly aliquoted with help of the Mosquito HV (sptlabtech) liquid handler into a 384-well plate (Eppendorf twin.tec® PCR Plate 384, skirted, 40 µL). Then, 500 cells/well were FACS sorted with precision mask ‘’single cell’’ trying to keep the volume as small as possible. The plate was properly sealed and immediately stored at -80°C. For cell lysis, the plate was placed for 10min in a PCR thermocycler to boil the samples (95°C) (Specht et al., 2018). Prior trypsinization, the samples were cooled down and droplets were spined down by a one-minute centrifugation at 1000 rcf.  1ul of 100ng/ul Trypsin solubilized in 500mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.2) was added to the samples with 10 dispense cycles (Mosquito HV) and incubated overnight at 37°C. To minimized condensation, the lid of the thermocycler was set to 95°C. The next day, the enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 4ul of 4% aqueous formic acid. Samples were spiked with iRT standard peptides (Biognosys) and loaded on Evotips following the provided instructions (Evosep).  Mass spectrometry MS analyses were performed on an Evosep One (Evosep) coupled to the TIMS TOF Pro (Bruker). For LC-MS/MS injections, samples were separated with the extended Evosep method ‘’15 samples/day’’ keeping the analytical column (PSC-15-100-3-UHPnC, ReproSil c18 3um 120A 15cm ID 100um, PepSep) at 50°C. For the dual TIMS TOF, measurements were acquired in diaPASEF mode (data independent acquisition Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (Meier et al., 2020; Meier et al., 2018). For the ion mobility settings, the inversed mobilities from 1/K0 0.60 Vs/cm2 to 1.60 Vs/cm2 were analyzed with ion accumulation and ramp time of 166 ms, respectively. 1 survey TIMS-MS scan was followed by 16 diaPASEF scans of 25 m/z isolation windows (Meier et al., 2020). Singly charged ions were excluded using the polygon filter mask. For the spectral library, ddaPASEF injections were acquired with the same parameter as above. For MS/MS acquisition, isolation windows were set to m/z 2.0 for precursor ions below m/z 700, and m/z 3.0 for precursor ions above. RAW data have been uploaded to the PRIDE repository.

### Data Protocol
Only proteins present in at least 3 replicates were considered for the differential expression analysis. Proteins with at least 2 fold change and p-value (adjusted for multiple comparison) below 0.05 were deemed significantly different between conditions. Differentially expressed proteins (both DOWN and UP-regulated) were then tested for over-representation of GO terms in the categories of Biological Process, Cellular Component and Molecular Function using PANTHER (Thomas et al., 2006).Seurat v3.1.1 was used to generate t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) plots, cluster cells and test for differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Functional enrichment categorization was performed using DAVID 6.8 (Huang da et al., 2009). The obtained lists of GO terms were then redundancy corrected using REVIGO (Supek et al., 2011). Differentially expressed proteins (both DOWN and UP-regulated) were also tested for over-representation of pathways from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene Ontologies (KEEG) (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). STRING Enrichment app was used to identify enriched gene ontology (GO) processes highlighting functional categories represented in proteins DOWN or UP-regulated in organoid derived NSPCs with or without Cerulenin (Jensen et al., 2009). Cytoscape v3.8.2 was used to generate and visualize the obtained protein enrichment maps (Shannon et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Fate and behavior of neural progenitor cells are tightly regulated during mammalian brain development. Metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, that are required for supplying energy and providing molecular building blocks to generate cells govern progenitor function. However, the role of de novo lipogenesis, which is the conversion of glucose into fatty acids through the multienzyme protein fatty acid synthase (FASN), for brain development remains unknown. Using Emx1Cre-mediated, tissue-specific deletion of <i>Fasn</i> in the mouse embryonic telencephalon, we show that loss of FASN causes severe microcephaly, largely due to altered polarity of apical, radial glia progenitors and reduced progenitor proliferation. Furthermore, genetic deletion and pharmacological inhibition of FASN in human embryonic stem cell-derived forebrain organoids identifies a conserved role of FASN-dependent lipogenesis for radial glia cell polarity in human brain organoids. Thus, our data establish a role of de novo lipogenesis for mouse and human brain development and identify a link between progenitor-cell polarity and lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Brain organoids, Fasn, Brain development, Lipogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Brain Research Institute, Laboratory of Neural Plasticity
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Daniel Gonzalez

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Jessberger
University of Zurich, Brain Research Institute, Laboratory of Neural Plasticity


