### Accession
PXD008351

### Title
Human AHH1 cells heavy ion irradiation LC-MSMS

### Description
Heavy ion radiotherapy has unfolded a great promise for cancer therapy.  Understanding the cellular response mechanism to heavy ion radiation is  required for exploring the measures of overcoming the devastating side  effects. Here, we performed a quantitative proteomics to investigate the  mechanism of carbon heavy ion irradiation on human AHH-1 lymphoblastoid  cells. Totally we identified 4602 proteins and quantified 4569 proteins  among which with high coverage on mitochondria. After stringent filtering,  we found 290 proteins were significantly up-regulated and 16 proteins were  down-regulated. Functional analysis revealed that these up-regulated  proteins specifically enriched in the process of DNA damage repair,  mitochondrial ribosome and especially mitochondrial respiratory chain, which  occupied approximately fifty percent of the accumulated proteins.  Bioinformatics analysis and functional study demonstrated that these up- regulated mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins enhanced ATP production  and simultaneously ROS releasing. More importantly, the increased ROS led to  organelle secondary injury and the lagged DNA double strand breaks.  Consistently, the expression of antioxidant enzymes was up-regulated for  free radical scavenging. The mechanism of lagged secondary injury originated  from disturbing of mitochondrial respiratory chain, the “target” outside  nuclear, explored here may provide a novel target for cell self-repairing  against heavy ion radiation induced cellular damage.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture AHH-1 cells and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were  obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). AHH-1 cells were  cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum  (FBS) (HyClone, Thermo Fisher). HUVECs were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified  Eagle Medium (DMEM) (HyClone, Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% FBS and  1% non-essential amino acids (HyClone, Thermo Fisher). Cell cultures were  maintained in a humidified incubator (37°C, 5% CO2).  Carbon Ion IR Carbon IR were performed at room temperature at the Heavy Ion Accelerator  Center (Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou,  China). Cells were irradiated with carbon ion beam at 300 MeV/U (LET =12.6  KeV/μm). Treatments with four different doses were performed, including 0,  0.5, 2 and 6 Gy. The colony survival rates were compared under these four  doses treating. The lower dose, 0.5 Gy was chose in this proteomic research.  Protein Extraction and Gel-assisted Digestion The AHH-1 cell homogenates were lysed with lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea,  5 mM IAA, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) followed  by sonication (2s on, 4s off, 8 min; 26.6 kHz, 30 W) and centrifugation  (13,300 rpm, 10 min). The supernatants were collected and the protein  concentration was detected by BCA assay, and run with a short SDS-PAGE  following by staining with Coomassie Blue G-250. The equal amount of  proteins (~100 μg) from each group were reduced, alkylated, and digested  with 10 ng/μL trypsin at 37℃ for 12 h.   iTRAQ Labeling The 4-plex iTRAQ was used for labeling the peptides from different cell  groups according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Foster City,  CA, USA). Peptides from DMSO, VND, IR, and (IR+VND) groups were labeled with  114, 115, 116 and 117 tag, respectively. The labeling procedure was carried  out as instructions. In order to achieve the high accuracy quantitation, the  tag peptide samples were selected as the following ratio,  114:115:116:117=1:2.5:1:2.5. The labeled peptides were then pooled and  separated into 13 fractions by high-pH reverse-phase high performance liquid  chromatography, followed by nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LC mass/mass  (nano-UPLC-MS/MS) analysis with LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. To  differentiate technical variations from LC-MS/MS and to identify the true  biological relevance, technical duplicates were considered by repeatedly  analyzing the same iTRAQ labeling samples.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8,  Martinsried, Germany) against the Uniprot human protein database (version  June, 2015). The target-decoy based strategy was used to control the peptide  and protein false discovery rate (FDR) ≤1%.

### Publication Abstract
Heavy ion radiotherapy has shown great promise for cancer therapy. Understanding the cellular response mechanism to heavy ion radiation is required to explore measures of overcoming devastating side effects. Here, we performed a quantitative proteomic analysis to investigate the mechanism of carbon ion irradiation on human AHH-1 lymphoblastoid cells. We identified 4602 proteins and quantified 4569 proteins showing high coverage in the mitochondria. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008351. After stringent filtering, 290 proteins were found to be significantly up-regulated and 16 proteins were down-regulated. Functional analysis revealed that these up-regulated proteins were enriched in the process of DNA damage repair, mitochondrial ribosome, and particularly mitochondrial respiratory chain, accounting for approximately 50% of the accumulated proteins. Bioinformatics and functional analysis demonstrated that these up-regulated mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins enhanced ATP production and simultaneously reactive oxygen species release. More importantly, increased reactive oxygen species led to secondary organelle injury and lagged DNA double-strand breaks. Consistently, the expression of antioxidant enzymes was up-regulated for free radical scavenging. The mechanism of lagged secondary injury originated from disturbances in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Our results provided a novel target for cell self-repair against heavy ion radiation-induced cellular damage.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Heavy ion radiation, Ahh1 cells

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Proteome Research Center

### Submitter
Peng-Cheng Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Proteome Research Center


