### Accession
PXD025188

### Title
Investigation on the quantitative proteomic responses of bloom-forming Cyanobacteria Microcystis aeruginosa to phosphorus depletion and starvation by the method of isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)

### Description
Microcystis aeruginosa cells were treated with phosphorus repletion, depletion and starvation. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomic method was employed to explore to the effects of phosphorus limitation on Microcystis aeruginosa cells at the protein level. This investigation would contribute to the understanding of global cellular responses of Microcystis to phosphorus limitation and provide theoretical basis for deciding whether it is an effective way to control Microcystis blooms by phosphorus reduction.

### Sample Protocol
Microcystis aeruginosa growing under different phosphorus concentration were harvested by centrifugation at 3000 g for 5 min at 4°C, washed twice with precooled sterile MilliQ water, and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen samples were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with a pestle and mortal, suspended in five-time precooled TCA/acetone (v: v = 1: 9) and kept at −20°C for 4 h, followed by centrifugation at 6000 g for 40 min. The pellet was washed three times with acetone and then air dried. All the above experiments were carried out at 4°C. The precipitated proteins were resuspended in 300 µL of SDT lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 1 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) and boiled for 5 mins in a water bath. The homogenate was sonicated on ice. The crude extract was then incubated in boiling water for 15 min . After centrifugation at 14000 g for 40 min and filtration with a 0.22 µm filter, the proteins in the filtrate were quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China).  Protein digestion was performed based on the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The obtained peptide mixtures (100 µg) were labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (SCIEX, Danaher Corporation, Washington, D.C., USA). Prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, labeled peptides were mixed into one sample mixture and fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier System (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). The peptide mixture was vacuum dried and acidified with buffer A (10 mmol/L KH2PO4 in 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3.0). The acidified peptide mixture was then fractioned by a Polysulfoethyl™ (PolyLCInc, Maryland, USA) column (4.6 × 100 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å) at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. A gradient elution (0%–8% buffer B (500 mmol/L KCl, 10 mmol/L KH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 3.0)) for 22 min, 8%–52% buffer B for 22–47 min, 52%–100% buffer B for 47–50 min, and 100% buffer B for 50–58 min) was used to separate the peptides. The chromatograms were recorded at 214 nm, and the eluted peptides were collected every minute by an ofﬂine fraction collector. Finally, collections were integrated into 15 fractions and separately desalted with C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). Each desalted fraction was concentrated to dryness by a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA). Samples were separated by an Easy nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each peptide fraction (15 fractions in total) was loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 µm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 75 µm × 10 cm, 3 µm resin, Waltham, MA, USA) for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was separated with a linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The linear gradient of buffer B (84% acrylonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA) was 0–35% for 50 min, 35–100% for 5 min and finally 100% for 5 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Easy nLC system. MS data were acquired using the data-dependent top 10 method, which dynamically chooses the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan in the range of 300–1800 mass/charge ratio (m/z) for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control target value was set to 3 × 106, and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV. The underfill ratio, specifying the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra data were processed using MASCOT software (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Database searches were performed against the UniProt database (uniprot-microcystis_aeruginosa_dianchi905.fasta, released in August 29, 2016, 5445 sequences). The search parameters included peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, trypsin enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ8plex (N-terminal, lysine (K)) as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation together with iTRAQ8plex (tyrosine (Y)) as the modified modification. All data were reported based on 99% confidence for protein identification as determined by a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%. The reporter ion-based quantitation (RIQ) method was used for iTRAQ quantitation, namely, the weighted average of the intensities of reporter ions in each identified peptide was used as the reference. The protein ratios were calculated as the median of only the unique peptides. Experimental bias was corrected by normalizing all peptide ratios to the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. Only proteins detected in all runs were included in the protein quantitation dataset. Student’s t test was used to determine the significance of differences, with an FDR correction (set as 5%, Benjamin-Hochberg), and a p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. The fold change (iTRAQ ratio) was calculated as the average of three biological replicates. Proteins with more than a 1.5-fold change (between the control and phosphorus limited groups) containing at least two unique peptides and a p-value less than 0.05 were determined to be significantly differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Microcystis</i> blooms are the most widely distributed and frequently occurring cyanobacterial blooms in freshwater. Reducing phosphorus is suggested to be effective in mitigating cyanobacterial blooms, while the underlying molecular mechanisms are yet to be elucidated. In the present study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics was employed to study the effects of phosphorus depletion on <i>Microcystis aeruginosa</i> FACHB-905. The production of microcystins (MCs), a severe hazard of <i>Microcystis</i> blooms, was also analyzed. In total, 230 proteins were found to be differentially abundant, with 136 downregulated proteins. The results revealed that, upon phosphorus limitation stress, <i>Microcystis aeruginosa</i> FACHB-905 raised the availability of phosphorus primarily by upregulating the expression of orthophosphate transport system proteins, with no alkaline phosphatase producing ability. Phosphorus depletion remarkably inhibited cell growth and the primary metabolic processes of <i>Microcystis</i>, including transcription, translation and photosynthesis, with structures of photosystems remaining intact. Moreover, expression of nitrogen assimilation proteins was downregulated, while proteins involved in carbon catabolism were significantly upregulated, which was considered beneficial for the intracellular balance among carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. The expression of MC synthetase was not significantly different upon phosphorus depletion, while MC content was significantly suppressed. It is assumed that phosphorus depletion indirectly regulates the production of MC by the inhibition of metabolic processes and energy production. These results contribute to further understanding of the influence mechanisms of phosphorus depletion on both biological processes and MC production in <i>Microcystis</i> cells.

### Keywords
Microcystis aeruginosa, Phosphorus, Itraq

### Affiliations
Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Nian Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Lirong Song
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


