### Accession
PXD000926

### Title
Deep Proteomics of the Xenopus laevis Egg using an mRNA-derived Reference Database

### Description
Mass spectrometry based proteomics enables the global identification and quantification of proteins and their post-translational modifications in complex biological samples. Proteomic analysis requires a complete and accurate reference set of proteins, and is therefore largely restricted to model organisms with sequenced genomes. Here, we demonstrate the feasibility of deep genome-free proteomics using a reference proteome derived from heterogeneous mRNA data. We identify more than 11k proteins with 99% confidence from the unfertilized, X. laevis egg and estimate protein abundance with approximately two-fold precision. Our reference database outperforms the provisional gene models based on genomic DNA-sequencing and references generated by other methods. Surprisingly, we find that many proteins in the egg lack mRNA support and many of these proteins are found in blood or liver, suggesting that they are taken up from the blood plasma, together with yolk, during oocyte growth and maturation, potentially contributing to early embryogenesis. To facilitate proteomics in non-model organisms, we make our platform available as an online resource which converts heterogeneous mRNA data into a protein reference set. Thus, we demonstrate the feasibility and power of genome-free proteomics while shedding new light on embryogenesis in vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Female Xenopus laevis were induced with 700U HCG.  After 14 hours, eggs were harvested, washed with 1x MMR, and dejellied with Cysteine (2% w/v), pH 8.0. 60 eggs were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen. Eggs were lysed with 250 mM Sucrose, 1% NP40 Substitute (Sigma), 5mM EDTA (pH 7.2), 1 Roche Complete mini tablet (EDTA free), 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 10 µM Combretastatin 4A, and 10 µM Cyochalasin D. For lysis eggs were vortexed at maximum speed for ten seconds, pipetted ten times up and down with a 1mL pipette tip, incubated on ice for 5minutes, and again vortexed for ten seconds. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4,500 RCF at 4º C for 4 minutes in a tabletop centrifuge. The cytoplasmic + lipid layers were mixed by gentle flicking and removed from the pelleted yolk. Additional HEPES (pH 7.2) was added to 100 mM, along with SDS added to 2% (w/v). The sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C, then alkylated with 15 mM NEM for 20 minutes at room temperature. Excess NEM was reacted with an additional 5 mM DTT at room temperature. Proteins were isolated by methanol/chloroform precipitation [40]. The protein pellet was resuspended (~5 mg/mL) in 6 M Guanidine HCl in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and sonicated for five minutes. The sample was diluted to 2 M Guanidine with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 20 ng/µL at room temperature for 14 hours. Next we diluted Guanidine HCl with  with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) to 0.5 M and digested further with 10 ng/µL of sequencing grade Trypsin (Roche) at 37°C for 8 hours or LysC at an additional 20ng/µL. Samples were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (SepPak, Waters) to desalt and isolate peptides. To reduce sample complexity, the peptides were resuspended in a 10 mM sodium carbonate buffer (pH 8.0), then fractionated by medium pH reverse-phase HPLC (Zorbax 300Extend-C18, 4.6 X 250 mm column, Agilant) using an Acetonitrile gradient from 6% - 31%. With a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min, fractions were collected into a 96 well-plate every 38 seconds, then pooled into 24 fractions by combining alternating wells from each column of the plate. Each fraction was dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 1% phosphoric acid. Peptides from each fraction were desalted and extracted once more with reverse-phase purification [41],  resuspended in 1% formic acid, and analyzed by LC-MS. LC-MS  LC-MS experiments were performed on QEactive MS or Orbitrap Fusion (both Thermo Fischer Scientific).The QExactives were equipped with a Famos autosampler (LC Packings) and an Agilent 1100 binary high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump (Agilent Technologies). For each run, approximately 4 μg of peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column, packed first with approximately 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 um, 200 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by 20 cm of Maccel C18 AQ resin (3 μm, 200 Å, Nest Group). Separation was achieved by applying a 5 - 27% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid over 160 min at ~ 300 nl/min. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV through a PEEK microtee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. The QExative was operated in data dependent mode. The survey scan was performed at a resolution setting of 70k (200m/z), followed by the selection of the ten most intense ions (top 10) for HCD MS2 fragmentation. The normalized collision energy for HCDMS2 experiments was set to 25%. Singly charged and ions for which a charge state could not be determined were not subjected to MS2. Ions for MS2 were excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 60 s. The Orbitrap Fusion was equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Proxeon). For each run approximately 4 μg of peptides were separated on a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column, packed first with approximately 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 200 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by 30 cm of Sep-Pak C18 GP resin (1.8 μm, 200 Å, Waters). Separation was achieved by applying a 6% - 22% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid over 120 min at 300 nl/min. The Fusion was operated in data dependent mode. The survey scan was performed at a resolution setting of 120k (200m/z) , followed by the selection of the most intense ions for HCD MS2 fragmentation within a three second window using the quadrupole and a 2 m/z isolation window. The normalized collision energy for HCDMS2 experiments was set to 35%. Singly charged and ions for which a charge state could not be determined were not subjected to MS2. Ions for MS2 were excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 45 s. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with 15k resolution (200 m/z).

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools developed in-house was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z. We used ReAdW.exe to convert the raw files into mzXML file format (http://sashimi.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/sashimi/). Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against protein sequence database (as described in the text) including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin. This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, where both peptide termini were required to be consistent with Trypsin or LysC specificity, while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2-spectrum was set at 0.02 Th. NEM alkylation was set as a static modification of cysteine residues (+125.047679 Da); oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. When proteins are reported, we performed a filtering step towards 1% FDR on the protein level. For this, the probabilities to be a random hit, of all peptides matched by SEQUEST to a protein, were multiplied. The proteins were rank ordered by their cumulative probability of all their peptides being wrong, and a cutoff was chosen so that less than 1% of decoy proteins were contained in the dataset. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Egg, Xenopus laevis, Metaphase, Development, Meiosis, Genome-free

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Martin Wuehr

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


