### Accession
PXD029008

### Title
C. elegans TFIIH subunit GTF-2H5/TTDA is a non-essential transcription factor indispensable for DNA repairC. elegans TFIIH subunit GTF-2H5/TTDA is a non-essential transcription factor indispensable for DNA repair.

### Description
The 10-subunit TFIIH complex is vital to transcription and nucleotide excision repair. Hereditary mutations in its smallest subunit, TTDA/GTF2H5, cause a photosensitive form of the rare developmental disorder trichothiodystrophy. Some trichothiodystrophy features are thought to be caused by subtle transcription or gene expression defects. TTDA/GTF2H5 knockout mice are not viable, making it difficult to investigate TTDA/GTF2H5 in vivo function. Here we show that deficiency of C. elegans TTDA ortholog GTF-2H5 is, however, compatible with life, in contrast to depletion of other TFIIH subunits. GTF-2H5 promotes TFIIH stability in multiple tissues and is indispensable for nucleotide excision repair, in which it facilitates recruitment of TFIIH to DNA damage. Strikingly, when transcription is challenged, gtf-2H5 embryos die due to the intrinsic TFIIH fragility in absence of GTF-2H5. These results support the idea that TTDA/GTF2H5 mutations cause transcription impairment underlying trichothiodystrophy and establish C. elegans as model for studying pathogenesis of this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry For immunoprecipitation, animals from ten full 9 cm culture plates were added to a 500 ml liquid culture of S basal medium containing OP50 bacteria and grown for 5 days at 21°C while shaking. Next, 500 ml ice cold M9 buffer was added and animals were collected in 100 ml by gravity sedimentation using a separation funnel. Animals were centrifuged for 3 min at 600 g with slow deceleration and washed by repeating this three times in ice cold M9. Next, the worm pellet was washed in 50 ml cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 0.05% NP-40 and complete EDTA free protease inhibitor) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen worms were lysed in IP buffer (30 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 130 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100 and complete EDTA free protease inhibitor) for 10 min at 4°C and sonicated using a Biorupter Sonicator (Diagenode). Sonicated samples were incubated with 500 U Benzonase (Sigma) for 1 h on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and supernatants were subjected to immunoprecipitation using GFP-TRAP-A agarose beads (Chromotec) for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were collected by centrifugation and washed five times with IP buffer. Proteins were eluted from the beads by incubation at 95°C for 5 min in 2x laemmli SDS sample buffer and separated on SDS-PAGE gel. Each SDS-PAGE gel lane was cut into 1-mm slices using an automatic gel slicer. Six slices were combined to one sample and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion with trypsin (Thermo, TPCK treated). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap™ 100 C18 trap column (Thermo, column dimensions 2 cm × 100 µm, 5 µm particles) at a flow rate of 1 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 25 cm × 75 µm, 2.4 µm particles, packed in-house) using a gradient from 0 to 100% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA) in 120 min and at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. The Orbitrap resolution in MS1 mode was set to 120,000 in profile mode at AGC 4E5 and at m/z range 375-1400 m/z. Fragmentation of precursors was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD at a cycle time of 2 s with a precursor window of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 28 %; MS2 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap in centroid mode at a resolution of 30,000 at AGC 5E4. Singly charged precursors were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds and the intensity threshold was set to 3E4. For the analysis, a single LC-MS/MS run was performed for all samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo) including the label free quantitation (Minora) module.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Transcription, Ip-ms, Dna repair, Tfiih

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam


