### Accession
PXD009111

### Title
Saci proteome starvation -  Early Response of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius to Nutrient Limitation

### Description
We performed a comprehensive study to unravel the overall transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolic changes that take places over time when S. acidocaldarius cells are exposed to nutrient limitation.

### Sample Protocol
- Cell extraction was performed using an ultra-sonicator with protein extraction buffer consisting of 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate pH8.5. - 100 μg proteins from each sample used for iTRAQ 8-pleax analysis with a biological duplicate for each sampling point (4 sampling time points). Trypsin used at the ratio of trypsin:proteins 1:20. - HILIC as used for fractionation of labelled peptides. - MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo, Germany) coupled with a nano uHPLC 3000 system (Dinonex, UK).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantitation of peptides/proteins  - All raw data files from MS analysis were submitted to MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 for protein identification against S. acidocaldarius MW001 database (consisting of 2,361 entries). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01 was used for identification of both peptides and proteins; a minimum score of 40 was used for modified peptides. - An in-house proteomic pipeline was used for quantitation of protein and determination of regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In natural environments microorganisms encounter extreme changes in temperature, pH, osmolarities and nutrient availability. The stress response of many bacterial species has been described in detail, however, knowledge in Archaea is limited. Here, we describe the cellular response triggered by nutrient limitation in the thermoacidophilic crenarchaeon <i>Sulfolobus acidocaldarius</i>. We measured changes in gene transcription and protein abundance upon nutrient depletion up to 4 h after initiation of nutrient depletion. Transcript levels of 1118 of 2223 protein coding genes and abundance of approximately 500 proteins with functions in almost all cellular processes were affected by nutrient depletion. Our study reveals a significant rerouting of the metabolism with respect to degradation of internal as well as extracellular-bound organic carbon and degradation of proteins. Moreover, changes in membrane lipid composition were observed in order to access alternative sources of energy and to maintain pH homeostasis. At transcript level, the cellular response to nutrient depletion in <i>S. acidocaldarius</i> seems to be controlled by the general transcription factors TFB2 and TFE&#x3b2;. In addition, ribosome biogenesis is reduced, while an increased protein degradation is accompanied with a loss of protein quality control. This study provides first insights into the early cellular response of <i>Sulfolobus</i> to organic carbon and organic nitrogen depletion.

### Keywords
Time course, Starvation, S. acidocaldarius, Quantitative proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, the University of Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Trong Khoa Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Trong K Pham
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, the University of Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, United Kingdom


