### Accession
PXD004355

### Title
Characterization of protein deamidation by shotgun proteomics

### Description
Characterization of glutamine (Gln) deamidation with the current available methods is only feasible for single compounds or simple mixtures. Here we have developed a new method to analyze in depth Gln and asparagine (Asn) deamidation from complex biological samples by shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Human brain tissues (100 mg) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail were homogenized in 250 µL of 100 mM ammonium acetate (AA) containing 1 % (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) for 5 min at high intensity using the tissue homogenizer bullet blender. Safe-lock tubes and 100 mg of metallic beads (0.9-2.00 mm particles) were used during the whole homogenization procedure. Tissue homogenates were then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min and supernatant was collected. The remaining pellet was subject to a second round of homogenization as previously described. Supernatants were combined and all homogenization procedures were performed at 4°C.  Human brain proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60°C and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature and protected from the light. Sample was two-fold diluted with 100 mM AA and 10 mM DTT and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were then enzymatically digested at 1:50 (w/w) overnight under 30 °C using sequencing-grade-modified trypsin. Trypsin digestion was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5 %. SDC was pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant was then collected and pelleted SDC was re-dissolved in 0.5% ammonium hydroxide and precipitated by addition of 0.5% FA in order to recover precipitated peptides. The SDC precipitation and peptide collection procedure was performed twice. All supernatants were combined. Peptide sample was desalted using a C-18 Sep-pack 50 mg cartridge (Water, Milford, MA, USA) and eluted with 1 mL of 75% ACN, 0.1% FA. Eluted peptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendor, Hamburg, Germany) and reconstituted in 200 µL of 75 % ACN, 0.1% FA before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search was carried out using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, MA, USA) and PEAKS Studio version 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) with a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da. PEAKS PTM algorithm  was used to identify PTMs and 1% false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment was applied to the obtained results. For Mascot database searches deamidation of Asp and Glu and oxidation of Met were set as variable modifications and peptides with Mascot score > 15 were used to generate the peptide list. Carbamidomethylation at Cys was set as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dpm, Brain, Glutamic acid, Ptm, Shotgun, Deamidation

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Director of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  Tel: (65) 6514-1006;  Fax: (65) 6791-3856  Email: sksze@ntu.edu.sg
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Sze Siu Kwan
Associate Professor Director of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Facility School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  Tel: (65) 6514-1006;  Fax: (65) 6791-3856  Email: sksze@ntu.edu.sg


