### Accession
PXD007653

### Title
Proteomics identifies organelle specific phosphorylation and reveals major subcellular reorganization in the progression of NAFLD

### Description
Obesity induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with the development of type 2 diabetes and constitutes a major health problem. A hallmark of the diseases is extensive lipid droplet (LD) formation and accumulation of toxic lipid species interfering with cellular signaling and functions. However, the cellular mechanisms during disease progression and cellular lipid overflow are poorly understood. Here, we develop a novel workflow for label free mass spectrometry based protein and phosphopeptide correlation profiling to systematically monitor the level and cellular distribution of ~6000 liver proteins and ~16,000 phosphosites during the development of dietary induced steatosis in mice. We see a redistribution of the secretory apparatus including a mislocalization of the COPI complex, and targeting of all analyzed Golgi apparatus proteins to LDs what leads to a general reduction of hepatic protein secretion. Further, we identify targeting of several organelle contact site proteins to LDs, accompanied by increased contacts between LDs and other organelles. Our resource provides the first systematic in vivo analysis of subcellular re-arrangements and organelle specific phosphorylation during disease development.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Proteins from all fractions were precipitated with ethanol/50mM natriumacetate pH5.0 overnight at room temperature and pelleted afterwards. Protein pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer (6M Guanidiniumchloride (GdmCl), 100mM Tris pH8.5, 10mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin - hydrochlorid (TCEP), 40mM 2-chloroacetamide( CAA)), heated for 5min at 95 °C and sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 3× 30s). Protein concentration was determined by tryptophan assay and adjusted to a concentration of 1µg/ µl. For each fraction 25µg proteins were diluted with 75µl 15% acetonitrile (ACN) and digested with 1:50 (protein:enzyme) LysC at 37 °C for 3hrs. Then, 10% ACN in 25mM Tris was added to a final concentration of 0.5M GdmCl (final Volume 300µl) and incubated with trypsin 1:50 (protein:enzyme) overnight at 37°C.  For secretome analysis 100µl of the collected supernatant were diluted with 100µl of 2x digestion buffer containing 20mm TCEP, 80mM CAA, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 20% 2,2,2-Trifluorethanol (TFE), heated 5 min 95°C, sonicated and digested with LysC and trypsin 1:50 (protein:enzyme) over night at 37°C. Acidified peptides (1% TFA) were cleared by centrifugation and loaded onto activated (30% Methanol, 1% TFA) double layer styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDBRPS; 3M Empore) (Kulak et al., 2014). StageTips were washed with 200µl 0.2% TFA and 0.2% TFA, 5% ACN and peptides were subsequently eluted with 60µl SDB-RPS elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH) for single shot analysis of the subcellular organelle fractions and secretome or in three steps (buffer 1:, buffer 2: buffer 3: 80% ACN, 5% NH4OH) for deep proteome analysis of the total liver lysate. Samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac for 40min at 45 °C. Samples were dissolved in 12µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA).  EasyPhos Proteins were precipitated with ethanol/50mM natriumacetate pH5.0 overnight at RT and phosphosites enriched using EasyPhos(Humphrey et al., 2015).   MS analysis For MS analysis peptides were loaded onto a 50-cm column with a 75µM inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9µM C18 ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 60 °C. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). For PCP analysis 2µg of peptides of each organelle fraction were separated on a 120min gradient of 5-30% buffer B over 95min followed by 30-60% buffer B over 5min and an increase to 95% buffer B over 5min followed by a washout. For deep proteome analysis of the three SDBRPS fractions from the total liver lysate 2µg of peptides were separated on a 240min gradient of 2-5% buffer B over 5min followed by 5–35% buffer B over 190min, 35–60% buffer B over 25 min, 60-95% buffer B over 5min, 5min 95% buffer B and a washout at a flowrate of 250nl on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using a data dependent top-15 method with maximum injection time 20ms, a scan range of 300–1650Th and an AGC target of 3e6. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 window of 1.4 Th. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 with maximum ion injection time of 55ms and an underfill ratio of either 20 or 40%. Dynamic exclusion was 20s. Phosphosites were eluted with a gradient of 5–20% buffer B over 85 min followed by 20–40% buffer B over 45min and 40-65% buffer B over 10 min and an increase to 95% buffer B over 5min followed by a washout at a flow rate of 300nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 system resulting in 140min gradients respectively. The maximum injection time was 20ms, at a scan range of 300–1650Th and an AGC target of 3e6. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 window of 1.6Th. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 with maximum ion injection time of 120ms and an underfill ratio of 40%. Dynamic exclusion 40s and apex trigger (4 to 7 s) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.6 using default setting if not stated otherwise.  False-discovery rate (FDR) on the protein, peptide and modification level was set to 0.01. Oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. For analysis of phosphosites phospho(STY) was added as variable modification. Three missed cleavages for protein analysis and five for phosphosites analysis were allowed. For analysis of proteomic samples label free quantitation was used. “Match between runs” was enabled. In the PCP experiment only neighboring fractions were matched to each other. Proteins and peptides were identified with a target-decoy approach in revert mode, using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Searches were performed against the Mouse UniProt FASTA database (September 2014) containing 51,210 entries and quantification of peptides and proteins was performed by MaxQuant. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus 1.5.6.2 and Microsoft Excel. Annotations were extracted from UniProtKB, Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).

### Publication Abstract
Lipid metabolism is highly compartmentalized between cellular organelles that dynamically adapt their compositions and interactions in response to metabolic challenges. Here, we investigate how diet-induced hepatic lipid accumulation, observed in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), affects protein localization, organelle organization, and protein phosphorylation in&#xa0;vivo. We develop a mass spectrometric workflow for protein and phosphopeptide correlation profiling to monitor levels and cellular distributions of &#x223c;6,000 liver proteins and &#x223c;16,000 phosphopeptides during development of&#xa0;steatosis. Several organelle contact site proteins are&#xa0;targeted to lipid droplets (LDs) in steatotic liver, tethering organelles orchestrating lipid metabolism. Proteins of the secretory pathway dramatically redistribute, including the mis-localization of the COPI complex and sequestration of the Golgi apparatus at LDs. This correlates with reduced hepatic protein secretion. Our systematic in&#xa0;vivo analysis of subcellular rearrangements and organelle-specific phosphorylation reveals how nutrient overload leads to organellar reorganization and cellular dysfunction.

### Keywords
Organelle protoemics, Liver, Diabetes, Steatosis

### Affiliations
Max Planck of Biochemistry
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


