### Accession
PXD008731

### Title
A family of unconventional deubiquitinases with modular chain specificity determinants

### Description
Interactors of human ZUFSP in HEK-293T cells. Flp-in T-REx 293 cells with stable 3xFLAG-ZUFSP integration were assayed for ZUFSP interactors under three different conditions: i) Cells expressing wild-type ZUFSP, ii) Cells expressing catalytically inactive ZUFSP, iii) Cells expressing wild-type ZUFSP with additional treatment by an unspecific nuclease (Benzonase) during purification.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In T-REx 293 cells or Flp-in T-REx 293 cells with stable 3xFLAG-ZUFSP integration were seeded in 10 cm dishes and protein expression was induced by addition of 1 µg/ml tetracycline. Alternatively, HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with pCMV2b 3xFLAG-ZUFSP using TransIT-LT1 transfection reagent. 24 h after induction or transfection, cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM TRIS pH 7, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % NP-40, complete protease inhibitor (Roche)) for 30 min at 4°C, and briefly sonicated before centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was incubated with prewashed magnetic anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma Aldrich) for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer for 5 min. Last washing step was performed with lysis buffer without NP-40. For Western Blot analysis with rabbit α-FLAG (1:3000; F7425, Sigma Aldrich) and rat α-RPA32 (4E4) ( 1:1000; 2208S; Cell Signaling Technology) proteins were eluted by addition of 2x Laemmli buffer. For MS analysis, bound proteins were eluted with 200 µg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich) in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea. Eluted proteins were prepared for mass spectrometry by incubation with 1 mM DTT for 1 h, 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min, 0.005 ng/µl Lys-C for 2 h and 0.005 ng/µl Trypsin for 18 h. For LC-MS/MS analysis, an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) instrument by a nano-spray ionization source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm in-house-packed column using a two-solvent buffer system: buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The amount of buffer B was increased from 7% to 23% within 40 min, followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min, and a washing and re-equilibration step before the next sample injection

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer operated in a Top 10 data-dependent mode, using the following settings: MS1—70.000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 20 ms maximum injection time, 300–1,750 scan range and MS2—35.000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 5e5 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time, 1.8 Th isolation window, 25 normalized collision energy. Data analysis was performed by MaxQuant software, V 1.5.4.742 using the Andromeda search engine43 against the human proteome reference data (including splice variants) from Uniprot. Default mass tolerance and modification settings were used. Re-quantify, label-free quantification and match-between-runs were enabled. ‘Oxidation on M’, ‘Phosphorylation on S,T,Y’ and ‘GlyGly on K’ were allowed as variable modifications. Intensities were averaged over biological triplicates, and the log2 of the intensity ratio ‘sample average/control average’ was used for enrichment quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) regulate ubiquitin signaling by trimming ubiquitin chains or removing ubiquitin from modified substrates. Similar activities exist for ubiquitin-related modifiers, although the enzymes involved are usually not related. Here, we report human ZUFSP&#xa0;(also known as ZUP1 and C6orf113) and fission yeast Mug105 as founding members of a DUB family different from the six known DUB classes. The crystal structure of human ZUFSP in covalent complex with propargylated ubiquitin shows that the DUB family shares a fold with UFM1- and Atg8-specific proteases, but uses a different active site more similar to canonical DUB enzymes. ZUFSP family members differ widely in linkage specificity through differential use of modular ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs). While the minimalistic Mug105 prefers K48 chains, ZUFSP uses multiple UBDs for its K63-specific endo-DUB activity. K63 specificity, localization, and protein interaction network suggest a role for ZUFSP in DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Human, Zufsp, Hek-293t cells

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Kay Hofmann

### Lab Head
Dr Kay Hofmann
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany


