### Accession
PXD036833

### Title
AlphaLink: bringing protein structure prediction in situ with in-cell photo-crosslinking mass spectrometry, crosslinking mass spectrometry, XL-MS,

### Description
The protein structure prediction problem has been revolutionised by AlphaFold2, an algorithm that uses neural networks and evolutionary information to predict accurate models from the primary sequence. However, some proteins remain difficult to predict. Moreover, proteins are dynamic entities that exist in complex environments in vivo. Here, we use the noncanonical amino acid Photo-Leucine to obtain information on residue-residue contacts inside cells by crosslinking mass spectrometry. We then introduce AlphaLink, a modified version of the AlphaFold2 algorithm that synergistically incorporates experimental distance restraint information into its network architecture. AlphaLink improves on the performance of AlphaFold2 in predicting challenging targets in both synthetic and real-world scenarios by employing sparse experimental contacts as anchor points. The program can predict individual conformations of proteins based on the distance restraints provided. The noise-tolerant framework presented here for integrating data in protein structure prediction opens a path to accurate characterisation of protein structures from in-cell data.

### Sample Protocol
Fractions 16-22 were obtained by SEC fractionation and treated with photo-leucine crosslinking in E. coli cells. E. coli K12 was grown in M9 minimal media with varying concentrations of photo-Leucine. For crosslinking MS experiments, E. coli were grown with 0.75 mM photo-Leucine for 22h. Cells were lysed, and membrane enrichment was achieved through centrifugation and washing. Proteome digestion and peptide fractionation were done, and crosslinked peptides were enriched by size-exclusion chromatography. For the analysis of photo-leucine crosslinked E. coli membranes, we used a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system. We separated the samples on an Easy-Spray column using optimized gradients for each offline-fraction. We acquired MS data in data-dependent mode and used a decision tree strategy to fragment ions with a precursor charge state between +3 and +7. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap. We enabled dynamic exclusion with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
Identification was performed using xiSEARCH software, searching accounting for photo-L crosslinker modifications and within-peptide photo-L crosslinks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Photo-leucine, Alphafold, Crosslinking, Photo-amino acid

### Affiliations
Technische Universitaet Berlin

### Submitter
Andrea Graziadei 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universitaet Berlin


