### Accession
PXD022098

### Title
Translation Error Clusters Induced by Aminoglycoside Antibiotics

### Description
Aminoglycoside antibiotics target the ribosome and induce mistranslation, yet which translation errors induce bacterial cell death is unclear. The analysis of cellular proteins by quantitative mass spectrometry shows that bactericidal aminoglycosides induce not only single errors, but also clusters of errors in full-length proteins in vivo with as much as four amino acid substitutions in a row. The downstream errorsin a cluster are up to 10,000-fold more frequent than the first error and independent of the intracellular aminoglycoside concentration. The prevalence, length, and composition of error clusters dependsnot only on the misreading propensity of a given aminoglycoside, but also on its ability to inhibit ribosome translocation along the mRNA. Error clusters constitute a new class of misreading events in vivo that may provide the predominant source of proteotoxic stress at low aminoglycoside concentration, which is particularly important for the autocatalytic uptake of the drugs.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli reference strain MG1655 was purchased from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. E. coli cells were grown in LB medium at 37°C. If not stated otherwise, 500 ml cultures were grown at 200 rpm to OD600 of 0.3 and treated with Str for 2h. EF-Tu was isolated from E. coli lysate by SDS PAGE, the respective band excised and in-gel digested.Samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to a QExactive HF-X hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Tryptic peptides were loaded on a C18 precolumn (2.5 cm, 150 µm ID, Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 5 µm). Bound peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 capillary column (31 cm, 75 µm ID, packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 1.9 µm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with a 76 min linear gradient from 5 to 42% ACN) in 0.1% formic acid.  Acquisition was performed using two acquisition schemes to maximize identifications while keeping consistent quantifications. Quantification runs were performed in positive ion mode using a top 10 DDA method with 2 micro scans per MS spectrum. MS survey spectra were acquired at a resolution setting of 120.000 FWHM in the range of 350-1600 m/z, using AGC target values and maximum injection of 3e6 and 100 ms, respectively. Precursors with charge states z=2-7 above threshold intensity of 3.0 e3 were selected at an isolation width of 1 m/z for fragmentation by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision setting of 35%. Ions of unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation selection, and the masses of fragmented precursors dynamically excluded for 15 s. MS/MS transients were acquired at a resolution setting of 15.000 FWHM using AGC target values and maximum injection of 1e5 and 150 ms, respectively. To gain additional misreading peptide identifications that are aligned to the quantification runs, two additional acquisition schemes were applied using the same chromatography setting.

### Data Protocol
Peptides with error clusters were initially identified using the PEAKS software applying the SPIDER algorithm71. Typical aminoglycoside-induced misreading events were emphasized by adjusting the mutation-weight matrix; i.e. the likelihood of R→C, N→K, D→E, D→H, C→R, E→D, Q→H, G→C, H→Q, I→M, I→F, I→V, L→Q, L→F, K→N, M→I, F→I, F→L, F→S, S→T, T→S, Y→N, and Y→H was set to -1.882, the value of V→I substitutions. The search included all 314 in built modifications. Typically, the FDR was set to 2 % and the mutation ion intensity to ≥ 2%.  These misreading peptide candidates and likely error clusters (based on the frequency of their individual misreading events) were included in the MaxQuant database of the E.coli proteome described above. MaxQuant results were further analyzed in Skyline. Missense clusters that were induced by Str were manually validated inspecting the mass accuracy of the precursor, the ion dot product of the precursor isotope distribution and consistence of the highest scoring MS/MS spectrum with predicted PROSIT spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoglycoside antibiotics target the ribosome and induce mistranslation, yet which translation errors induce bacterial cell death is unclear. The analysis of cellular proteins by quantitative mass spectrometry shows that bactericidal aminoglycosides induce not only single translation errors, but also clusters of errors in full-length proteins in vivo with as many as four amino acid substitutions in a row. The downstream errors in a cluster are up to 10,000-fold more frequent than the first error and independent of the intracellular aminoglycoside concentration. The prevalence, length, and composition of error clusters depends not only on the misreading propensity of a given aminoglycoside, but also on its ability to inhibit ribosome translocation along the mRNA. Error clusters constitute a distinct class of misreading events in vivo that may provide the predominant source of proteotoxic stress at low aminoglycoside concentration, which is particularly important for the autocatalytic uptake of the drugs.

### Keywords
Aminoglycosides

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Department of Physical Biochemistry Am Fassberg 11 37077 Goettingen Germany

### Submitter
Ingo Wohlgemuth

### Lab Head
Dr Ingo Wohlgemuth
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Department of Physical Biochemistry Am Fassberg 11 37077 Goettingen Germany


