### Accession
PXD010575

### Title
Both cold and sub-zero acclimation induce cell wall modification and changes in the extracellular proteome in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Cold acclimation (CA) leads to increased plant freezing tolerance during exposure to low, non-freezing temperatures as a result of many physiological, biochemical and molecular changes that have been extensively investigated. In addition, many plant species, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, respond to a subsequent exposure to mild, non-damaging freezing temperatures with an additional increase in freezing tolerance referred to as sub-zero acclimation (SZA). There is comparatively little information available about the molecular basis of SZA. However, previous transcriptomic studies indicated that cell wall modification may play an important role during SZA. Here we show that CA and SZA are accompanied by extensive changes in cell wall amount, composition and structure. While CA leads to a significant increase in cell wall amount, the relative proportions of pectin, hemicellulose and cellulose remained unaltered during both CA and SZA. However, both treatments resulted in more subtle changes in structure as determined by infrared spectroscopy and monosaccharide composition as determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. These differences could be related through a proteomic approach to the accumulation of cell wall modifying enzymes such as pectin methylesterases, pectin methylesterase inhibitors and xyloglucan endotransglucosylases/hydrolases in the extracellular matrix.

### Sample Protocol
After the extraction of apoplastic proteins, 50 μg of protein per sample were solubilized with 100 µl 8 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) and loaded into Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 27 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega). After centrifugation, the eluted solutions were loaded onto Finisterre C18 SPE columns (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain). Columns were washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA. Peptides were dried and stored at -80°C until use. Peptides were resuspended in 30 μl of resuspension buffer (5% v/v acetonitrile, 2% v/v trifluoroacetic acid). Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive Plus coupled to an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). 8 μl of the samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm bead size (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl min-1 in a buffer consisting of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. Peptide elution was facilitated by increasing the acetonitrile gradient from 3% to 30% [v/v] over 46 min, from 30% to 50% for the next 12 min and from 50% to 80% for the last 10 min. The column was then washed with 80% [v/v] acetonitrile for 7 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 200 to 1600 at resolution of 70 000 (AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT of 100 ms). MS/MS scans were performed for the 15 peptides with the highest MS signal (ddMS2 resolution of 17 500, AGC target 1e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 2 m/z, relative collision energy 30). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed with Progenesis LC/MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Selection of a reference run and, alignment and peak picking was performed automatically. The spectra for each MS1 signal peak were exported to Mascot. Mascot search parameters were set as follows: Arabidopsis TAIR10 genome annotation, requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine), peptide mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ± 0.8 Da, allowed peptide charges of +2 and +3 and maximum of two missed cleavage. Spectra were also searched against a decoy database of the Arabidopsis proteome and results were filtered to ensure a FDR below 1 % on the protein level. Additionally, peptide identifications with a Mascot score below 25 were excluded. Mascot results were imported into Progenesis QI. Relative Quantitation using Hi-N was selected as a protein quantitation option. Three the most abundant peptides were used for this analysis. The results were exported for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cold acclimation (CA) leads to increased plant freezing tolerance during exposure to low, non-freezing temperatures as a result of many physiological, biochemical and molecular changes that have been extensively investigated. In addition, many plant species, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, respond to a subsequent exposure to mild, non-damaging freezing temperatures with an additional increase in freezing tolerance referred to as sub-zero acclimation (SZA). There is comparatively little information available about the molecular basis of SZA. However, previous transcriptomic studies indicated that cell wall modification may play an important role during SZA. Here we show that CA and SZA are accompanied by extensive changes in cell wall amount, composition and structure. While CA leads to a significant increase in cell wall amount, the relative proportions of pectin, hemicellulose and cellulose remained unaltered during both CA and SZA. However, both treatments resulted in more subtle changes in structure as determined by infrared spectroscopy and monosaccharide composition as determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. These differences could be related through a proteomic approach to the accumulation of cell wall modifying enzymes such as pectin methylesterases, pectin methylesterase inhibitors and xyloglucan endotransglucosylases/hydrolases in the extracellular matrix.

### Keywords
Freezing tolerance, Proteome, Apoplast, Sub-zero, Extracellular, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Infrastructure Group Leader "Transcript Profiling" Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam-Golm Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dirk Hincha
Infrastructure Group Leader "Transcript Profiling" Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam-Golm Germany


