### Accession
PXD002166

### Title
Peroxidase B6T173 (ZmPrx35) from insect-resistant maize (Zea mays, p84C3) kernels

### Description
Peroxidase (POD) activity was found to be positively correlated with insect resistance in maize kernels. Thus, we purified active PODs from (Zea mays, p84C3) kernels and subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses. To verify the identified putative plant PODs, we produced them by recombinant expression in E. coli. Whereas B4FFK9 did not display in vitro activity, B6T173 (ZmPrx35) was active and also exhibits a heme cofactor. B6T173 accounts for about 80% of the POD activity in the kernel, according to densitometric evaluation.

### Sample Protocol
Partial purification of protein fractions, guided by an in-gel assay for plant peroxidase (POD) activity. Putative POD bands were excised from SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to tryptic digest and nanoESI-LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
PeptideShaker and Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (using X!Tandem as search engine). Conversion of hits to mzIdentML.

### Publication Abstract
Plant peroxidases (PODs) are involved in diverse physiological processes, including defense against pathogens and insects. Contrary to their biological importance, only very few plant PODs have been proven on protein level, because their low abundance makes them difficult to detect in standard proteomics work-flows. A statistically significant positive correlation between POD activity and post-harvest insect resistance has been found for maize (Zea mays, p84C3) kernels. In combining activity-directed protein purification, genomic and proteomic tools we found that protein B6T173 (ZmPrx35) is responsible for the majority of the POD activity of the kernel. We successfully produced recombinant ZmPrx35 protein in Escherichia coli and demonstrate both, in vitro activity and the presence of a haem (heme) cofactor of the enzyme. Our findings support the screening for insect resistant maize variants and the construction of genetically optimized maize plants.

### Keywords
Insect resistance, Activity-directed proteomics, Plant peroxidase

### Affiliations
CINVESTAV Unidad Irapuato
CINVESTAV Unidad Irapuato Km. 9.6 Libramiento Norte Carr. Irapuato-León 36821 Irapuato Gto., México Tel.: +52-462-6239-635

### Submitter
Robert Winkler

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Winkler
CINVESTAV Unidad Irapuato Km. 9.6 Libramiento Norte Carr. Irapuato-León 36821 Irapuato Gto., México Tel.: +52-462-6239-635


