### Accession
PXD025099

### Title
Facilitating in situ cross-linking and mass spectrometry by antibody-based protein enrichment

### Description
Cross-linking of living cells followed by mass spectrometry identification of cross-linked peptides (in situ CLMS) is an emerging technology to study protein structures in their native environment. One of the inherent difficulties of this approach is the high complexity of the samples following cell lysis. This difficulty largely limits the identification of cross-links to the more abundant proteins in the cell. Here, we describe a targeted approach in which an antibody pulls a specific protein-of-interest out of the lysate. Mass spectrometry analysis of the protein material that binds to the antibody can then identify considerably more cross-links on the antibody target and its interactors. By using an antibody against the CCT chaperonin, we obtained over two hundred cross-links that provide in situ evidence for the subunit arrangement of CCT and its main interactions with prefoldin. Antibodies against tubulin likewise provided in situ evidence for the structure of the microtubule including the seam. Finally, the approach was also successful in identifying cross-links on a protein expressing  at very low amounts (tau in non-neuronal cells). These results demonstrate the general applicability of antibody-based sample simplification for in situ CLMS.

### Sample Protocol
Standard XL-MS preparion. Please see Methods in accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
In house analysis applications. Please see Methods in accompanying paper

### Publication Abstract
The integrity of a cell's proteome depends on correct folding of polypeptides by chaperonins. The chaperonin TCP-1 ring complex (TRiC) acts as obligate folder for &gt;10% of cytosolic proteins, including he cytoskeletal proteins actin and tubulin. Although its architecture and how it recognizes folding substrates are emerging from structural studies, the subsequent fate of substrates inside the TRiC chamber is not defined. We trapped endogenous human TRiC with substrates (actin, tubulin) and cochaperone (PhLP2A) at different folding stages, for structure determination by cryo-EM. The already-folded regions of client proteins are anchored at the chamber wall, positioning unstructured regions toward the central space to achieve their native fold. Substrates engage with different sections of the chamber during the folding cycle, coupled to TRiC open-and-close transitions. Further, the cochaperone PhLP2A modulates folding, acting as a molecular strut between substrate and TRiC chamber. Our structural snapshots piece together an emerging model of client protein folding within TRiC.

### Keywords
Antibody, Cl-ms

### Affiliations
Nir Kalisman, Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
Joanna Zamel

### Lab Head
Dr Nir Kalisman
Nir Kalisman, Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


