### Accession
PXD043246

### Title
Enhanced hippocampal LTP but typical NMDA receptor and AMPA receptor function in a novel rat model of CDKL5 deficiency disorder

### Description
Background: Mutations in the X-linked gene cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) cause a severe neurological disorder characterised by early-onset epileptic seizures, autism and intellectual disability (ID). Impaired hippocampal function has been implicated in other models of monogenic forms of autism spectrum disorders and ID and is often linked to epilepsy and behavioural abnormalities. Many individuals with CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD) have null mutations and complete loss of CDKL5 protein, therefore in the current study we used a Cdkl5-/y rat model to elucidate the impact of CDKL5 loss on cellular excitability and synaptic function of CA1 pyramidal cells (PCs). We hypothesised abnormal pre and/or post synaptic function underlie the enhanced LTP we observe in the hippocampus of Cdkl5-/y rats. Methods: To allow cross-species comparisons of phenotypes associated with the loss of CDKL5, we generated a loss of function mutation in exon 5 of the rat Cdkl5 gene and assessed the impact of the loss of CDLK5 using a combination of extracellular and whole-cell electrophysiological recordings, biochemistry, and histology.  Results: Our results indicate that CA1 hippocampal LTP is enhanced in slices prepared from juvenile, but not adult, Cdkl5-/y rats.  Enhanced LTP does not result from changes in NMDA receptor function or subunit expression as these remain unaltered throughout development.  Furthermore, Ca2+ permeable AMPA receptor mediated currents are unchanged in Cdkl5-/y rats. We observe reduced mEPSC frequency accompanied by increased spine density in basal dendrites of CA1 PCs, however we find no evidence supporting an increase in silent synapses when assessed using a minimal stimulation protocol in slices. Additionally, we found no change in paired-pulse ratio, consistent with normal release probability at Schaffer collateral to CA1 PC synapses.  Conclusions: Our data indicate a role for CDKL5 in hippocampal synaptic function and raise the possibility that altered intracellular signalling rather than synaptic deficits contribute to the altered plasticity. Limitations:  This study has focussed on the electrophysiological and anatomical properties of hippocampal CA1 PCs across early postnatal development.  Studies involving other brains regions, older animals and behavioural phenotypes associated with the loss of CDKL5 are needed to understand the pathophysiology of CDD.

### Sample Protocol
Purified synaptosomes were lysed in 8 M urea with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, sonicated for 30 s max amplitude and power on the UP200St sonicator (Hielscher – Ultrasound Technology), and protein quantified by BCA using a Nanodrop 1000. Samples (100 μg) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 mins at RT, and 30 mM Iodoacetamide was added for 30 mins at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted to 1 M Urea with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, and digested with 2 μg Trypsin overnight at 37 °C, before being desalted using a macro-spin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer protocol. For mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were resuspended in HPLC-grade water containing 2% MeCN and 1% TFA to make a final concentration of 1 μg/μl (based on protein concentration prior to digest). Then, 5 μl of samples were injected for analysis. Peptides were separated using 50 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 μm ID, 3 μm C18) in conjunction with a PepMap trapping column (100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm C18) (Thermo Scientific) analysed with Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on to the column in solvent A (3% MeCN, 0.1% FA in HPLC water). A 218 minute gradient was performed with 3% solvent A to 35% solvent B (80% MeCN, 0.08% FA), before increasing solvent B to 90 % for 5 minutes, and re-equilibrating with 3 % solvent A for 10 minutes. Settings for data dependent acquisition were MS1 with 120,000 resolution, scan range 400–1,600, charge state 2–7, AGC target of 400,000 and dynamic exclusion of 50 ms with repeat count 1. Peptide ions were fragmented using HCD (30% collision energy) with a resolution of 30,000, and AGC target of 10,000 with a maximum injection of 40 ms. The whole duty cycle was 3 s, during which the instrument performed “top speed” analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.7.4) with the following modifications: fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus); label-free quantitation with minimum ratio count 2; maximum five modifications per peptide, and two missed cleavages. Searches were conducted using a Rattus norvegicus Uniprot-Trembl database (downloaded 27th July 2017 with 36,078 entries) and a list of common contaminants. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Quantification used only razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2. “Re-quantify” was enabled. “Match between runs” was used with alignment time window 20 min and match time window 0.7 min. LFQ intensities were used for data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Rat, Nmda, Cdk, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute Faculty of Medical Sciences Framlington Place Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH UK

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute Faculty of Medical Sciences Framlington Place Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH UK


