### Accession
PXD038669

### Title
Method development for simplified High-Throughput Plasma Proteomics

### Description
We developed a simplified proteomics sample preparation method that increased the sensitivity and reproducibility of large-scale plasma samples. Peptide loss was reduced while sensitivity was increased by eliminating the peptide clean-up step and using disposable trap column tips. The simplified High-Throughput Plasma Proteomics (sHTPP) method was evaluated using a systemic approach. We identified and quantified more than 500 proteins in non-depleted plasma samples without missing values as the DIA approach improved in terms of identification and quantification. Furthermore, 96-well plate sample handling with a multi-channel pipet allows for high-throughput sample analysis. In a large-scale clinical trial with 300 plasma samples, we used the method to demonstrate robust and accurate quantifications.

### Sample Protocol
For the sHTPP method evaluation, plasma/serum samples were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 minutes prior to the experiment, and 5 uL of supernatant were transferred to a 96-well plate containing 55 uL of lysis buffer containing 8M UREA and 10 mM DTT. After 1 hour of incubation at 30°C, 5 uL of IAA was added. After diluting the lysis buffer to less than 1M, proteins were subjected to enzymetic digestion with Trypsin/LysC. Peptide concentration was determined using the BCA assay, and 200 ng of the peptides were loaded into Evosep tips, which are disposable trap-columns, in accordance with the loading protocol. Loaded peptide samples were separated using an Evosep ONE LC system with a 60 sample per day (SPD) method and analyzed using an Orbitrap Explore 240 mass spectrometry system.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained through data dependent acquisition was subjected to FragPipe, an integrated tool with MSFragger and IonQuant for identification and quantification, respectively. High-ph fractionations of plasma peptides or highly abundance proteins depleted plasma peptides were analyzed by GFP-DIA MS and searched using FragPipe to generate a spectrum library. All DIA data from individual plasma samples were searched in DIA-NN using the spectrum library.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based clinical proteomics requires high throughput, reproducibility, robustness, and comprehensive coverage to serve the needs of clinical diagnosis, prognosis, and personalized medicine. Oftentimes these requirements are contradictory to each other. We report the development of a streamlined High-Throughput Plasma Proteomics (sHTPP) platform for untargeted profiling of the blood plasma proteome, which includes 96-well plates and simplified procedures for sample preparation, disposable trap column for peptide loading, robust liquid chromatographic system for separation, data-independent acquisition in tandem mass spectrometry, and DIA-NN, FragPipe, and in-house peptide spectral library-based data analysis. Using the optimized platform at a throughput of 60 samples per day, over 600 protein groups including 57 FDA-approved biomarkers can be consistently identified from whole human plasma, and more than 85% of the detected proteins have 100% completeness in quantitative values across 300 samples. The balance achieved between proteome coverage, throughput, and reproducibility of this sHTPP platform makes it promising in clinical settings, where a large number of samples are to be measured quickly and reliably to support various needs of clinical medicine.

### Keywords
Simplified high-throughput plasma proteomics, Shtpp

### Affiliations
Department of Center for Translational Biomedical Research at University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Kannapolis, NC, 28087
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
Department of Center for Translational Biomedical Research at University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Kannapolis, NC, 28087


