### Accession
PXD041886

### Title
Multi-omic characterisation as a tool to improve knowledge, valorisation and conservation of wild fruit genetic resources: the case of Arbutus unedo L

### Description
The conservation of plant genetic resources (PGRs) is contingent on their current or potential use, so extending the knowledge about them is crucial for their valorization. The valorization and conservation of wild fruit PGRs are critical to ensure the maintenance of genetic and cultural heritage and to promote and develop of new perspectives on resource use. New strategies for characterizing PGRs are needed, and the omics approach can provide profound information that is still largely unknown. The strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo L.) is an underutilized, drought and fire-resistant species distributed in the Mediterranean area and its berries have large ethnobotanical use but were not usually consumed as fresh fruits. Although their phenolic profile and antioxidant capacity are known, they are not well characterised, particularly from a proteomic perspective. The aim of this work is the characterisation from a molecular viewpoint of two ecotypes of A. unedo (Campania and Sicily) to valorise a less known wild fruit PGR to encourage its preservation. Samples were collected from two different geographical areas to assess whether different geographical conditions could influence the characteristics of leaves and fruits at the three stages of ripening (green, veraison, red). Proteomic analysis identified 904 proteins, of which 122 showed significance along the ripening process. Some of these differentially abundant proteins, such as chalcone synthase, show a marked increase during ripening. From a proteomic perspective, there are no differences between the fruits from the two regions compared by the ripening stage. However, the pedoclimatic metabolic imprinting allowed the observation of good diversity in the metabolomic profiles between the two ecotypes, especially for anthocyanins and catechins, generally more abundant in Sicilian fruit, or the phenolic compounds more abundant in Campania fruit. Multi-omic characterisation enhanced the knowledge on a wild fruit plant species which shows specific adaptations and responses to the environment to be considered when addressing the issue of local agrobiodiversity.

### Sample Protocol
After the protein extraction, an electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed. Horizontal slices of SDS-PAGE bands for each sample (green, veraison, and red fruit from both Sicilia and Campania regions) were excised from the gel lane and subjected to the in-situ digestion. The mixture peptides washed out the gel pieces were analyzed by LC-MS/MS apparatus.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by using MaxQuant software and visualized by Perseus software. The following parameters were used for raw data processing: trypsin enzyme specificity, 3 missed tryptic cleavages, oxidation of methionineand formation of pyroGlu from N-terminal glutamine (Q) or glutamic acid (E), as variable modifications, and cysteine (C) carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Identification parameters included a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, minimum of 1 peptide (both razor and unique peptide). Peptide tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of ± 0.2 Da. All proteins were filtered according to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01% applied both at peptide and protein levels and a maximum peptide posterior error probability (PEP) of 1. The derived peak list generated by Quant.exe (the first part of MaxQuant) was searched using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant both against A. unedo and Ericaceae fasta file downloaded from the UNIPROT web site. A label-free method was used for the relative quantification

### Publication Abstract
The valorisation and conservation of plant genetic resources (PGRs) and wild fruit PGRs are critical to ensure the maintenance of genetic and cultural heritage and to promote new perspectives on resource use. New strategies to characterize PGRs are needed, and the omics approach can provide information that is still largely unknown. The Strawberry tree (<i>Arbutus unedo</i> L.) is an underutilized, drought and fire-resistant species distributed in the Mediterranean area and its berries have large ethnobotanical use. Although their phenolic profile and antioxidant capacity are known, they are not well characterised, particularly from a proteomic perspective. The aim of this work is the characterisation of two ecotypes of <i>A. unedo</i> (Campania and Sicily) from a molecular viewpoint to valorise and encourage the preservation of this wild fruit. Samples were collected from two different geographical areas to assess whether different geographical conditions could influence the characteristics of leaves and fruits at the three stages of ripening (green, veraison, red). Proteomic analysis identified 904 proteins, of which 122 showed significance along the ripening. Some of these differentially abundant proteins, such as chalcone synthase, show a marked increase during ripening. The protein functional classes with the highest representation are involved in protein and amino acid metabolism, glycolysis and in secondary metabolism. From a proteomic perspective, there are no differences between the fruits from the two regions compared by the ripening stage. However, the pedoclimatic metabolic imprinting allowed the observation of good diversity in the metabolomic profiles between the two ecotypes, especially for anthocyanins, 4 times more abundant in the Sicilian veraisoned fruit than in the Campania one, and catechins, with double the abundance in the Campania ecotype compared to the Sicilian ecotype in the green phase, but more abundant (3x) in the Sicilian veraisoned fruit. Phenolic compounds show a 20% greater abundance in the Campania green arbutus fruit than in the Sicilian one, values that then equalise as ripening progresses. Multi-omic characterisation enhanced the knowledge on a wild fruit plant species which shows specific adaptations and responses to the environment to be considered when addressing the issue of local agrobiodiversity.

### Keywords
Ripening, Arbutus unedo l., Strawberry-tree, Proteomics, Pedoclimatic metabolomic imprinting

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Science - University of Naples "Federico II"
University of Naple Federico II

### Submitter
Gabriella Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Angela
Department of Chemical Science - University of Naples "Federico II"


