### Accession
PXD018775

### Title
Effect of Nitrosative Stress on the S-nitroso-Proteome of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

### Description
The fungi of Paracoccidioides spp. genus are the causative agents of paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), a systemic mycosis endemic to Latin America. This fungus is considered a facultative intracellular pathogen that is able to survive and replicate inside macrophages. The survival of the fungus during infection depends on its adaptability to various conditions, such as nitrosative/oxidative stress produced by the host immune cells, particularly alveolar macrophages. Currently, there is little knowledge about the P. brasiliensis signaling pathways involved in the fungus evasion mechanism of the host defense response. However, it is known that some of these pathways are triggered by reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) produced by host cells. Considering that the effects of NO (nitric oxide) on pathogens are concentration dependent, such effects could alter the redox state of cysteine residues by influencing (activating or inhibiting) a variety of protein functions, notably S-nitrosylation, a highly important NO-dependent posttranslational modification that regulates cellular functions and signaling pathways. It has been demonstrated by our group that P. brasiliensis yeast cells proliferate when exposed to low NO concentrations. Thus, this work investigated the modulation profile of S-nitrosylated proteins of P. brasiliensis, as well as identifying S-nitrosylation sites after treatment with RNS. Through mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) and label-free quantification, it was possible to identify 474 proteins in the S-nitrosylated proteome study. With this approach, we observed that proteins treated with NO at low concentrations presented a proliferative response pattern, with several proteins involved in cellular cycle regulation and growth being activated. These proteins appear to play important roles in fungal virulence. On the other hand, proteins stimulated by high NO concentrations exhibited a survival response pattern, which may help to elucidate RNS antifungal properties and identify potential molecular targets for the development of new drugs in the future

### Sample Protocol
Enriched proteins were denatured with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), and disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65°C for 1 h. Then, 15 mM IAA was added and incubated at room temperature (in the dark) for 1 h. Samples were incubated with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature, and proteins were precipitated with 8 volumes of cold acetone and 1 volume of cold methanol for 3 h at -80°C and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed (2 times) with cold methanol and dried in a SpeedVac (Savant SpeedVac, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were dissolved in 10 µL 100 mM NaOH, 15 µL H2O2 and 75 µL of 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7,5); subsequently, 2 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to samples and incubated overnight at 37°C (Kleifeld et al., 2011; Castilho et al., 2014). Samples were diluted up to 500 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for trypsin inactivation and loaded into a solid-phase extraction Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the protocol (Menin et al., 2008). After desalting, samples were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 0,1% formic acid prior to nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.Enriched samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA) connected to an Easy-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA) operating in positive ionization mode with voltage 2,3 kVe and temperature at 250°C. Peptides were separated with a 90 min gradient elution, with 5-40% solvent B (0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile) followed by a 20-min gradient with 40-95% solvent B at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Columns were packed in house where the precolumn (ID 100 µm x OD 360) was packed with 5 cm of C18 resin (10 µm, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA) and analytical column (ID 75 µm x OD 360) was packed with 10 cm of ACQUA C18 resin (5 µm, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA). The mass spectrometer was programmed in the data-dependent acquisition mode with a resolution of 30,000 (400 m/z) followed by collision induced by dissociation (CID) of the 20 most intense ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 70 s was employed. The isolation window for the precursor ions was set to 2 Da, and the minimum number of ions to trigger events MS2 was 5000. The analyses were run in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed and searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (MPI in Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) software integrated into the Andromeda Search engine. Proteins were identified by querying against the full sequence of P. brasiliensis strain Pb18 (Proteome ID: UP000001628, UniProt, http://www.UniProt.org/). Searches were performed considering carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met and phosphorylation in Ser, Thr or Tyr as variable modifications. All validated proteins were submitted to Gene Ontology (GO), Blast (e-value ≤ 1e-5) and InterProannotation using the Blast2GO algorithm (Conesa and Götz, 2008). Only proteins identified in at least two analyses were used for validation and table assembly.

### Publication Abstract
The fungi <i>Paracoccidioides brasiliensis</i> and <i>Paracoccidioides lutzii</i> are the causative agents of paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), a systemic mycosis endemic to Latin America. This fungus is considered a facultative intracellular pathogen that is able to survive and replicate inside macrophages. The survival of the fungus during infection depends on its adaptability to various conditions, such as nitrosative/oxidative stress produced by the host immune cells, particularly alveolar macrophages. Currently, there is little knowledge about the <i>Paracoccidioides</i> spp. signaling pathways involved in the fungus evasion mechanism of the host defense response. However, it is known that some of these pathways are triggered by reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) produced by host cells. Considering that the effects of NO (nitric oxide) on pathogens are concentration dependent, such effects could alter the redox state of cysteine residues by influencing (activating or inhibiting) a variety of protein functions, notably <i>S</i>-nitrosylation, a highly important NO-dependent posttranslational modification that regulates cellular functions and signaling pathways. It has been demonstrated by our group that <i>P. brasiliensis</i> yeast cells proliferate when exposed to low NO concentrations. Thus, this work investigated the modulation profile of <i>S</i>-nitrosylated proteins of <i>P. brasiliensis</i>, as well as identifying <i>S</i>-nitrosylation sites after treatment with RNS. Through mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) and label-free quantification, it was possible to identify 474 proteins in the <i>S</i>-nitrosylated proteome study. With this approach, we observed that proteins treated with NO at low concentrations presented a proliferative response pattern, with several proteins involved in cellular cycle regulation and growth being activated. These proteins appear to play important roles in fungal virulence. On the other hand, fungus stimulated by high NO concentrations exhibited a survival response pattern. Among these <i>S</i>-nitrosylated proteins we identified several potential molecular targets for fungal disease therapy, including cell wall integrity (CWI) pathway, amino acid and folic acid metabolisms. In addition, we detected that the transnitrosylation/denitrosylation redox signaling are preserved in this fungus. Finally, this work may help to uncover the beneficial and antifungal properties of NO in the <i>P. brasiliensis</i> and point to useful targets for the development of antifungal drugs.

### Keywords
Nitric oxide, S-nitrosylation, S-nitroso-proteome, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêuticas, Federal University of São Paulo, Diadema, SP, Brazil
Federal University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Marina Navarro

### Lab Head
Dr Wagner Luiz Batista
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêuticas, Federal University of São Paulo, Diadema, SP, Brazil


