### Accession
PXD005236

### Title
A bacteriophage enzyme induces bacterial metabolic perturbation that confers a novel promiscuous function

### Description
One key concept in the evolution of new functions is the ability of enzymes to perform promiscuous side-reactions that serve as a source of novelty that may become beneficial under certain conditions. Here, we identify a mechanism where a bacteriophage-encoded enzyme introduces novelty by inducing expression of a promiscuous bacterial enzyme. By screening for bacteriophage DNA that rescued an auxotrophic E. coli mutant carrying a deletion of the ilvA gene, we show that bacteriophage-encoded S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) hydrolases reduce SAM levels. Via this perturbation of bacterial metabolism, expression of the promiscuous bacterial enzyme MetB is increased, which in turn complements the absence of IlvA. These results demonstrate how foreign DNA can increase the metabolic capacity of bacteria, not only by transfer of bona fide new genes, but also by bringing cryptic bacterial functions to light via perturbations of cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots containing 50 μg of each sample were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method ((Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred on 10 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, USA), wahed with 8M urea solution and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with 500 ng of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) for 3h, then 500 ng more of trypsin was added and the digestion was performed overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeled samples were mixed, sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The combined labeled sample was fractionated using Pierce the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eight fractions were colected using the elution solvents containing 0.1% of triethylamine and 10.0%, 12.25%, 14.5%, 16.75%, 19.0%, 21.25%, 25.0% and 50.0% of acetonitrile. The fractions were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 20 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis. Each fraction was analysed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system. Peptides were trapped on the C18 trap column (200 μm X 3 cm, particle size 3 μm) separated on the home-packed C18 analytical column (75 μm X 30 cm, particle size 3 μm) using the gradient from 5% to 25% B in 45 min, from 25% to 80% B in 5 min, solvent A was 0.2 formic acid and solvent B was 98% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 120 000 resolution. The most intense precursor ions were selected (‘top speed’ setting with a duty cycle of 3s), fragmented using CID at collision energy setting of 30 spectra and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in ion trap. Charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with 10 ppm tolerance. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 60 000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at collision energy of 55 using the synchronous precursor selection of the 5 most abundant MS/MS fragments.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Swissprot database for Escherichia coli K12 (May 2016, 4434 sequences) was downloaded from Uniprot and supplemented the 2 mutant sequences. Mascot 2.3.2.0 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. No missed cleavages were accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results, target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 at 0.003 Da mass tolerance with reporter absolute intensity threshold of 2000. The resulting ratios were normalised on the median protein value of 1.0 in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
One key concept in the evolution of new functions is the ability of enzymes to perform promiscuous side-reactions that serve as a source of novelty that may become beneficial under certain conditions. Here, we identify a mechanism where a bacteriophage-encoded enzyme introduces novelty by inducing expression of a promiscuous bacterial enzyme. By screening for bacteriophage DNA that rescued an auxotrophic Escherichia coli mutant carrying a deletion of the ilvA gene, we show that bacteriophage-encoded S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) hydrolases reduce SAM levels. Through this perturbation of bacterial metabolism, expression of the promiscuous bacterial enzyme MetB is increased, which in turn complements the absence of IlvA. These results demonstrate how foreign DNA can increase the metabolic capacity of bacteria, not only by transfer of bona fide new genes, but also by bringing cryptic bacterial functions to light via perturbations of cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Antibiotic resistance, Tmt, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Dan I. Andersson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden


