### Accession
PXD027167

### Title
Metabolic modulation of tumors with engineered bacteria for immunotherapy

### Description
The availability of L-arginine in tumors is a key determinant of an efficient anti-tumor  T cell response. Consequently, elevation of typically low L-arginine levels within the tumor may greatly potentiate the anti-tumor responses of immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as PD-L1 blocking antibodies. However, currently no means are available to locally increase intra-tumoral L-arginine levels. Here, we used a synthetic biology approach to develop an engineered probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 strain that colonizes tumors and continuously converts ammonia, a metabolic waste product that accumulates in tumors, into L-arginine. Colonization of tumors with these bacteria elevated intra-tumoral L-arginine concentrations, increased the amount of tumor-infiltrating T cells, and had striking synergistic effects with PD-L1 blocking antibodies in the clearance of tumors. The anti-tumor effect of the living therapeutic was mediated by L-arginine and was dependent on T cells. These results show that engineered microbial therapies enable metabolic modulation of the tumor microenvironment leading to enhanced efficacy of immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial cells were washed by cold PBS and centrifuged at 8,000 rpm, 4 °C for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded, and cell pellets were stored at -80 °C. Bacterial pellets were re-suspended in an ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC) at pH 8 containing 4% SDS. Then, samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 min followed by sonication in a Bioruptor (15 cycles, 30s on, 30s off, high mode). Non-soluble cell debris were spun down at 16,000g for 10 min and supernatants were precipitated with 5 volumes cold acetone at -80°C over-night. Precipitated proteins were spun down at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4°C and pellets were washed twice with ice cold 80% acetone. Then, pellets were dried in a SpeedVac and re-suspended in ABC buffer containing 8 M urea followed by sonication. Protein amount was determined using a Nanodrop. Proteins were pre-digested with LysC (1:50, w/w) followed by reduction of disulfide bonds with 10mM DTT and subsequent alkylation with 50 mM iodacetamide. Samples were diluted 1:5 with ABC, and then trypsin (1:50, w/w) was added and the mixtures were incubated overnight at RT. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified and loaded on C18 StageTips15. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN), dried using a SpeedVac, and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 0.5% acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.54) was used to analyze MS raw files. MS/MS spectra were searched against the E. coli Nissle Uniprot FASTA database (UP000011176, the sequence for argAfbr was mannually added) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across different replicates within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. Protein identification required at least 1 razor peptide. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantitation algorithm (MaxLFQ). Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The availability of L-arginine in tumours is a key determinant of an efficient anti-tumour T cell response<sup>1-4</sup>. Consequently, increases of typically low L-arginine concentrations within the tumour may greatly potentiate the anti-tumour responses of immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)-blocking antibodies<sup>5</sup>. However, currently no means are available to locally increase intratumoural L-arginine levels. Here we used a synthetic biology approach to develop an engineered probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 strain that colonizes tumours and continuously converts ammonia, a metabolic waste product that accumulates in tumours<sup>6</sup>, to L-arginine. Colonization of tumours with these bacteria increased intratumoural L-arginine concentrations, increased the number of tumour-infiltrating T cells and had marked synergistic effects with PD-L1 blocking antibodies in the clearance of tumours. The anti-tumour effect of these bacteria was mediated by L-arginine and was dependent on T cells. These results show that engineered microbial therapies enable metabolic modulation of the tumour microenvironment leading to enhanced efficacy of immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Synthetic biology, Cancer immunotherapy, Metabolic modulation of tumors, L-arginine, Bacteria-based therapies

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.  Institute of Oncology Research, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vincenzo Vela 6 - CH-6500 Bellinzona

### Submitter
Matteo Pecoraro

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Geiger
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.  Institute of Oncology Research, Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.


