### Accession
PXD046000

### Title
A PTPB1-Cdk3 signaling axis promotes cell cycle progression of human glioblastoma cells through an Rb-E2F dependent pathway

### Description
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) plays a key role in developing different types of cancer. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this effect is unclear. To identify possible molecular targets of PTP1B that mediate its positive role in tumorigenesis, we undertook a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic approach, which allowed us to identify the Cyclin-dependent kinase 3 (Cdk3) as a novel PTP1B substrate. Molecular docking studies revealed stable interactions between the PTP1B catalytic domain and Cdk3. In addition, we observed that PTP1B dephosphorylates Cdk3 at Tyrosine residue 15 in vitro and interacts with it in the nucleus and cytoplasm of human glioblastoma (GB) cells. Finally, we found that the pharmacological inhibition of PTP1B or its depletion with siRNA leads to cell cycle arrest with the diminished activity of Cdk3, the consequent hypophosphorylation of Rb, and the down-regulation of E2F and its target genes Cdk1, Cyclin A, and Cyclin E1. These data delineate a novel signaling pathway from PTP1B to Cdk3 required for efficient cell cycle progression in an Rb-E2F dependent manner in human GB cells and suggest new therapeutic strategies for treating these tumors.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, Ptp1b−/− and Ptp1b+/+ cells were grown in media containing 12C6,14N4-Arg and 12C6,14N2-Lys, or 13C6,15N4-Arg and 13C6,15N2-Lys (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA. USA) until the populations went through six passages. Then, cells were starved for 3 h prior to ligand stimulation with EGF (50 ng/mL, 10 min; PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA), and were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 mM NaF) for 20 min. Lysates were precleared by centrifugation at 16,500 × g for 15 min. Protein amount determination was performed using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). In SILAC experiments, cell lysates were mixed 1:1 (double labeling). For immunoprecipitation, 200 μg of anti-phospho-tyrosine 4G10 antibody (cat # ZMS16282. Sigma-Aldrich. St. Louis, MO. USA) were added together with 40 μL of protein A-Sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) to mixed cell lysates containing up to 20 mg of total labeled proteins and incubated at 4 °C for 4 h. Precipitates were washed four times with lysis buffer, and precipitated proteins were eluted twice with urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 1% n-octyl glucoside) at 37 °C for 10 min.  After anti-phospho-tyrosine immunoprecipitation, precipitated proteins were denatured in the urea buffer described above, and protein amount was measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Proteins were reduced by adding 2 mM DTT (final concentration) at 25 °C for 45 min, and thiols were carboxymethylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Endoproteinase Lys-C was added in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100, and the proteins were digested at room temperature for 4 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were diluted with water to reach a final urea concentration below 2 M. For double digestion, modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100, and the digest was incubated at room temperature overnight. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1%. After trypsin digest, phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere chromatography (TiO2) columns as previously described [45,46]. Peptide samples were diluted 1:6 with 30 g/L 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. 5 μg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences Inc., Torrance, California, USA) were washed once with elution buffer (NH3 water in 20% ACN, pH 10.5) and equilibrated with washing buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA). TiO2 beads were loaded with DHB by washing with loading buffer (6 g/L DHB in 15% ACN). Peptide samples were loaded onto TiO2 beads for 30 min at room temperature on a rotating wheel. Subsequently, beads were washed three times with washing buffer, and bound phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 50 μL of elution buffer at room temperature for 10 min. The eluates were filtered through STAGE Tips in 200-μL pipette tips. 30 μL of 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid was applied to the STAGE Tips after filtering [47], and the flow-through was combined with the filtered sample. The pH value of the sample was adjusted with TFA to a value of approximately pH 7, and the eluates were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator. Before MS analysis, 5% ACN and 0.1% TFA (final concentrations) were added to the samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by nanoscale LC–MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA. USA) coupled to an Ultimate U3000 (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) via a Proxeon nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon Biosystems, Denmark). Peptides were separated on a 75 μM PepMap C18 nano column. Data were acquired in data-dependent mode: full scan spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60 000 after accumulation of 1 000 000 ions. The “lock mass” option was used to improve the mass accuracy of precursor ions. The ten most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35% and recorded in the linear ion trap (target value of 5000) based on the survey scan and in parallel to the orbitrap detection of MS spectra. Peptide identification was performed using the MASCOT search engine. Raw data analysis of SILAC experiments was performed using MaxQuant software 1.2.0.18. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and a minimum peptide length of 6. All settings were default and searched using acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. SILAC quantification was performed by choosing multiplicity as 2 in group-specific parameters and Arg6 and Lys6 as heavy labels. The protein false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
PTP1B plays a key role in developing different types of cancer. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this effect is unclear. To identify molecular targets of PTP1B that mediate its role in tumorigenesis, we undertook a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic approach, which allowed us to identify Cdk3 as a novel PTP1B substrate. Substrate trapping experiments and docking studies revealed stable interactions between the PTP1B catalytic domain and Cdk3. In addition, we observed that PTP1B dephosphorylates Cdk3 at tyrosine residue 15 in&#xa0;vitro and interacts with it in human glioblastoma cells. Next, we found that pharmacological inhibition of PTP1B or its depletion with siRNA leads to cell cycle arrest with diminished activity of Cdk3, hypophosphorylation of Rb, and the downregulation of E2F target genes Cdk1, Cyclin A, and Cyclin E1. Finally, we observed that the expression of a constitutively active Cdk3 mutant bypasses the requirement of PTP1B for cell cycle progression and expression of E2F target genes. These data delineate a novel signaling pathway from PTP1B to Cdk3 required for efficient cell cycle progression in an Rb-E2F dependent manner in human GB cells.

### Keywords
Ptpb1, Cdk3, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Cancer Signaling and Epigenetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Phialdelphia, PA, USA
Fox Chase Cancer Center

### Submitter
Jonathan Chernoff

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Chernoff, MD, PhD
Cancer Signaling and Epigenetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Phialdelphia, PA, USA


