### Accession
PXD031886

### Title
Analysis of the extracellular proteome from Aspergillus nidulans growing in Avicel, sugarcane bagasse and sugarcane straw

### Description
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are oxidative enzymes found in viruses, archaea, bacteria as well as eukaryotes, such as fungi, algae and insects, actively contributing to the degradation of different polysaccharides. Analysis of the extracellular proteome (secretome) from Aspergillus nidulans growing in Avicel, sugarcane bagasse and sugarcane straw and analysed by LC-MS/MS in a LTQ Orbitrap Velos revealed that up to five LPMOs from family AA9 (AnLPMO9s), along with an AA3 cellobiose dehydrogenase (AnCDH1), are co-secreted upon growth on crystalline cellulose and lignocellulosic substrates, indicating their role in the degradation of plant cell wall components. Functional analysis revealed that the three main secreted LPMO9s (AnLPMO9C, AnLPMO9F and AnLPMO9G) correspond to cellulose- active enzymes with distinct regioselectivity. Deletion and overexpression studies confirmed that the abundantly secreted AnLPMO9F is a major component of the extracellular cellulolytic system, while AnLPMO9G, less abundant in the secretome, and has an important role by oxidizing crystalline fractions of cellulose. Single or double deletion of these AnLPMO9s partially impair fungal growth on sugarcane straw but not on crystalline cellulose, demonstrating the importance of LPMO9s for the saprophytic fungal lifestyle in the degradation of complex lignocellulosic  substrates. Although the deletion of AnCDH1 slightly reduced the cellulolytic activity, it did not affect fungal growth indicating the existence of other electron donors to LPMOs. Additionally, double or triple knockouts of these enzymes had no accumulative deleterious effect on the cellulolytic activity nor on fungal growth, regardless of the deleted gene. Overexpression of AnLPMO9s in a cellulose-induced secretome background confirmed the importance and applicability of AnLPMO9G to improve lignocellulose saccharification.

### Sample Protocol
A. nidulans A773 conidia suspension were inoculated (5x10^6 conidia/mL final concentration) for pre-cultivation on Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 50 mL liquid MM 1% (w/v) glucose pH 6.5 for 24 h at 37 °C. Mycelia was removed by filtration, washed abundantly and transferred to Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) containing 50 mL liquid MM pH 6.5 supplemented with 1% (w/v) Avicel, glucose, steam-exploded sugarcane bagasse (SCB) and steam-exploded sugarcane straw (SCS), cultivation then proceeded for 24, 72 and 120 h at 37 °C. Cultivation was performed using three replicates. Mycelia was removed by filtration and the crude filtrates were centrifuged (10.000g, 40 min, 4 °C) and concentrated in 10 kDa cut-off Amicon (Millipore, USA). The concentrated secretomes (20 μg) were partially resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE, excised and then reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, at room temperature), alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), and digested with 20 mg/mL trypsin (Promega). After peptide extraction, the samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator. 4.5 µL of the peptide mixture was analyzed on an ETD-enabled LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with LC–MS/MS by an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. The peptides were separated by a 2–90 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid using a PicoFrit Column analytical column (20 cm × ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 60 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the source temperature was 275 °C. The instrument method for the LTQ Velos Orbitrap was set up in the data-dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 10^6. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000, and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35 %). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s, and repeat count of 1. An activation q of 0.25 and an activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were converted to a peak list format (mgf) using the Mascot Distiller v.2.3.2.0 software (Matrix Science Ltd.). These spectra were searched against the A. nidulans genome from AspGD (10.560 entries) using the Mascot v.2.3.01 engine (Matrix Science Ltd.) with oxidation of methionine as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Additional parameters were one trypsin-missed cleavage, a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 1 Da for fragment ions. All datasets processed using the workflow feature in the Mascot software were further analyzed in the software ScaffoldQ + (Proteome Software) to validate the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 % probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Mascot identifications required at least both the associated identity scores and ion scores to be p < 0.05. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99 % probability for protein identification. Protein probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm. Using the number of total spectra output from the ScaffoldQ + software, we identified the differentially expressed proteins using spectral counting. Quantitative value was applied to normalize the spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lpmo, Fungal biology, Sugarcane lignocellulose, Carbohydrate metabolism, Aa9, Oxidative enzymes

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Enzymology and Molecular Biology (LEBIMO), Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Marcelo Rubio

### Lab Head
Dr André Damásio
Laboratory of Enzymology and Molecular Biology (LEBIMO), Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)


