### Accession
PXD044277

### Title
Interactome analysis of PHF2 using LC-MS combined with an immunoprecipitation assay

### Description
PHF2 demethylates lysine 9 in histone 3 and acts as a tumor suppressor. In liver pathogenesis, PHF2 has dual effects. PHF2 induces simple hepato-steatosis by epigenetically coactivating ChREBP. When lipid accumulation goes serious, it protects the liver from fibrogenesis by facilitating Nrf2 activity, a major transcription factor in the defense against oxidative stress during non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. However, little is known regarding the functions of PHF2 in liver cancer cells. Therefore, to investigate the possible roles of PHF2 and find new interacting proteins, we performed an LC-MS/MS assay combined with an immunoprecipitation assay.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were transfected with the Flag/SBP-PHF2 plasmid. Proteins were immunoprecipitated using Flag or streptavidin affinity beads. PHF2 gel pieces cut from SDS-polyacrylamide gels were destained with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then with 100% acetonitrile. The proteins were reduced in the gels using 20 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 1 h. After alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h in the dark, the gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then dehydrated in acetonitrile. Next, the dried gel pieces were rehydrated in a sequencing-grade modified trypsin solution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel using 50% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer Ver. 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to detect the PHF2-interacting proteins. The proteins identified commonly in two precipitates (Flag or streptavidin) were listed.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitic acid (PA) is the most common fatty acid in humans and mediates palmitoylation through its conversion into palmitoyl coenzyme A. Although palmitoylation affects many proteins, its pathophysiological functions are only partially understood. Here we demonstrate that PA acts as a molecular checkpoint of lipid reprogramming in HepG2 and Hep3B cells. The zinc finger DHHC-type palmitoyltransferase 23 (ZDHHC23) mediates the palmitoylation of plant homeodomain finger protein 2 (PHF2), subsequently enhancing ubiquitin-dependent degradation of PHF2. This study also reveals that PHF2 functions as a tumor suppressor by acting as an E3 ubiquitin ligase of sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c (SREBP1c), a master transcription factor of lipogenesis. PHF2 directly destabilizes SREBP1c and reduces SREBP1c-dependent lipogenesis. Notably, SREBP1c increases free fatty acids in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, and the consequent PA induction triggers the PHF2/SREBP1c axis. Since PA seems central to activating this axis, we suggest that levels of dietary PA should be carefully monitored in patients with HCC.

### Keywords
Phf2, Lc-msms, Hepg2, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Seoul National University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Do-Won Jeong

### Lab Head
Dr Yang-Sook Chun
Seoul National University College of Medicine


