### Accession
PXD031389

### Title
Proteomic profiling of healthy and SLE isolated B-cells

### Description
B cells orchestrate the autoimmune responses in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), but broad based B-cell directed therapies only show modest efficacy while attenuating humoral immune responses to vaccines and inducing acquired immunodeficiency. used proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of B cells from patients with SLE and healthy individuals and demonstrated a dominant DDR in SLE B cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: B cells were isolated simultaneously (to avoid batch effects) from frozen peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of SLE patients and healthy controls (HC) (n=11/condition) with EasySep™ Human B Cell Isolation Kit (Cat. #17954, STEMCELL) following DNase treatment according to the guidelines of EasySep. The purified cell population was subjected to complete cell lysis using a buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 100 mm Tris/HCl, 100 mm DTT, pH 7.6 and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysed samples were further sonicated for 30 min in a water bath. The protein extracts were purified from debris by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 17Kxg. The supernatants were transferred to clean tubes and processed according to the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method of Hughes (39), without acidification and including a step of protein alkylation in 100 mM Iodoacetamide.  Digestion was carried out for continuous shaking at 1400 rpm at 37 °C using 0.25 μg Trypsin/LysC mixture in a 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Next day, the magnetic beads were removed and the peptidic samples were further purified by Sp3 peptide cleanup and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were solubilized in Buffer A, sonicated for 5 minutes and the peptide concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using a nanodrop. Ultrahigh pressure nanoLC: Each sample was analyzed three times (technical replicates). Approximately 0.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 10 μL/min for 4 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient starting with 5% B up to 27.5% B in 58 min stepped to 40% B in 2 min and finally reaching 99%B and remaining there for 5 min and then allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 50°C. MS/MS: The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). The peptides were measured from 350-1500 m/z, using a resolving power of 120K for MS1, AGC at 3e6, maximum injection time of 100ms, followed by 12 MS/MS of the most abundant 2+-4+ charged ions using a resolving power of 15K, AGC at 1e5, maximum injection time of 22ms, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z at 28 NCE and a dynamic exclusion of 30s. The software Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files and internal calibration was activated using a lock mass of m/z 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis: The raw files were searched, using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4, against the Homo sapiens reference proteome FASTA database downloaded from Uniprot on 19/09/19 (containing 95959 protein sequences) and the ProteomeTools_HCD28_PD spectral library using the multiple peptide search (MPS) option activated and using serially the MSPepSearch and SequestHT nodes. The protein dynamic modifications assessed were oxidation +15.995 Da (M), deamidation +0.984 Da (N, Q) and the N-terminal variable modifications of acetylation +42.011 Da, Met-loss -131.040 Da (M) and Met-loss+Acetyl -89.030 Da (M). Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C) was set as a static modification. The result filtered for high confident peptides, with enhanced peptide and protein annotations. Only master proteins were evaluated. The quantified abundances were based on intensity values and were normalized to the total peptide amount. The statistical evaluation between the Control group and SLE Patient protein normalized abundances was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software (pairwise background-based t-test). The minimum percentage of replicate features was set to 60 %. 4995 proteins identified with at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B cells; atr; irf1; dna damage response; systemic lupus erythematosus; autoimmunity; proteomics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
1. Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, 115 27 Athens, Greece.  2. Joint Rheumatology Program, 4th Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, 124 62 Athens, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Dimitrios Boumpas
1. Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, 115 27 Athens, Greece.  2. Joint Rheumatology Program, 4th Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, 124 62 Athens, Greece.


