### Accession
PXD027043

### Title
Molecular insights into mechanisms of GPCR hijacking by Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
We use hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to analyse the effects of S. aureus leucotoxins binding to the atypical chemokine receptor ACKR1 on receptor's structure and dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified by affinity-purification (His-tag for the toxins and Flag-tag for the receptor ACKR1). Mixtures of receptor: leukotoxins were pre-incubated together to reach equilibrium prior to HDX-MS analysis. Analysis of freshly prepared ACKR1 apo, ACKR1: HlgA and ACKR1: HlgB (1: 1 ratio) mixtures were performed as follows: 3 µL of sample are diluted in 57 µL of undeuterated for the reference or deuterated last wash SEC buffer. The final percentage of deuterium in the deuterated buffer was 95%. Deuteration was performed at 20°C for 30, 60, 300, 600 and 1800 sec. Next, 50 µL of reaction sample are quenched in 50 µL of quench buffer (KH2PO4 50 mM and K2HPO4 50mM, pH 2.3) at 0°C. 80 µL of quenched sample are loaded onto a 50 µL loop and injected on an Enzymate pepsin column (300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 30 mm, Waters) maintained at 15°C, with 0.2% formic acid at a flowrate of 100 µL/min and an additional backing pressure of 6000 psi controlled by the HDX regulator kit (Waters). The peptides are then trapped at 0°C on a Vanguard column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm X 5 mm, Waters) for 3 min, before being loaded at 40 µL/min onto an Acquity UPLC column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, 1.7 µm, 1 mm X 100 mm, Waters) kept at 0°C. Peptides are subsequently eluted with a linear gradient (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile solvent at 5% up to 35% during the first 6 min, then up to 40% and 95% over 1 min each) and ionized directly by electrospray on a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). HDMSE data were obtained by 20-30 V trap collision energy ramp. Lock mass accuracy correction was made using a mixture of leucine enkephalin. The pepsin column was then washed three times with Guanidine-HCl 1.5 M, acetonitrile 4% and formic acid 0.8% and a blank is performed between each sample in order to minimize the carry-over. All timepoints were performed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed from undeuterated data using ProteinLynx global Server (PLGS, version 3.0.3, Waters). Peptides are filtered by DynamX (version 3.0, Waters) using the following parameters: minimum intensity of 1000, minimum product per amino acid of 0.2, maximum error for threshold of 5 ppm. All peptides were manually checked and data was curated using DynamX. Back exchange was not corrected since we are measuring differential HDX and not absolute one. Statistical analysis of all differential HDX data was performed using Deuteros 2.0 (Lau et al. 2020 Bioinformatics) and only peptides with a 99% confidence interval were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Atypical chemokine receptor 1 (ACKR1) is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) targeted by <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> bicomponent pore-forming leukotoxins to promote bacterial growth and immune evasion. Here, we have developed an integrative molecular pharmacology and structural biology approach in order to characterize the effect of leukotoxins HlgA and HlgB on ACKR1 structure and function. Interestingly, using cell-based assays and native mass spectrometry, we found that both components HlgA and HlgB compete with endogenous chemokines through a direct binding with the extracellular domain of ACKR1. Unexpectedly, hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry analysis revealed that toxin binding allosterically modulates the intracellular G protein-binding domain of the receptor, resulting in dissociation and/or changes in the architecture of ACKR1-G&#x3b1;i1 protein complexes observed in living cells. Altogether, our study brings important molecular insights into the initial steps of leukotoxins targeting a host GPCR.

### Keywords
Gpcr, Pharmacology, Structural mass spectrometry, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
IGF, University of Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, Montpellier, France
University of Montpellier

### Submitter
Cherine Bechara

### Lab Head
Dr Cherine Bechara
IGF, University of Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, Montpellier, France


