### Accession
PXD023913

### Title
Integrated proteomics-based physical and functional mapping of AXL kinase signaling pathways and inhibitors define its role in cell migration: ABPP

### Description
To better understand the signaling complexity of AXL, a member of the TAM family of receptor tyrosine kinases, we created a physical and functional map of AXL signaling interactions, phosphorylation events, and target-engagement of three AXL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). We assessed AXL protein-complexes using BioID, effects of AXL TKI on global phosphoproteins using mass spectrometry, and target engagement of AXL TKI using activity-based protein profiling. BioID identifies AXL-interacting proteins that are mostly involved in cell adhesion/migration. Global phosphoproteomics reveal that AXL inhibition deregulates phosphorylation of peptides involved in phosphatidylinositol-mediated signaling and cell adhesion/migration. Comparison of three AXL inhibitors reveals that TKI RXDX-106 inhibits pAXL, pAKT and migration/invasion of these cells without reducing their viability, while Bemcentinib exerts AXL-independent phenotypic effects. Proteomic characterization of these TKIs reveals that they inhibit diverse targets in addition to AXL, with Bemcentinib having the most off-targets. AXL and EGFR TKI co-treatment did not reverse resistance in cell line models of Erlotinib resistance. However, a unique vulnerability was identified in one persister clone, wherein combination of Bemcentinib and Erlotinib inhibited cell viability and signaling. We also show that AXL is overexpressed in ~30-40% of NSCLC but rarely in SCLC. NSCLC cells have a wide range of AXL protein expression, with basal activation detected rarely. Overall, we evaluate the mechanisms of action of AXL in lung cancer which can be used to establish assays to measure drug targetable active AXL complexes in patient tissues and inform the strategy for targeting its signaling network as an anticancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
H1299 and PC9 cell pellets, in triplicate for each sample, were harvested in ice-cold PBS and stored at -80°C until probe labeling. Cell lysates were prepared, and the ATP-binding proteome 13 labeled according to the Pierce Kinase Enrichment Kits and ActivXTM Probes (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 1ml of Pierce IP lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1:100) and sonicated. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C and desalted by Zeba Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay, and a total of 1.5 mg per biological replicate was used for ATP probe labeling. MnCl2 was added to the lysate to a final concentration of 20 μM and incubated for 10 minutes. Lysates were incubated with 20 μM RXDX-106, Cabozantinib, Bemcentinib or DMSO for 15 minutes and the desthiobiotin-ATP probe was added for the competition reaction at a final concentration of 5 μM for 15 minutes. All reactions were performed at room temperature. Reduction and alkylation were performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The lysates were then digested with 20 μg/mL of trypsin at 37°C overnight. A second digestion with 5 μg of trypsin was performed the next day for 1 hour. Desthiobiotinylated peptides were captured by 50 μl slurry of high-capacity streptavidin beads for 1h. The beads were washed with IP lysis buffer, PBS buffer, and LC-MS grade water in sequence with three washes for each step. The peptides were then eluted with elution buffer (aqueous 50% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)), lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended in 12 μl of injection buffer containing aqueous 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and PRTC in order to confirm consistent operation of the LC-MS/MS instrument. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLCnano, Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an nanoelectrospray quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 μm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5μm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 μm ID x 25 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA). The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% 11 formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibrate for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. The resolution settings were 60,000 and 45,000 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The isolation window was 0.8 Th with 0.2 offset to capture the M and M+1 isotopes of the peptide precursor.

### Data Protocol
For this upload, database searches were performed with Mascot.  For the manuscript, data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (37). The m/z tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS.  Carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and desthiobiotinylation of lysine was set as a variable modification for database searching.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Axl tyrosine kinase, Targeted therapy, Lung cancer, Abpp

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric B. Haura, MD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


