### Accession
PXD028861

### Title
Identification of 8-oxoG binding proteins in Deinococcus radiodurans

### Description
8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoG) is a common RNA oxidation that has been implicated in carcinogenesis, neurodegeneration, and aging. Some? Many? RNA-binding proteins have shown binding preference for 8-oxoG modified RNA; such binding? can protect cells from oxidative stress. To date, the presence of specific 8-oxoG-recognizing proteins is only known in model organisms, but, how these proteins cooperate is still unclear. Here, we use RNA affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry to search for proteins that specifically bind 8-oxoG-modified RNA in Deinococcus radiodurans, an extremophilic bacterium with extraordinary resistance to oxidative stresses. We identified four proteins that selectively bind to oxidized RNA: polynucleotide phosphorylase (DR_2063/PNPase), ATP-dependent DEAD-box RNA helicase (DR_0335/RhlB), ribosomal protein S1 (DR_1983/RpsA), and transcriptional termination factor (DR_1338/Rho). The knockout of PNPase and RhlB in D. radiodurans caused increased sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide and a significant accumulation of 8-oxoG modified RNA. Importantly, PNPase directly interacts with RhlB in D. radiodurans; however, no additional phenotypic effect was observed for the double deletion of pnp and rhlB compared to the individual single deletions. Overall, our findings suggest a role of the PNPase-RhlB complex in targeting 8-oxoG-modified RNAs for rapid degradation and thereby constitutes an important component of D. radiodurans resistance to oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
A 24-mer RNA oligonucleotide [5’-Biotin-NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN8-oxoGNNNNNN-3’, (N stands for random base: A/T/C/G)] were chemically synthesized for the RNA affinity chromatography assay to discover 8-oxoG specific binding proteins. An unmodified oligonucleotide [(5’-NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNGNNNNNN-3’, (N stands for random base: A/T/C/G)] was used as a control. 100 mL of D. radiodurans cells were harvested at OD600nm of 0.8, washed, and resuspended in lysis buffer [1 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)]. The cells were then lysed using a sonicator (XL-2000 Microson ultrasonic liquid processor, QSonica) with an amplitude of 25%, alternating between 10 s on and 10 s off for 10 min on ice. Afterward, the cell extracts were collected by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm to obtain whole-cell lysates from the supernatant, and the concentrations were measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). 500 μg of the lysates or purified His6 tagged proteins were pre-cleared with 500 μg Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 300 μLof binding buffer [10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 150 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% v/v IGEPAL CA-630] for 30 min at 4 °C with rotation in the presence of 0.4 U/mL SUPERase• InTM RNase Inhibitor (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 125 μg of yeast tRNA (Sigma-Aldrich) to reduce the unspecific binding. 10 μg of biotinylated modified/unmodified RNA baits in 20 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5) were refolded by heating at 90 °C for 10 min and incubated with pre-cleared lysates or His6 tagged protein (200 µg) for 30 min at room temperature, and then for 2 h at 4 °C. The mixture was then added to 500 μg Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 pre-blocked with BSA (1%) and tRNA (50 μg/mL) for 2 h at 4 °C. The RNA-protein complexes were pulled-down and washed with 900 μL wash buffer [10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% v/v IGEPAL CA-630] for three times. The bead pellets were then eluted using 20 μL of high-salt elution buffer [10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 500 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% v/v IGEPAL CA-630]. To increase the yield, the elution step was repeated, and eluates combined. The eluted proteins were then analyzed by SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, or liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Proteins obtained from RNA affinity chromatography or co-immunopurification were resuspended in the SDS sample buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 25% (v/v) glycerol, 0.5% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (w/v) Bromophenol blue, 0.05% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol). The mixtures were denatured at 95°C for 5 min and run ~3 mm into the 12% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad). After staining by Coomassie Bright Blue (Sigma-Aldrich‎), the protein bands were excised using a clean razor blade. The gel tubes were then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich), reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for another 30 min. The gels were washed, rehydrated, and then digested by 10 ng/μL trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) overnight at 37˚C. Proteins was then extracted from the gels using 5% formic acid and 1:2 (v/v) 5% formic acid:acetonitrile. The samples were sent for LC-MS/MS analysis at the University of Texas ICMB proteomics facility. The resulting protein spectral counts were searched against the Uniprot D. radiodurans R1 (ATCC 13939) database using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and normalized to total ion intensity. The identifications were validated with Scaffold v4.4.1 (Proteome Software) with greater than 99.0% probability and with a minimum of two peptides at 99.0% peptide probability. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptides and 5% for protein identification. The difference between two strains/fractions was calculated using Student’s t-test and the P values were adjusted by the Benjamini-Hochberg method [45].

### Publication Abstract
8-Oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoG) is a major RNA modification caused by oxidative stresses and has been implicated in carcinogenesis, neurodegeneration, and aging. Several RNA-binding proteins have been shown to have a binding preference for 8-oxoG-modified RNA in eukaryotes and protect cells from oxidative stress. To date, polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase) is one of the most well-characterized proteins in bacteria that recognize 8-oxoG-modified RNA, but how PNPase cooperates with other proteins to process oxidized RNA is still unclear. Here, we use RNA affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry to search for proteins that preferably bind 8-oxoG-modified RNA in Deinococcus radiodurans, an extremophilic bacterium with extraordinary resistance to oxidative stresses. We identified four proteins that preferably bind to oxidized RNA: PNPase (DR_2063), DEAD box RNA helicase (DR_0335/RhlB), ribosomal protein S1 (DR_1983/RpsA), and transcriptional termination factor (DR_1338/Rho). Among these proteins, PNPase and RhlB exhibit high-affinity binding to 8-oxoG-modified RNA in a dose-independent manner. Deletions of PNPase and RhlB caused increased sensitivity of D. radiodurans to oxidative stress. We further showed that PNPase and RhlB specifically reduce the cellular availability of 8-oxoG-modified RNA but have no effect on oxidized DNA. Importantly, PNPase directly interacts with RhlB in D. radiodurans; however, no additional phenotypic effect was observed for the double deletion of <i>pnp</i> and <i>rhlB</i> compared to the single deletions. Overall, our findings suggest the roles of PNPase and RhlB in targeting 8-oxoG-modified RNAs and thereby constitute an important component of D. radiodurans resistance to oxidative stress. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Oxidative RNA damage can be caused by oxidative stress, such as hydrogen peroxide, ionizing radiation, and antibiotic treatment. 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoG), a major type of oxidized RNA, is highly mutagenic and participates in a variety of disease occurrences and development. Although several proteins have been identified to recognize 8-oxoG-modified RNA, the knowledge of how RNA oxidative damage is controlled largely remains unclear, especially in nonmodel organisms. In this study, we identified four RNA binding proteins that show higher binding affinity to 8-oxoG-modified RNA compared to unmodified RNA in the extremophilic bacterium <i>Deinococcus radiodurans</i>, which can endure high levels of oxidative stress. Two of the proteins, polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase) and DEAD-box RNA helicase (RhlB), interact with each other and reduce the cellular availability of 8-oxoG-modified RNA under oxidative stress. As such, this work contributes to our understanding of how RNA oxidation is influenced by RNA binding proteins in bacteria.

### Keywords
8-oxo-7, 8-dihydroguanine; rna oxidation; rna binding proteins; pnpase; rhlb; oxidative stress; deinococcus radiodurans; rna degradation

### Affiliations
Univesity of Texas at Austin
McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
RUNHUA HAN

### Lab Head
Dr Lydia M. Contreras
McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


