### Accession
PXD006216

### Title
Chemotherapy-induced cellular senescence is characterized by aberrant lipid regulation and lipid peroxidation

### Description
As normal cells approach their proliferative limit, they arrest to undergo replicative senescence, displaying large cell size, flat morphology and activation of senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-b-Gal). A subset of normal or tumor cells exposed in vitro or in vivo to chemotherapy agents such as etoposide perform a related response with a similar cellular phenotype dubbed therapy-induced senescence (TIS). High cellular heterogeneity in samples including TIS cells can impede confident determination of senescence-specific factors, frustrating discovery of markers and targets for functional analysis. As a TIS study model, we treated murine melanoma cells with the chemotherapeutic etoposide, applied a live-cell fluorescent SA-b-Gal senescence assay, and utilized fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to enrich TIS cells. Enriched senescent cell samples were subjected to mass spectrometry and label-free quantitative proteomics analysis, alongside proliferating and quiescent cell samples. Systems biology analysis revealed that senescent cells overexpress proteins and pathways regulating glycolipid processing, lipid metabolism, and lipid peroxidation. Senescence-associated activation of numerous glycosidases was observed, along with elevated cell surface expression of several major lipid regulatory proteins. Senescent cells were found to contain abundant lipid droplets and to import various types of extracellular lipids in correlation with extent of SA-b-Gal expression, and tumor cells were observed to spontaneously senesce in the presence of excess ceramide or triglycerides. Redox-induced lipid peroxidation, resulting in accumulation of cellular reactive aldehydes and consequent expression of aldehyde detoxification enzymes, was observed to be a key feature of TIS induced by three DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
For each cell sample, a whole cell lysate was prepared using at least 1 X 106 cells. Each lysate was subfractionated into cytoplasmic, membrane, and nuclear fractions using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit (Pierce) according to the instructions. For samples S and P, two biological and two technical replicates were performed. For samples L and Q, one biological replicate and two technical replicates were performed.    20 µg of each lysate fraction was loaded onto a 12% Bis-Tris acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) with MOPS buffer (Invitrogen) and run for 10 min at 200V constant. The gel was stained with Imperial Protein Stain (Pierce) at room temperature to visualize protein lanes. For each lane, 1 cm gel sections were excised by sterile razor blade and cubed into ~ 1 mm3 gel sections. Each gel section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5; Sigma-Aldrich) in 50% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich). A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3, (pH 7.5) and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl (TCEP; Pierce) at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide (Pierce) prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5), and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50 - 1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5), and 20 mM CaCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were extracted sequentially with 5% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), then with 75% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid, combined, and vacuum dried using a centrifugal concentrator (Eppendorf).   All samples were re-suspended in HPLC-grade water (Burdick & Jackson) containing 0.2% formic acid, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (CalBioChem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, in-source dimer [2 M+H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μL C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic C8 (Optimize Technologies), washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm X 75 μm C18-packed spray tip nanocolumn packed with Michrom Magic C18 AQ (Optimize Technologies), for a two-step gradient. Mobile phase A was H2O/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 0.350 µL/min, a 90 min, two-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50% – 95% B over the next 10 min, held 10 min at 95% B, returned to starting conditions, and re-equilibrated.  The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360 – 2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MS/MS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 (unit?) resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Singly charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
. All LC-MS/MS *.raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute, V. 1.5.2.8) searching against the SPROT Mus musculus database (160223_SPROT_Mus_Iso_AUP000000589.fasta, UniProt, 2016). The following analysis criteria were used: label free quantitation (LFQ) was selected with a minimum of 1 high confidence peptide to assign quantitation intensities. Trypsin was identified as the protease with maximum missed cleavage set to 2. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to oxidization (M), formylation (n-term), deamidation (NQ), 4-hydroxynonenal HNE (CHK), and GlyGly (K). The Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer was defined using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the MS level LFQ peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt file as LFQ intensities.  Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only Identified by Site”. A data filter was set such that identified protein hits were seen in at least two replicates.    This analysis produced a list of sorted proteomes of for the following sample states (P, proliferating; Q, quiescent, L, senescent, SA--GalLO; S, senescent, SA--GalHI). Ratios for (S/P), (L/P), (Q/P), (S/Q), and (S/L) were generated from average LFQ intensities of hits passing initial filtering criteria. Significant hits were considered if they exhibited ≥ 1.5 fold change, either increase (positive) or decrease (negative). P-values were determined from paired, two-tailed t-test results calculated from mean spectral count data.

### Publication Abstract
At their proliferative limit, normal cells arrest and undergo replicative senescence, displaying large cell size, flat morphology, and senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-<i>&#x3b2;</i>-Gal) activity. Normal or tumor cells exposed to genotoxic stress undergo therapy-induced senescence (TIS), displaying a similar phenotype. Senescence is considered a DNA damage response, but cellular heterogeneity has frustrated identification of senescence-specific markers and targets. To explore the senescent cell proteome, we treated tumor cells with etoposide and enriched SA-<i>&#x3b2;</i>-Gal<sup>HI</sup> cells by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). The enriched TIS cells were compared to proliferating or quiescent cells by label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomics and systems analysis, revealing activation of multiple lipid metabolism pathways. Senescent cells accumulated lipid droplets and imported lipid tracers, while treating proliferating cells with specific lipids induced senescence. Senescent cells also displayed increased lipid aldehydes and upregulation of aldehyde detoxifying enzymes. These results place deregulation of lipid metabolism alongside genotoxic stress as factors regulating cellular senescence.

### Keywords
Maxquant lfq, Q-exactive, Chemotherapy-induced senescence, Lipid peroxidation, Quant proteomics, Mus

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
University of Chicago. Biological Sciences Division, Molecular Genetics & Cell Biology

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J Kron
University of Chicago. Biological Sciences Division, Molecular Genetics & Cell Biology


