### Accession
PXD020199

### Title
Proteomic Signatures of Acute Oxidative Stress Response to Paraquat in the Mouse Heart

### Description
Using quantitative tandem mass spectrometry, we assessed the effects of acute exposure of the oxidative stress inducer paraquat on protein expression in mouse hearts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from mice (male, ~12 weeks old, C57BL/6J) were digested with trypsin on a molecular weight filter and labeled with TMT tags. Digested proteins were subjected to offline high-pH reversed-phase fractionation. Fractions were further separated with online low-pH reversed phase liquid chromatography using an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptide signals were acquired with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw spectrum files were converted to .mzML and searched with a Comet/Percolator workflow against a Mus musculus database retrieved from UniProt. Peptides were accepted for identification under 0.01 Percolator q-value.

### Publication Abstract
The heart is sensitive to oxidative damage but a global view on how the cardiac proteome responds to oxidative stressors has yet to fully emerge. Using quantitative tandem mass spectrometry, we assessed the effects of acute exposure of the oxidative stress inducer paraquat on protein expression in mouse hearts. We observed widespread protein expression changes in the paraquat-exposed heart especially in organelle-containing subcellular fractions. During cardiac response to acute oxidative stress, proteome changes are consistent with a rapid reduction of mitochondrial metabolism, coupled with activation of multiple antioxidant proteins, reduction of protein synthesis and remediation of proteostasis. In addition to differential expression, we saw evidence of spatial reorganizations of the cardiac proteome including the translocation of hexokinase 2 to more soluble fractions. Treatment with the antioxidants Tempol and MitoTEMPO reversed many proteomic signatures of paraquat but this reversal was incomplete. We also identified a number of proteins with unknown function in the heart to be triggered by paraquat, suggesting they may have functions in oxidative stress response. Surprisingly, protein expression changes in the heart correlate poorly with those in the lung, consistent with differential sensitivity or stress response in these two organs. The results and data set here could provide insights into oxidative stress responses in the heart and avail the search for new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Heart, Oxidative stress, Mouse, Lung

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine-Cardiology, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus
UC Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus

### Submitter
Maggie Pui Yu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie PY Lam
Department of Medicine-Cardiology, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus


