### Accession
PXD003096

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid proteome: whole insect samples, with or without Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus

### Description
‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ (CLas), the bacterial pathogen associated with citrus greening disease, is transmitted by Diaphorina citri, the Asian citrus psyllid (ACP).  We used quantitative mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of CLas(+) and CLas(-) populations of D. citri.  This experiment used adult mixed sex whole insect samples as starting material for protein extraction.  DNA extracted from CLas(+) ACP was tested by qPCR to confirm presence of CLas.

### Sample Protocol
Asian citrus psyllids were collected from healthy or CLas(+) Citrus sinensis plants, flash frozen, and cryoground.  For whole insect protein extraction: proteins were precipitation was performed using trichloroacetic acid/acetone, and proteins were resuspended in urea/ammonium bicarbonate and quantified by Bradford assay.  Equimass amounts of protein were reduced (DTT), alkylated (MMTS) and digested (trypsin).  Peptide samples were cleaned up using Oasis MCX cartridges (Waters) and MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were searched against a combined database of predicted D. citri, endosymbiont (Carsonella, Profftella, and Wolbachia), and CLas proteins using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). MS/MS search parameters included fixed modifications (cysteine: Methylthio), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), and maximum one missed cleavage.  Thermo *.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using MSConvert in Protewizard. Files with the *.dat extension were exported from Mascot and loaded into Scaffold Q+ 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and used to calculate normalized spectral count for each protein from each sample.  Scaffold protein and peptide thresholds were set at 95%, with a minimum peptide number of two per protein – this resulted in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 2.9% and a peptide FDR of less than 0.09%.

### Publication Abstract
'Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus' (CLas), the bacterial pathogen associated with citrus greening disease, is transmitted by Diaphorina citri, the Asian citrus psyllid. Interactions among D. citri and its microbial endosymbionts, including 'Candidatus Profftella armatura', are likely to impact transmission of CLas. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of CLas(+) and CLas(-) populations of D. citri, and found that proteins involved in polyketide biosynthesis by the endosymbiont Profftella were up-regulated in CLas(+) insects. Mass spectrometry analysis of the Profftella polyketide diaphorin in D. citri metabolite extracts revealed the presence of a novel diaphorin-related polyketide and the ratio of these two polyketides was changed in CLas(+) insects. Insect proteins differentially expressed between CLas(+) and CLas(-) D. citri included defense and immunity proteins, proteins involved in energy storage and utilization, and proteins involved in endocytosis, cellular adhesion, and cytoskeletal remodeling which are associated with microbial invasion of host cells. Insight into the metabolic interdependence between the insect vector, its endosymbionts, and the citrus greening pathogen reveals novel opportunities for control of this disease, which is currently having a devastating impact on citrus production worldwide.

### Keywords
Asian citrus psyllid, Citrus greening, Insect vector, Huanglongbing, Endosymbiont, Diaphorina citri

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS Boyce Thompson Institute Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
John Ramsey

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS Boyce Thompson Institute Cornell University


