### Accession
PXD037892

### Title
The Fgf/Erf/NCoR1/2 repressive axis controls trophoblast cell fate

### Description
Here, we demonstrate that upon inhibition of the Fgf/Erk pathway in mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs), the Ets2 repressor factor (Erf) interacts with components of the Nuclear Receptor Corepressor Complex 1 and 2 (NCoR1 and NCoR2). Upon attenuation of Fgf signalling, unphosphorylated, nuclear Erf recruits the NCoR1/2 complex to key trophoblast genes, brings about their transcriptional silencing and facilitates differentiation and placental development.

### Sample Protocol
Erf- and Tbl1x-coding sequences were cloned, resulting in PiggyBac-CAG-Avi-Erf-3xFlag-ires-Neo and PiggyBac-CAG-Avi-Tbl1x-3xFlag-ires-Neo constructs, respectively. TSGFP cells were transfected with each construct along with the empty vector control using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen), selected with G418 and expanded in 10 15-cm dishes. Co-immunoprecipitation was performed as described before (PMID: 26206133). Cells were washed in PBS, harvested, resuspended in Buffer A (10mM Hepes pH 7.6, 1.5mM MgCl2 and 10mM KCl) and disrupted by a dounce homogenizer. Extracts were spun down and the pellet resuspended in Buffer C (20mM Hepes pH 7.6, 25% Glycerol, 420mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2 and 0.2mM EDTA), passed through a 19-G needle and dialysed to Buffer D (20mM Hepes pH 7.6, 20% Glycerol, 100mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl2 and 0.2mM EDTA). Anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma Aldrich, A2220) equilibrated in buffer D were added to the nuclear extract and incubated for 3 h at 4C in the presence of Benzonase (Novagen). Beads were washed with buffer D containing 0.02%NP-40 (C-100*) and with (20mM Hepes, 10% Glycerol, 100mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl2).  HPLC-MS  The system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). For more details see the Supplementary Information of the corresponding paper.  Phosphoproteome TSGFP cells were treated with 3µM PD0325901 in standard TS media for 0, 1, 5,15 and 30 minutes, lysed for 15 minutes at room temperature in a lysis buffer (8M Urea, 20mM Hepes, 15mM DTT), supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3, (Sigma Aldrich), and sonicated (20 cycles: 10s ON, 30s OFF). 1.5 mg of protein in 1 ml were treated with 250 units Benzonase at 37°C for 1h. The alkylation: 30 mM Iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, quenched by 7.5 mM DTT for 30 min at RT. The samples were diluted to 6 M urea by 100 mM Ammoniumhydrogencarbonate (ABC) and digested with Lys-C at an enzyme/protein ratio 1:50 for 2h at 37ºC, followed by dilution to 4 M urea with 100 mM ABC, trypsin addition in a ratio of 1:75, and incubation for 2h at 37°C, followed by another dilution to 2 M, trypsin addition in a ratio of 1:75, and incubation at 37°C overnight. The samples were acidified by Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reach pH 2. Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted with 70% Acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), followed by freeze-drying.  TMT labelling. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate. TMT10-plex labelling reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. 3 vials per label were added to the peptide samples and incubated for 1h. After quenching with 5% hydroxylamine, the samples were mixed in several steps to achieve a correct mixing ratio of 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1. Following labelling, peptides were again freeze-dried, dissolved in TFA 0.1% and desalted using C18 cartridges (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 70% ACN and 0.1% FA, followed by freeze-drying. Phosphopeptide enrichment and fractionation. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 by dissolving in 4 ml of TiO2 loading buffer (300 mg/ml lactic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) followed by incubation with TiO2resin (GL Science) for 60 min at room temperature. For washing and elution the beads were transferred to 8 Mobicol columns (10 µm filter, MoBiTec). The TiO2beads were washed with 8 x 500 µl of TiO2loading buffer, 8 x 500 µl of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 4 x 500 µl of 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 4 x 500 µl of 1% ACN, 0.1% FA. Bound peptides were eluted by 3 x 200 µl 0.3 M NH4OH, 2 x 200 µl 0.7 M NH4OH and 2 x 150 µl 0.4 M NH4OH and 40% ACN, combined, and freeze-dried. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved in SCX buffer A (5 mM phosphate buffer pH 2.7, 15% ACN). The SCX fractionation was performed on an Ultimate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a TSKgel SP-25W column at a flow rate of 35 μl/min. For the separation, a ternary gradient was used, starting with 100% buffer A for 10 min, followed by a linear increase to 10% buffer B (5 mM phosphate buffer pH 2.7, 1 M NaCl, 15% ACN) and 50% buffer C (5 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.0, 15% ACN) in 60 min, to 25% buffer B and 50% buffer C in next 10 min, to 50% buffer B and 50% buffer C in next 5 min and an isocratic elution for further 15 min. The flow-through was collected as a single fraction, along the gradient fractions were collected every minute and stored before analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis.  Raw MS data from IP experiments was loaded into Proteome Discoverer. All MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.1.5.9849. Trypsin was specified as a proteolytic enzyme allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were set to ±5 ppm at the precursor and ±15 ppm at the fragment mass level. Peptide and protein identification were performed in two steps. An initial search against the mouse SwissProt database with common contaminants appended. Here, beta-methylthiolation of cysteine was searched as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and glutamine to pyro-glutamate conversion at peptide N-termini were defined as variable modification. Results were filtered for 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and the protein level using Percolator. Additionally, an Amanda score of at least 150 was required. Identified proteins were exported and subjected to a second step search considering additional variable modifications. These were: phosphorylation of serines, threonines and tyrosines, acetylation of lysines and N-termini, ubiquitination (GG) of lysines, mono-, di- and tri-methylation of lysines as well as mono- and di-methylation of arginines. Identifications were filtered using the filtering criteria described above and subjected to label-free quantification using IMP-apQuant. Statistical significance or differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma and corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.  For more details see the Supplementary Information of the corresponding publication.  Phosphoproteome TMT fractions of time-resolved phosphoproteomics samples after Mek inhibition were processed and analysed as follows. The mascot (version 2.2.7, Matrix Science, UK) was used as a database search engine. Up to 3 missed cleavages were considered. Mass tolerance was set to 30 mmu at the precursor and 10 ppm at the fragment mass level. TMT-10plex at lysine and peptide N-termini as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as well as acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Identified peptides were filtered for 1% FDR at PSM, peptide and protein level using Percolator and a minimum Mascot Score of 10 was required. ptmRS was used for phospho site localisation. Spectra were quantified based on reporter ion intensities using the “Reporter Ions Quantifier” node in PD. Identified spectra were exported to R for further processing. All spectra with 5 or more missing reporter ion intensities or when signal intensity of all reporters was below 2000 were removed. Resulting spectra were grouped to peptides based on sequence and phospho site localisation considering phosphorylation sites with >95% site localisation probability as confidently localized. All peptides with at least two-fold regulation compared to untreated samples were subjected to k-means clustering. For more details see the Supplementary Information of the corresponding paper.

### Publication Abstract
Placental development relies on coordinated cell fate decisions governed by signalling inputs. However, little is known about how signalling cues are transformed into repressive mechanisms triggering lineage-specific transcriptional signatures. Here, we demonstrate that upon inhibition of the Fgf/Erk pathway in mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs), the Ets2 repressor factor (Erf) interacts with the Nuclear Receptor Co-Repressor Complex 1 and 2 (NCoR1/2) and recruits it to key trophoblast genes. Genetic ablation of Erf or Tbl1x (a component of the NCoR1/2 complex) abrogates the Erf/NCoR1/2 interaction. This leads to mis-expression of Erf/NCoR1/2 target genes, resulting in a TSC differentiation defect. Mechanistically, Erf regulates expression of these genes by recruiting the NCoR1/2 complex and decommissioning their H3K27ac-dependent enhancers. Our findings uncover how the Fgf/Erf/NCoR1/2 repressive axis governs cell fate and placental development, providing a paradigm for Fgf-mediated transcriptional control.

### Keywords
Ncor1, Ncor2, Trophoblast stem cells, Erf

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, A-1090 Vienna, Austria Tel.: +4314016037718

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina A. Latos
Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, A-1090 Vienna, Austria Tel.: +4314016037718


