### Accession
PXD029283

### Title
Mapping PP1c and its Inhibitor 2 interactomes reveals conserved and specific networks in asexual and sexual stages of Plasmodium

### Description
Malaria parasites require multiple phosphorylation and dephosphorylation steps to drive signaling pathways for proper differentiation and transformation. Several protein phosphatases, including Protein Phosphatase 1 (PP1c), one of the main dephosphorylation enzymes, have been shown to be indispensable for Plasmodium life cycle. PP1c functions are elaborated processes via dynamic interactions with a vast number of binding partners that contribute to its diversity of action. In this study, we have used Plasmodium berghei transgenic parasite strains stably expressing PP1c or its Inhibitor 2 (I2) tagged with mCherry, combined with mCherry affinity pulldown of proteins from asexual and sexual stages and mass spectrometry analyses. Mapped proteins were used to identify interactomes and to cluster functionally related proteins. Our findings confirm previous physical interactions of PP1c and reveal shared and specific biological processes enrichment linked to cellular component assembly in both schizonts and gametocytes, to biosynthetic process/translation in schizonts and to protein transport exclusively in gametocytes. Further, our analysis of PP1c and I2 interactomes reveals that nuclear export mediator factor and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, suggested to be essential in P. falciparum, could be potential targets of the complex PP1c/I2 in both asexual and sexual stages. Our study emphasizes the adaptability of Plasmodium PP1c and provides a fundamental study of the protein interaction landscapes involved in a myriad of events in Plasmodium, suggesting why it is crucial to the parasite and a source for alternative therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation eluates were supplemented with SDS to a final concentration of 5% for protein digestion. S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on immunoprecipitation eluates according to manufacturer’s protocol, but using two extra washing steps for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 2h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried down. Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For immunoprecipitation experiments, single-shot MS analysis was performed. For each run, 2 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minute). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each replicate to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
MS files were searched with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against Andromeda search engine against the database of Mus musculus from swissprot 07/2020 and Plasmodium berghei ANKA from PlasmoDB (v37).  To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. Match between runs was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria parasites require multiple phosphorylation and dephosphorylation steps to drive signaling pathways for proper differentiation and transformation. Several protein phosphatases, including protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), one of the main dephosphorylation enzymes, have been shown to be indispensable for the <i>Plasmodium</i> life cycle. The catalytic subunit of PP1 (PP1c) participates in cellular processes via dynamic interactions with a vast number of binding partners that contribute to its diversity of action. In this study, we used <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> transgenic parasite strains stably expressing PP1c or its inhibitor 2 (I2) tagged with mCherry, combined with the mCherry affinity pulldown of proteins from asexual and sexual stages, followed by mass spectrometry analyses. Mapped proteins were used to identify interactomes and to cluster functionally related proteins. Our findings confirm previously known physical interactions of PP1c and reveal enrichment of common biological processes linked to cellular component assembly in both schizonts and gametocytes to biosynthetic processes/translation in schizonts and to protein transport exclusively in gametocytes. Further, our analysis of PP1c and I2 interactomes revealed that nuclear export mediator factor and peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, suggested to be essential in <i>P. falciparum</i>, could be potential targets of the complex PP1c/I2 in both asexual and sexual stages. Our study emphasizes the adaptability of <i>Plasmodium</i> PP1 and provides a fundamental study of the protein interaction landscapes involved in a myriad of events in <i>Plasmodium</i>, suggesting why it is crucial to the parasite and a source for alternative therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Pp1 partners., Interactome, Interactomics, Inhibitor 2, Dephosphorylation, Protein phosphatase 1

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France


