### Accession
PXD020780

### Title
Identification of proteins associated with the decapping complex and the endonuclease DNE1 in Arabidopsis

### Description
In this work, we used an unbiased approach coupling immunoprecipitations (IPs) and mass spectrometry to define the interactome of the decapping activator DCP1 and the decapping enzyme DCP2. In addition we unravel the interactome of the endonuclease DNE1 harboring an endoribonuclease domain of the NYN family.

### Sample Protocol
After co-immunoprecipitation, eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin and analyzed by nano LCMS/MS. For IPs with crosslinking, digested proteins were analyzed on a QExactive + mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
IP data were searched against the TAIR 10 database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science) and data were imported into Proline 1.4 software (Bouyssié et al., Bioinformatics 2020). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent IPs. Volcano plots display the adjusted p-values and fold changes in Y and X-axis, respectively, and show the enrichment of proteins co-purified with tagged proteins as compared to control IPs. The statistical analysis based on spectral counts was performed using a homemade R package that calculates fold change and p-values using the quasi-likelihood negative binomial generalized log-linear model implemented in the edgeR package. The size factor used to scale samples were calculated according to the DESeq2 normalization method (i.e., median of ratios method). P-value were adjusted using Benjamini Hochberg method from stats R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dcp1, Rna degradation, P-bodies, Mrna decapping, Nyn domain, Dne1, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Damien Garcia
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France


