### Accession
PXD011778

### Title
Fibroblast secretome proteomic analysis

### Description
LV fibroblasts were isolated from control (day 0), and infarcted regions at day 1, day 3, and day 7 after myocardial infarction (MI). Cells were isolated in DMEM in 10% fetal bovine serum and were  seeded  into  6-well  plates  and  were  allowed  to  grow  to 80%  confluence  in  DMEM  supplemented  with  10%  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS).  Cells  were  serum starved  (DMEM  +  0.1%  FBS)  for  18  h and then media was changed and secretome was collected after 24 h. The sample sizes are n=3 biological replicates for each time point.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and peptides were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for proteomic analysis. The trypsinized peptide mixture was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences and Swiss Prot database (January 18, 2017 version). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.05 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac fibroblasts are the major producers of extracellular matrix (ECM) to form infarct scar. We hypothesized that fibroblasts undergo a spectrum of phenotype states over the course of myocardial infarction (MI) from early onset to scar formation. Fibroblasts were isolated from the infarct region of C57BL/6J male mice (3-6&#xa0;months old, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;60) at days 0 (no MI control) and 1, 3, or 7 after MI. Whole transcriptome analysis was performed by RNA-sequencing. Of the genes sequenced, 3371 were differentially expressed after MI. Enrichment analysis revealed that MI day 1 fibroblasts displayed pro-inflammatory, leukocyte-recruiting, pro-survival, and anti-migratory phenotype through Tnfrsf9 and CD137 signaling. MI day 3 fibroblasts had a proliferative, pro-fibrotic, and pro-angiogenic profile with elevated Il4ra signaling. MI day 7 fibroblasts showed an anti-angiogenic homeostatic-like myofibroblast profile and with a step-wise increase in Acta2 expression. MI day 7 fibroblasts relied on Pik3r3 signaling to mediate Tgfb1 effects and Fgfr2 to regulate PI3K signaling. In vitro, the day 3 MI fibroblast secretome stimulated angiogenesis, while day 7 MI fibroblast secretome repressed angiogenesis through Thbs1 signaling. Our results reveal novel mechanisms for fibroblasts in expressing pro-inflammatory molecules and regulating angiogenesis following MI.

### Keywords
Time course, Heart, Proteome, Fibroblast secretome

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center
Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research  Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS  39216-4505

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Merry Lindsey
Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research  Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS  39216-4505


