### Accession
PXD004871

### Title
Dysregulated Proteolysis of Extracellular Matrix Proteins Regulates Influenza and Pneumonia Co-infection Associated Mortality

### Description
The balance between tissue integrity and efficient immune response is critical for host survival. Here we investigate the role of extra cellular matrix (ECM)-remodeling events in the lung during influenza infection. Using an unbiased genomic and proteomic approach we follow the dynamics of gene and ECM responses in an influenza-infected mouse model, integrated with whole tissue as well as ECM imaging and functional assays. Our study identifies membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) as a major host-regulated ECM remodeling collagenase in influenza infection. We show that inhibition of MT1-MMP-driven proteolytic activity protected tissue structural and compositional features. We demonstrate that available influenza treatment (Oseltamivir) is ineffective in preventing the lung ECM damage and is therefore less effective than anti-MT1-MMP treatment in influenza and Streptococcus pneumoniae co-infections. Importantly, the combination between the two treatments resulted in 100% survival. This study highlights the importance of ECM protection for survival during infectious diseases, and paves the way for combined host-pathogen theraphy to fight emerging pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Lung samples were de-cellularized using 0.5% EDTA supplemented with 2% triton, shaking for 24 hours. Samples were then dehydrated using a Speedvac and weighted. Samples were then subjected to in-solution digestion using activated MMP-13. The proteins were extracted in 8M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated. 15µg of protein from each sample were boiled and separated on 10% SDS-PAGE.  The proteins in each gel slice were reduced with 3 mM DTT,  modified with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate  and digested in 10% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37°C. The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo) .

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.3.0.5. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of peptides enabling quantitation from each LC/MS run for each peptide identified in any of experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Mounting an effective immune response, while also protecting tissue integrity, is critical for host survival.&#xa0;We used a combined genomic and proteomic approach to investigate the role of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteolysis in achieving this balance in the lung during influenza virus infection. We identified the membrane-tethered matrix metalloprotease MT1-MMP as a prominent host-ECM-remodeling collagenase in influenza infection. Selective inhibition of MT1-MMP protected the tissue from infection-related structural and compositional tissue damage. MT1-MMP inhibition did not significantly alter the immune response or cytokine expression. The available flu therapeutic Oseltamivir did not prevent lung ECM damage and was less effective than anti-MT1-MMP in influenza virus Streptococcus pneumoniae coinfection paradigms. Combination therapy of Oseltamivir with anti-MT1-MMP showed a strong synergistic effect and resulted in complete recovery of infected mice. This study highlights the importance of tissue resilience in surviving infection and the potential of such host-pathogen therapy combinations for respiratory infections.

### Keywords
Pneumonia, Influenza, Extracellular matrix proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel.
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Irit Sagi
Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel.


