### Accession
PXD006438

### Title
Quantitative label-free proteomic analysis of human urine to identify novel protein biomarkers for schistosomiasis

### Description
Background: Schistosomiasis is a chronic neglected tropical disease that is characterized by continued inflammatory challenges to the exposed population, and it has been established as a possible risk factor in the aetiology of bladder cancer. Improved diagnosis of schistosomiasis and its associated pathology is possible through mass spectrometry  to identify  biomarkers among the infected population, which will influence early detection of the disease and its subtle morbidity. Methodology: A high-throughput proteomic approach was used to analyse human urine samples for 49 volunteers from Eggua, a schistosomiasis endemic community in South-West, Nigeria. The individuals were previously screened for Schistosoma haematobium and structural bladder pathologies via microscopy and ultrasonography respectively. Samples were categorised into schistosomiasis, schistosomiasis with bladder pathology, bladder pathology, and a normal healthy control group. These samples were analysed to identify potential protein biomarkers. Results: A total of 1306 proteins and 8752 unique peptides were observed in this study (FDR = 0.01). Fifty-four human proteins were found to be potential biomarkers for schistosomiasis and bladder pathologies due to schistosomiasis by label-free quantitative comparison between groups. Thirty-six (36) parasite-derived potential biomarkers were also identified, which include some existing putative schistosomiasis biomarkers that have been previously reported. Some of these proteins include Elongation factor 1 alpha, phosphopyruvate hydratase, histone H4 and heat shock proteins (HSP 60, HSP 70). Conclusion: These findings provide an in-depth analysis of potential schistosoma and human host protein biomarkers for diagnosis of chronic schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma haematobium and its pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were prepared by in-solution tryptic digest prior to analysis on a QExactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from clinical samples was searched against the human proteome database + the S. hematobium database, as well as against the S. hematobium database only. Raw data were analysed using MaxQuant and statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus in order to identify groups of proteins that were differentially regulated in the various disease state groups. Putative biomarkers were identified by t test with Bonferoni multiple testing correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schistosomiasis, Schistosoma haematobium, Qexactive, Discovery proteomics, Biomarkers, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences & Institute of Infectious Disease & Molecular Medicine Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town Anzio, Observatory Cape Town 7925 South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Bridget Calder

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences & Institute of Infectious Disease & Molecular Medicine Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town Anzio, Observatory Cape Town 7925 South Africa


