### Accession
PXD002658

### Title
Lens Disulfide crosslink -  Evidence of highly conserved β-crystallin disulfidome that can be mimicked by in vitro oxidation in age-related human cataract and glutathione depleted LEGSKO mouse lens

### Description
Low glutathione levels are associated with crystallin oxidation in age-related nuclear cataract (ARNC). To understand the role of cysteine residue oxidation, we used the novel approach of comparing human cataracts with glutathione-depleted LEGSKO mouse lenses for intra- vs. intermolecular disulfide crosslinks using 2D-PAGE and proteomics, and then systematically identified in vivo and in vitro all disulfide forming sites using ICAT labeling method coupled with proteomics. Crystallins rich in intramolecular disulfides were abundant at young age in human and WT mouse lens but shifted to multimeric intermolecular disulfides at older age. The shift was ~4x accelerated in LEGSKO lens. Most cysteine disulfides in β-crystallins (except βA4 in human) were highly conserved in mouse and human and could be generated by oxidation with H2O2, while γ-crystallin oxidation selectively affected γC23/42/79/80/154, γD42/33 and γS83/115/130 in human cataracts, and γB79/80/110, γD19/109, γF19/79, γE19, γS83/130 and γN26/128 in mouse.  Analysis based on available crystal structure suggests that conformational changes are needed to expose C42, C79/80, C154 in γC; C42, C33 in γD, and C83, C115 and C130 in γS. In conclusion, while the β-crystallin disulfidome is highly conserved in ARNC and LEGSKO mouse, and reproducible by in vitro oxidation, some of the disulfide formation sites in γ-crystallins necessitate prior conformational changes. Overall, the LEGSKO mouse model is closely reminiscent of ARNC.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Isotope-coded Affinity Tag labeling Experiments (ICAT)--For ICAT-based quantification by mass spectrometry, 100μg of protein aliquot of lens sample processed as above was mixed with equal volume of ice-cold 20% TCA, and kept at -20oC for 2hr. After centrifugation at 26,000xg for 15min, the pellet was washed twice with 500μl cold acetone, and then dried for 3min in a Savant SpeedVac concentrator. The dried samples were re-suspended in 80μl freshly made ICAT buffer with 10mM TCEP, and incubated at 30oC for 30min after 30sec sonication in water bath. The samples were then labeled with the cleavable ICAT reagent (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) at 37oC for 2hr in the dark as described in the instruction manual. All human aged normal, cataract and LEGSKO mouse cataract lens samples were labeled with cleavable “heavy” ICAT reagent (C13-ICAT), whereas the young human and age-matched wild type mouse lens control samples were labeled with the cleavable “light” ICAT reagent (C12-ICAT). After labeling, a 1:1 mixture of each aged or cataract lens sample with control sample was prepared, to which 800μl fresh 10mM calcium chloride was added. To digest the proteins, 4μg of mass spectrometry grade lysyl endopeptidase (Wako, Richmond, VA) was added into each sample. Samples were incubated at 37oC for 2hrs in the dark, followed by addition of 5μg of sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) per sample and head-to-head rotation for 18hr at 37oC in the dark.  The peptides solution was adjusted to pH 3.0 by formic acid and then passed through Oasis HLB Plus cartridge, eluted with 5ml 70% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid after washing with 5ml 5% formic acid. The eluted peptides were further purified by high-resolution cation-exchange column using POROS 50HS beads (6mm × 7cm, column volume 1ml. Thermo Fisher, Grand Island, NY), perfused with Pharmacia LKB peristaltic pump. The collected peptides were finally enriched and purified by Avidin affinity column, and eluted with 30% acetonitrile, 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), after sequential washing with 2×PBS, 1×PBS, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/20% methanol (pH8.3) and Milli-Q water. The samples were dried with a SpeedVac concentrator, and the biotin was removed by cleaving the linker with TFA. The samples were then subjected to LC/MS analysis at the CWRU Center for Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of ICAT labeled samples--Liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis of the resulting peptides was performed with an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Taunton, MA). The spectra were acquired in the positive ionization mode by data dependent methods consisting of a full MS scan in high mass accuracy FT-MS mode at 120,000 resolution, and MS/MS on the twenty most abundant precursor ions in CID mode with the normalized collision energy of 35%. The identification of peptides was achieved with Mascot Daemon (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science) and the data were searched against SwissProt human database. The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for product ions. Carbamidomethylation of Cys, as well as the oxidation of Met residues was set as variable modifications. Both light and heavy ICAT labeled peptides were first identified using Mascot Demon searching algorithm, and then confirmed by manually examination, especially for the peptides having multiple Cys residues and mix-labeled with iodoacetamide (IAM) and ICAT. Quantification of ICAT labeling was conducted using Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science). The ratio of light ICAT to heavy ICAT was calculated and averaged on basis of peptide peak heights for each individual scan. The ratio for the same peptide but with different charge and methionine oxidation state were then averaged manually. For the peptide carrying multiple Cys residues but mix-labeled with IAM and ICAT, the ratio was manually calculated by the peptide peak heights extracted from the selected ion chromatogram. Each sample was run once in LC/MS analysis, the average ratio from multiple spectra covering same sites was calculated from each sample, and standard errors were calculated from three biological replicates. All reported ICAT ratios were identified with the standard error < 0.1 and correlation co-efficiency > 0.99.

### Publication Abstract
Low glutathione levels are associated with crystallin oxidation in age-related nuclear cataract. To understand the role of cysteine residue oxidation, we used the novel approach of comparing human cataracts with glutathione-depleted LEGSKO mouse lenses for intra- versus intermolecular disulfide crosslinks using 2D-PAGE and proteomics, and then systematically identified in vivo and in vitro all disulfide forming sites using ICAT labeling method coupled with proteomics. Crystallins rich in intramolecular disulfides were abundant at young age in human and WT mouse lens but shifted to multimeric intermolecular disulfides at older age. The shift was &#x223c;4x accelerated in LEGSKO lens. Most cysteine disulfides in &#x3b2;-crystallins (except &#x3b2;A4 in human) were highly conserved in mouse and human and could be generated by oxidation with H(2)O(2), whereas &#x3b3;-crystallin oxidation selectively affected &#x3b3;C23/42/79/80/154, &#x3b3;D42/33, and &#x3b3;S83/115/130 in human cataracts, and &#x3b3;B79/80/110, &#x3b3;D19/109, &#x3b3;F19/79, &#x3b3;E19, &#x3b3;S83/130, and &#x3b3;N26/128 in mouse. Analysis based on available crystal structure suggests that conformational changes are needed to expose Cys42, Cys79/80, Cys154 in &#x3b3;C; Cys42, Cys33 in &#x3b3;D, and Cys83, Cys115, and Cys130 in &#x3b3;S. In conclusion, the &#x3b2;-crystallin disulfidome is highly conserved in age-related nuclear cataract and LEGSKO mouse, and reproducible by in vitro oxidation, whereas some of the disulfide formation sites in &#x3b3;-crystallins necessitate prior conformational changes. Overall, the LEGSKO mouse model is closely reminiscent of age-related nuclear cataract.

### Keywords
Cataract, Disulfide bond, Lens

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Xingjun Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Xingjun Fan
Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA


