### Accession
PXD030936

### Title
Red blood cells protein profile is modified in breast cancer patients

### Description
We characterized the proteomic composition of RBCs from 53 breast cancer patients (stages I-III and IV), compared with 33 healthy donors. For that, we performed two different proteomic analyses (LC-MS/MS in DDA mode-shotgun- and a SWATH-MS) using the Triple TOF 6600 technology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from RBCs:10 mL of blood (EDTA tube) were centrifuged (1700 g/10´) to isolate RBCs after discarding plasma and Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs). RBCs were lysed in 40 mMHepes (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 2 % Triton- x100 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 200 Mm NaCl, 40 mM MgCl2, 20 mM EGTA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 80 mMβ-glycerophosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and centrifuged to obtain supernatant containing total protein. Total protein quantitation was performed with DC Protein Assay following the manufacturer´s instructions (Biorad, CA, USA). Proteomic analysis by TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system. To make global protein identification, an equal amount of protein from RBCs of 86 samples (BC patients n=53, HD: n=33) was loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel to concentrate the proteins in a band. The band was processed as described previously (1,2).  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode-shotgun analysis. Digested peptides of all individually samples from RBCs were separated using Reverse Phase Chromatography as described previously (1,2).  Protein quantification by SWATH-MS analysis (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra). In order to build the MS/MS spectral libraries, the peptide solutions were analyzed by a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using micro-LC-MS/MS  as described (1,2). The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were then used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software (version 2.2, Sciex, MA, USA), MS/MS ALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0, Sciex, MA, USA). Peptides with a confidence score above 99% (as obtained from Protein Pilot database search) were included in the spectral library. For relative quantification by SWATH-MSanalysis, SWATH-MS acquisition was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system (Sciex,, MA, USA). Peptides from RBCs samples from all control and BC patients were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (IDA) method making 3 technical replicate for each sample as described previously (1,2). 1. Anfray, C. et al. Intratumoral combination therapy with poly(I:C) and resiquimod synergistically  triggers tumor-associated macrophages for effective systemic antitumoral immunity. J. Immunother. cancer9, (2021). 2. da Silva Lima, N. et al. Inhibition of ATG3 ameliorates liver steatosis by increasing mitochondrial function. J. Hepatol. (2021). doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2021.09.008

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode-shotgun analysis. Digested peptides of all individually samples from RBCs were separated using Reverse Phase Chromatography as described previously (1,2). Protein quantification by SWATH-MS analysis (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra). In order to build the MS/MS spectral libraries, the peptide solutions were analyzed by a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using micro-LC-MS/MS  as described (1,2)..The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were then used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software (version 2.2, Sciex, MA, USA), MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0, Sciex, MA, USA). Peptides with a confidence score above 99% (as obtained from Protein Pilot database search) were included in the spectral library.For relative quantification by SWATH-MSanalysis, SWATH-MS acquisition was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system (Sciex,, MA, USA). Peptides from RBCs samples from all control and BC patients were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (IDA) method making 3 technical replicate for each sample as described previously(1,2). Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6.01 software (GraphPad Software Inc.) and R Studio Version R-3.6.3. Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used for media comparisons and Fisher exact test or Chi-square test for association analysis.Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were visualized using Kaplan-Meier plots and tested by the log-rank test. Only p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The normalization and differential expression analysis of the proteomic data was performed using the Bioconductor NormalyzerDE package (16). The Variance stabilization normalization (VSN) method (3) was chosen among the different normalization options provided by the package. To fit the logistic regression models, was used the glm function of the stats package of R. The subsequent analysis of the ROC curve was performed using the pROC package (4) of R. For Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Gene Ontology (GO)analysis and protein interaction, the used tool wasGO-Shiny V0.741or String (https://string-db.org/), considering strength >1.2,> 3 proteinsandfalse discovery rate (FDR)< 0.05.Venn diagrams were performed using http://www.interactivenn.net/(5).   1 C. Anfray et al., Intratumoral combination therapy with poly(I:C) and resiquimod synergistically  triggers tumor-associated macrophages for effective systemic antitumoral immunity. J. Immunother. cancer. 9 (2021), doi:10.1136/jitc-2021-002408. 2 N. da Silva Lima et al., Inhibition of ATG3 ameliorates liver steatosis by increasing mitochondrial function. J. Hepatol. (2021), doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2021.09.008. 3 W. Huber, A. Von Heydebreck, H. Sültmann, A. Poustka, M. Vingron, in Bioinformatics (2002), vol. 18. 4 X. Robin et al., pROC: An open-source package for R and S+ to analyze and compare ROC curves. BMC Bioinformatics. 12 (2011), doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-77. 5 H. Heberle, V. G. Meirelles, F. R. da Silva, G. P. Telles, R. Minghim, InteractiVenn: A web-based tool for the analysis of sets through Venn diagrams. BMC Bioinformatics. 16 (2015), doi:10.1186/s12859-015-0611-3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metastasis, Red blood cells (rbcs); breast cancer

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Bravo
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


