### Accession
PXD003765

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of Toxoplama gondii PRU oocyst during sporulation

### Description
The comparative proteomics research of Toxoplasma gondii oocyst during sporulation

### Sample Protocol
Oocysts were centrifuged at 2000rpm for 15min. The pellet was re-suspended in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 150 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM EDTA,1% DOC, 1% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche), briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 12000rpm for 20min at 4 °C, and the supernatants were analyzed as total lysates. Total protein concentration was determined using the QuantiProTM BCA Assay Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. BSA was used as a standard.iTRAQ tagging and analysis was performed as described previously. Briefly, 100 μg proteins from each sample were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin (Promega).The digested peptides were dried and reconstituted with 50 μl 0.5 M TEAB. The dried peptides were labeled in line with the iTRAQ protocol (AB Sciex, Foster City, Calif, USA).Unsporulated oocysts were labeled with 113 and 114 while sporulated oocysts with 115 and 116 iTRAQ reagents. The labeled samples were mixed in a single vial, vacuum-dried and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. The eluted fractions were desalted, dried and reconstituted with 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with ProteinPilot™ Software 4.5 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon™ algorithm (4.5.0.0, 1654) for the peptide identification, which was further processed by Pro GroupTM algorithm where isoform-specific quantification was adopted to trace the differences between expressions of various isoforms.The required MS/MS spectra were searched against ToxoDB13_Tgondii ME49.fasta (http://www.toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/TgondiiME49/fasta/data/) and the total number of protein sequences recorded in this database was 8322. Unique protein with at least one unique peptide was identified and FDR was set to < 0.01 for the identification of both peptides and proteins. Peptide confidence level of 95% or unused confidence score >1.3 was used as the qualification criteria. Relative quantification of proteins was calculated based on the ratio of peak areas from MS/MS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Oocyst

### Affiliations
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
chunxue zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xingquan zhu
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)


