### Accession
PXD013769

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry of the CCAN and CCAN-Cenp-A complexes

### Description
Here we performed a cross-linking mass spectrometry analysis of the inner kinethocore complex CCAN and of the complex associated with a CenpA-nucleosome (CCAN-CenpA)from budding yeast. These experiments validated the cryo-EM structure of both complexes and provided additional structural insights on the complex organization.

### Sample Protocol
The CCAN and CCAN-CenpA complexes were recombinantly expressed and purified from insect cells. After reconstitution the final complexes were isolated through multiple chromatography rounds. The samples were cross-linked using the DSSO cross-linker and processed using a standard bottom-up proteomics sample preparation. The samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS with a MS2/MS3 acquisition strategy.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 with the XlinkX nodes integrated.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, accurate chromosome segregation in mitosis and meiosis maintains genome stability and prevents aneuploidy. Kinetochores are large protein complexes that, by assembling onto specialized Cenp-A nucleosomes<sup>1,2</sup>, function to connect centromeric chromatin to microtubules of the mitotic spindle<sup>3,4</sup>. Whereas the centromeres of vertebrate chromosomes comprise millions of DNA base pairs and attach to multiple microtubules, the simple point centromeres of budding yeast are connected to individual microtubules<sup>5,6</sup>. All 16 budding yeast chromosomes assemble complete kinetochores using a single Cenp-A nucleosome (Cenp-A<sup>Nuc</sup>), each of which is perfectly centred on its cognate centromere<sup>7-9</sup>. The inner and outer kinetochore modules are responsible for interacting with centromeric chromatin and microtubules, respectively. Here we describe the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae inner kinetochore module, the constitutive centromere associated network (CCAN) complex, assembled onto a Cenp-A nucleosome (CCAN-Cenp-A<sup>Nuc</sup>). The structure explains the interdependency of the constituent subcomplexes of CCAN and shows how the Y-shaped opening of CCAN accommodates Cenp-A<sup>Nuc</sup> to enable specific CCAN subunits to contact the nucleosomal DNA and histone subunits. Interactions with the unwrapped DNA duplex at the two termini of Cenp-A<sup>Nuc</sup> are mediated predominantly by a DNA-binding groove in the Cenp-L-Cenp-N subcomplex. Disruption of these interactions impairs assembly of CCAN onto Cenp-A<sup>Nuc</sup>. Our data indicate a mechanism of Cenp-A nucleosome recognition by CCAN and how CCAN acts as a platform for assembly of the outer kinetochore to link centromeres to the mitotic spindle for chromosome segregation.

### Keywords
Cryo-em structure, S.cerevisiae, Xl-ms, Inner kinetochore complex

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Domenico Fasci

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


