### Accession
PXD006617

### Title
The Impact of Rhizobium on Seed Productivity and Quality of Pisum sativum Upon Disease Stress Caused by Didymella pinodes

### Description
In this study  the effect of Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viceae (Rlv) on seed proteome through shotgun proteomics analyses of healthy versus pathogen (Didymella pinodes) infected Pisum sativum plants was investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from 50 mg of fine powedered seeds were extracted (2 technical, 3 biological samples per treatment) using a Phenol extraction (Wienkoop et al. 2008 MCP). were randomly loaded to an EASY-Spray column, 15 cm × 50 µm ID, PepMap C18, >2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size (PepMap RSLC, Thermo scientific) and separated during a 180 min gradient with a flow rate of 400 nL per minute using an 1D nano LC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with Full scan range 350–1800 m/z, enabled dynamic exclusion, exclusion duration 60 s, exclusion list size 500, repeat duration 30 s, repeat count 1, 20 MS2 scans, CID (activation type), enabled charge state rejection with rejected unassigned charge state 1, minimum required signal 1000 and expiration count 1.

### Data Protocol
The resulted RAW files from MS measurement were uploaded on MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.3.8) for protein quantification and identification with the following group specific parameters setting: maximum missed cleavages 2, five (as maximum number) of variable modifications (acetylation of the N-term and oxidation of methionine) per peptide, label-free quantification (LFQ) minimum ratio 2, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, Isotope and centroid match tolerance 2 and 7.5 ppm respectively. Also the following global parameters settings: stabilized large LFQ ratio 2, activation of required MS/MS for LFQ, minimum 6 amino acids as peptide length, revert decoy mode, peptide/spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01. An assembled protein database (FASTA format) from our previous study (Desalegn et al., 2016) was applied in Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Pulses are one of the most important categories of food plants, and Pea (<i>Pisum sativum</i> L.) as a member of pulses is considered a key crop for food and feed and sustainable agriculture. Integrative multi-omics and microsymbiont impact studies on the plant's immune system are important steps toward more productive and tolerant food plants and thus will help to find solutions against food poverty. <i>Didymella pinodes</i> is a main fungal pathogen of pea plants. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) promote plant growth and alleviate various stresses. However, it remained unclear as to how the AMF effect on seed metabolism and how this influences resistance against the pathogen. This study assesses the AMF impacts on yield components and seed quality upon <i>D. pinodes</i> infection on two different <i>P. sativum</i> cultivars, susceptible versus tolerant, grown in pots through phenotypic and seed molecular analyses. We found that AMF symbiosis affects the majority of all tested yield components as well as a reduction of disease severity in both cultivars. Seeds of mycorrhizal pea plants showed strong responses of secondary metabolites with nutritional, medicinal, and pharmaceutical attributes, also involved in pathogen response. This is further supported by proteomic data, functionally determining those primary and secondary metabolic pathways, involved in pathogen response and induced upon AMF-colonization. The data also revealed cultivar specific effects of AMF symbiosis that increase understanding of genotype related differences. Additionally, a suite of proteins and secondary metabolites are presented, induced in seeds of <i>P. sativum</i> upon AMF-colonization and pathogen attack, and possibly involved in induced systemic resistance against <i>D. pinodes</i>, useful for modern breeding strategies implementing microsymbionts toward increased pathogen resistance.

### Keywords
Seeds, Pisum sativum, Didymella pinodes, Rhizobium, Pea

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
University of Vienna, Dept. of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna, Dept. of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology


