### Accession
PXD003093

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mouse oocytes identifies PRMT7 as reprogramming factor that replaces SOX2 in the induction of pluripotent stem cells

### Description
The inclusion of oocyte factors together with Yamanaka’s previously identified reprogramming factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 with or without cMYC; OSK(M)) may facilitate the reprogramming process that leads to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We previously applied label-free LC-MS/MS analysis to search for such facilitators of reprogramming (reprogrammome), resulting in a catalog of 28 candidates that are (i) able to robustly access the cell nucleus, and (ii) shared between mature mouse oocytes and pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells. In the present study we hypothesized that our 28 reprogrammome candidates would also be (iii) abundant in mature mouse oocytes, (iv) depleted after oocyte-to-embryo transition, and (v) able to potentiate or replace the OSKM factors during iPSC reprogramming. Using LC-MS/MS and isotopic labeling methods we found that the abundance profiles of the 28 proteins was below that of known oocyte-specific and housekeeping proteins. Out of the 28 proteins only arginine methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7) presented a substantially changing profile during mouse embryogenesis and impacted on the conversion of mouse fibroblasts into iPSCs. PRMT7 indeed could very efficiently replace SOX2 in a factor-substitution assay yielding iPSCs. These findings show that proteomics can be used to prioritize the functional analysis of reprogrammome candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Fertilized and unfertilized oocytes were collected after gonadotropin stimulation (5 IU each PMSG and hCG, injected i.p. 48 hours apart) and cervical dislocation of B6C3F1 mice aged 6-8 weeks. Fertilized oocytes were recovered from oviducts and cultured in KSOM(aa) medium. Developmental stages were collected at respective time points. Before lysing in SDS buffer, the zona pellucida was removed using acidic Tyrode’s solution so as to increase the sensitivity of proteome analysis for the remaining oocyte proteins. Our analytical strategy is based on the use of a SILAC spike in reference cell lysate (F9 teratocarcinoma cells). In brief, proteins from zona-free oocytes or embryos were mixed 1:1 (protein amount) with the heavy F9 carcinoma spike-in cell lysate (Lys8 and Arg10 labeled), acetone-precipitated, reduced and alkylated and then digested with Endoproteinase Lys-C (3hr) and Trypsin (over night). Following desalting on Empore 3M C18 discs, peptide mixtures were offline fractionated by RP-HPLC at pH 10.2 (Buffer A: 10mM ammonium formate pH 10.2; Buffer B: 10mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitril, pH 10.2; linear gradient from 0-35% B in 70min; 35 - 70% B in 15min; 70% B for 10min; Waters XBridge BEH C18 2.1 x 150mm). Twenty pools were generated from each sample by concatenated fractionation (Wang et al., 2011), dried down in a SpeedVac and subsequently analysed individually by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos or a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA 02454, USA), equipped with an Easy nano-LC system and a nano-electrospray source (both from Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). A 15 cm fused silica capillary emitter (New Objective, ID 75µm) filled with a C18 reversed phase matrix (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) was used as online LC column.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (v 1.5.3.0). The MaxQuant output data was exported to Excel for the analysis of abundance profiles. The proteins gene identities were analyzed for gene ontologies using the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) classification system (Mi et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
The reprogramming process that leads to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) may benefit from adding oocyte factors to Yamanaka's reprogramming cocktail (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, with or without MYC; OSK(M)). We previously searched for such facilitators of reprogramming (the reprogrammome) by applying label-free LC-MS/MS analysis to mouse oocytes, producing a catalog of 28 candidates that are (i) able to robustly access the cell nucleus and (ii) shared between mature mouse oocytes and pluripotent embryonic stem cells. In the present study, we hypothesized that our 28 reprogrammome candidates would also be (iii) abundant in mature oocytes, (iv) depleted after the oocyte-to-embryo transition, and (v) able to potentiate or replace the OSKM factors. Using LC-MS/MS and isotopic labeling methods, we found that the abundance profiles of the 28 proteins were below those of known oocyte-specific and housekeeping proteins. Of the 28 proteins, only arginine methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7) changed substantially during mouse embryogenesis and promoted the conversion of mouse fibroblasts into iPSCs. Specifically, PRMT7 replaced SOX2 in a factor-substitution assay, yielding iPSCs. These findings exemplify how proteomics can be used to prioritize the functional analysis of reprogrammome candidates. The LC-MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003093.

### Keywords
Early embryo, Development, Oocyte, Reprogrammome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 D-48149 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 D-48149 Münster Germany


