### Accession
PXD040183

### Title
Repeated hypoglycemia in diabetic mice induce hypothalamic mitochondrial and synaptic activity deregulations characteristic of neurodegenerative diseases

### Description
Repeated exposures to insulin-induced hypoglycemia in diabetic patients progressively impair the counter-regulatory response (CRR) that restores normoglycemia. This defect is characterized by reduced secretion of glucagon and other counter-regulatory hormones. Evidence indicates that glucose responsive neurons located in the hypothalamus, orchestrate the CRR. Here, we aimed at identifying the changes in hypothalamic gene and protein expression that underlie impaired CRR. High fat diet fed and low dose streptozocin-treated C57BL6N mice were exposed to one (acute hypoglycemia, AH) or multiple (recurrent hypoglycemia, RH) insulin-induced hypoglycemic episodes. Single nuclei RNA sequencing (snRNAseq) data were obtained from the hypothalamus and cortex of AH and RH mice. Proteomic data were also obtained from hypothalamic synaptosomal fractions. The present study shows that repeated moderate hypoglycemia in diabetic mice lead, in the hypothalamus, to multiple cellular physiology changes, affecting all cell types and their interactions, which show striking features of neurodegenerative diseases. It also shows that repeated hypoglycemic episodes affect very differently the hypothalamus and the cortex.

### Sample Protocol
7-weeks old C57BL6N male mice were fed a high fat diet and seven weeks after initiation of the diet they received intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of streptozocin. Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) mice were randomly divided in two groups with similar body weight and glycemia. One group of mice (Recurrent Hypoglycemia, RH) received three insulin i.p. injections per week during four weeks (12 injections). The second group of mice received three i.p. injections per week of saline (Acute Hypoglycemia, AH) and a final injection of insulin. Brains were collected and snap frozen 120 min after the last insulin IP injection.  Hypothalamus samples were homogenized using a motorized pestle mixer in hypotonic cell lysis buffer (HBLC) and incubated on ice for 45min. The homogenate was spun at 2000 rpm for 10min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and this step was repeated to remove the remaining nuclear fraction. The resulting supernatant was spun at 10000 rpm for 10min at 4°C and the pellet containing the synaptosomal fraction was resuspended in HBLC. Protein was quantified using BCA. The synaptosomal fractions and whole lysates of the hypothalami from 4 AH and 4 RH mice were digested following the SP3 method. After 10 min heating at 75°C, proteins were alkylated with 30mM chloroacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. Beads were added at a ratio 10:1 (w:w) to samples, and proteins were precipitated on beads with ethanol (final concentration: 60 %). After 3 washes with 80% ethanol, beads were digested in 50l of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1.2 g of trypsin. After 1h of incubation at 37°C, the same amount of trypsin was added to the samples for an additional 1h of incubation. Supernatant were then recovered, transferred to new tubes and acidified with formic acid (0.5% final concentration). Aliquots of samples were mixed to create two separate pools for whole lysates and synaptosomal fractions. Then, these were separated into 6 fractions by off-line basic reversed-phase (bRP) using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. The fractions were collected in 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5 and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1 % triethylamine (~pH 10). Dried bRP fractions were redissolved in 50l 2% acetonitrile with 0.5% TFA, and 3-5l were injected for LC-MS/MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker) mass spectrometer interfaced through a nanospray ion source (“captive spray”) to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.250 l/min with a 2-27% acetonitrile gradient in 93 min followed by a ramp to 45% in 15 min and to 90% in 5 min (all solvents contained 0.1% formic acid). Identical LC gradients were used for DDA and DIA measurements.   For creation of the spectral library, data-dependent acquisitions (DDA) were carried out on the 6 bRP fractions of both pools using a standard TIMS PASEF method with ion accumulation for 100 ms for each survey MS1 scan and the TIMS-coupled MS2 scans. Duty cycle was kept at 100%. Up to 10 precursors were targeted per TIMS scan. Precursor isolation was done with a 2 Th or 3 Th windows below or above m/z 800, respectively. The minimum threshold intensity for precursor selection was 2500.  If the inclusion list allowed it, precursors were targeted more than one time to reach a minimum target total intensity of 20’000. Collision energy was ramped linearly based uniquely on the 1/k0 values from 20 (at 1/k0=0.6) to 59 eV (at 1/k0=1.6). Total duration of a scan cycle including one survey and 10 MS2 TIMS scans was 1.16 s. Precursors could be targeted again in subsequent cycles if their signal increased by a factor 4.0 or more.  After selection in one cycle, precursors were excluded from further selection for 60s. Mass resolution in all MS measurements was approximately 35’000.  The data-independent acquisition (DIA) used mostly the same instrument parameters as the DDA method. Per cycle, the mass range 400-1200 m/z was covered by a total of 32 windows, each 25 Th wide and a 1/k0 range of 0.3. Collision energy and resolution settings were the same as in the DDA method. Two windows were acquired per TIMS scan (100ms) so that the total cycle time was 1.7 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw Bruker MS data were processed directly with Spectronaut 15.7 (Biognosys). A library was constructed from the DDA bRP fraction data by searching the reference mouse proteome (www.uniprot.org) database of June 4th, 2021 (55’364 sequences). For identification, peptides of 7-52 AA length were considered, cleaved with trypsin/P specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation (variable) were the modifications applied. Mass calibration was dynamic and based on a first database search. The Pulsar engine was used for peptide identification. Protein inference was performed with the IDPicker algorithm. Spectra, peptide and protein identifications were all filtered at 1% FDR against a decoy database. Specific filtering for library construction removed fragments corresponding to less than 3 AA and fragments outside the 300-1800 m/z range. Also, only fragments with a minimum base peak intensity of 5% were kept.  Precursors with less than 3 fragments were also eliminated and only the best 6 fragments were kept per precursor. No filtering was done on the basis of charge state and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Shared (non proteotypic) peptides were kept.  The library created contained 104,951 precursors mapping to 81,168 stripped sequences, of which 33,796 were proteotypic. These corresponded to 8,292 protein groups (11,697 proteins). Of these, 1,217 were single hits (one peptide precursor).  In total 619,559 fragments were used for quantitation. Peptide-centric analysis of DIA data was done with Spectronaut 15.7 using the library described above. Single hits proteins (defined as matched by one stripped sequence only) were kept in the Spectronaut analysis. Peptide quantitation was based on XIC area, for which a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 3 (the 3 best) precursors were considered for each peptide, from which the median value was selected.  Quantities for protein groups were derived from inter-run peptide ratios based on MaxLFQ algorithm. Global normalization of runs/samples was done based on the median of peptides.   Statistical analyses of proteomics data were done with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.15.0). Contaminant proteins were removed, and intensity values were log2-transformed. After assignment to groups, only proteins quantified in at least 4 samples of one group were kept. After missing values imputation (based on normal distribution using Perseus default parameters), t-tests were carried out among all conditions, with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple testing (Q-value threshold <0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Whole lysate, Mouse, Hypothalamus, Diabetes, Hypoglycemia, Synaptosomal fractions

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integraive Genomics (CIG), University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard Thorens
Center for Integraive Genomics (CIG), University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


