### Accession
PXD032131

### Title
Tankyrase-mediated ADP-ribosylation is a novel regulator of TNF-induced death

### Description
TNF is a key component of the innate immune response. Upon binding to its receptor, TNFR1, it promotes production of other cytokines via a membrane-bound complex 1, or induces cell death via a cytosolic complex 2. To understand how TNF-induced cell death is regulated we performed mass spectrometry of complex 2 and identified tankyrase-1 as a native component that, upon a death stimulus, mediates complex 2 poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation). PARylation promotes recruitment of the E3 ligase RNF146 resulting in proteasomal degradation of complex 2 thereby limiting cell death. Intriguingly, expression of the ADP-ribose binding/hydrolyzing SARS-CoV-2 macrodomain sensitizes cells to TNF-induced death via abolishing complex 2 PARylation. This suggests that disruption of ADP-ribosylation during an infection can prime a cell to retaliate with an inflammatory cell death.

### Sample Protocol
BMDMs were isolated from the tibia and femur of mice. Cell lysates were prepared in 6M GndHCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0, sonicated and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark at 95 °C for 10 min. 10 mg of proteins were diluted 1:12 with in PARG buffer (Martello et al., 2016) and digested with modified Porcine Trypsin (1:25; Sigma) overnight at 37 °C. ADPr-Peptide enrichments were carried out as previously described (Martello et al., 2016; Leutert et al., 2018) with the following protocol modifications. Following PARG-mediated PAR-to-MAR peptide ADPr-modification reduction, the peptides were enriched using Af1521-WT (0.5mL beads; Martello et al., 2016) and eAF1521 (1.0mL beads; Nowak et al., 2020) macrodomain affinity enrichment for 2 h at 4ºC. Afterwards, beads were washed and the peptides eluted from the beads in three steps with 100 μl 0.15% TFA. Eluted peptides were desalted using MicroSpin C18 columns (Nest Group Inc., Southborough, Massachusetts) as previously described.  Samples were eluted from the HpH column using three different percentages of ACN (7%, 15%, and 50% in 20 mM NH4OH) and from the LpH column using one condition containing 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. After elution, the samples were dried via vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 12 µl in MS-buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), vortexed briefly, sonicated (10 min, 100%, 25 °C), and centrifuged (16’000x g, 2 min, RT) before MS analysis.  Identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters). The ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD (Bilan et al., 2017) was applied, which includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADPr fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the initial HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al., 2017). Solvent compositions in channels A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were loaded onto loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). Peptides were eluted over 110 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An elution gradient protocol from 2% to 25% B, followed by two steps at 35% B for 5 min and at 95% B for 5 min, respectively, was used.

### Data Protocol
The HCD and EThcD deconvoluted separated .msg files were searched against the UniProt database for mouse proteins(taxonomy 10090, version 20190709), reverse sequence decoys and known contaminants using Mascot, and the following search parameters were applied: trypsin digests with up to 5 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Finally, S, R, K, D, E, H, C, T and Y residues were set as variable ADP-ribose acceptor amino acids. The neutral losses of 347.0631 Da, 541.0611 Da and 583.0829 Da from the ADP-ribose were scored in HCD fragment ion spectra (Gehrig et al). Peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, number of 13C = 1, peptide charge = 2+/3+/4+, MS/MS tolerance = 0.05 Da34. Briefly, the resulting files were filtered to include only peptides with one or more ADP-ribose modifications, peptide scores > 15 and peptide expect values < 0.05. For ADP-ribose acceptor site localizations, the list of modified peptides was further filtered based on peptide variable modification confidence values > 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a key component of the innate immune response. Upon binding to its receptor, TNFR1, it promotes production of other cytokines via a membrane-bound complex 1 or induces cell death via a cytosolic complex 2. To understand how TNF-induced cell death is regulated, we performed mass spectrometry of complex 2 and identified tankyrase-1 as a native component that, upon a death stimulus, mediates complex 2 poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation). PARylation promotes recruitment of the E3 ligase RNF146, resulting in proteasomal degradation of complex 2, thereby limiting cell death. Expression of the ADP-ribose-binding/hydrolyzing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 macrodomain sensitizes cells to TNF-induced death via abolishing complex 2 PARylation. This suggests that disruption of ADP-ribosylation during an infection can prime a cell to retaliate with an inflammatory cell death.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Tankyrase, Tnf-induced cell death

### Affiliations
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Parkville VIC 3052, Australia   Department of Medical Biology University of Melbourne Parkville VIC 3010, Australia
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr John Silke
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Parkville VIC 3052, Australia   Department of Medical Biology University of Melbourne Parkville VIC 3010, Australia


