### Accession
PXD047614

### Title
Pulldown of human serum proteins with Trypanosoma brucei Invariant Surface Glycoprotein 75

### Description
Subspecies of Trypanosoma brucei are the causative agents of Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT) in Sub-Saharan Africa. The surface proteome of trypanosome parasites serves a critical function at the host-parasite interface and is essential for immune evasion. Most of the surface area is covered by the variable surface glycoproteins (VGSs). Embedded within the VSGs is the protein receptor Invariant Surface Glycoprotein 75 (ISG75) with unknown function. The project aims to identify potential ligands of ISG75 in human serum.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown samples were loaded onto filtration units (Vivacon 500, 30K Da cutoff) and washed three times with UA buffer (8M urea in 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB)). Subsequently, 100 µL of 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in UA buffer was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. After centrifugation to remove excess DTT, 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA buffer was added and incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. After one more wash by UA buffer and centrifugation to remove all liquids, 10 µL of Lys-C in UA buffer was added (enzyme to protein ratio at 1:100) and the spin unit was incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours. Then 100 µL of trypsin in 100 mM TEAB (enzyme to protein ratio at 1:50) was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Resultant peptides were released from the spin unit by centrifugation and then vacuum dried. Peptide quantification was done by a fluorometric peptide assay.

### Data Protocol
Triplicates for each sample were combined and searched in MaxQuant (v2.3.1.0) with the iBAQ algorithm enabled. Database was human uniprot database downloaded on 21 July 2023 plus common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-term and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were both set at 0.01. After removing contaminants and reversed protein sequences, iBAQ percentage for each protein was calculated by dividing each individual iBAQ value against the sum of all iBAQ values from one sample. iBAQ percentage represents the relative amount of each protein in one sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isg75, Sleeping sickness, Trypanosome

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Brix Folsted Andersen
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


