### Accession
PXD026219

### Title
Training-induced bioenergetic improvement in human skeletal muscle is associated with non-stoichiometric changes in the mitochondrial proteome without reorganisation of respiratory chain content

### Description
Mitochondrial defects are implicated in multiple diseases and aging. Exercise training is an accessible and inexpensive therapeutic intervention that can improve mitochondrial bioenergetics and quality of life. By combining a multi-omics approach with biochemical and in silico normalisation, we removed the bias arising from the training-induced increase in human skeletal muscle mitochondrial content to unearth an intricate and previously undemonstrated network of differentially prioritised mitochondrial adaptations. We show that changes in hundreds of transcripts, proteins, and lipids are not stoichiometrically linked to the overall increase in mitochondrial content. We demonstrate that enhancing electron flow to oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is more important to improve ATP generation than increasing the abundance of the OXPHOS machinery, and that training-induced supercomplex formation does not confer enhancements in mitochondrial bioenergetics. Our study provides a new analytical approach allowing unbiased and in-depth investigations of training-induced mitochondrial adaptations, challenging our current understanding and calling for careful reinterpretation of previous findings.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen skeletal muscle samples (~30 mg) were homogenised with 2x 20 strokes in a Potter-Elvehjem tissue grinder attached to a rotating drill (~1000 rpm) in 3 mL solution B (1 mM EDTA, 220 mM mannitol, 20 mM HEPES-KOH [pH=7.6], 70 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM PMSF) and spun at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was further spun at 12000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and the ensuing pellet was resuspended in 200 µL of sucrose buffer (0.5 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES-KOH [pH=7.6]). Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid method according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce-Thermo Fisher Scientific, Melbourne, Australia). Two IM fractions per sample (50 µg each) were spun at 12000 g for 10 min at 4°C; after removal of the supernatant, the pellets were stored frozen at -80°C for 842 subsequent proteomics analysis.  IM fractions were prepared for proteomics analysis as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, 50 μg of frozen mitochondrial isolates were solubilised in 20 µL of 8 M urea, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.1; this was followed by 15 min of sonication in a water bath sonicator and 30 min of shaking (1500 rpm, at 37°C). The urea concentration was reduced to 2 M with H2O prior to protein digestion with trypsin (Promega, Alexandria, NSW, Australia) at a 1:60 trypsin:protein ratio and subsequent overnight digestion at 37°C. The next day, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (1% [v/v] final concentration) and centrifuged for 5 min at 20,100 g at RT. The supernatants were desalted on pre-activated (100% acetonitrile [ACN]) and pre-equilibrated (0.1% TFA, 2% ACN) Empore™ SPE Disks (matrix active group polystyrene-divinylbenzene [SDB-XC] Merck, Bayswater, VIC, Australia) stage tips made in-house, before being washed (0.1% TFA, 2% ACN) and eluted in 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN. Samples were concentrated under vacuum and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN. After 15 min sonication and subsequent vortexing samples were centrifuged at 20,100 g at RT before estimation of peptide concentration (Direct Detect, Merck).  Approximately 600-800 ng of peptides were analysed on a Thermo Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mulgrave, VIC, Australia). Peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an isocratic flow of 5 µL min−1 of 2% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA) for 5 min before switching the trap-column in line with the analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nL min−1 using a nonlinear ACN gradient of buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) over 125 min including void and equilibration. Data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375–1400 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 15 most intense ions with z ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3e6, stepped normalised collision energy of 27, 30, 32, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, MS/MS resolution 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 5e4, MS/MS maximum injection time 50 ms, minimum intensity was set at 2e3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform version 1.6.1.0, searching against the Uniprot human database containing reviewed, canonical variants in FASTA format (June 2018) and a database containing common contaminants by the Andromeda search engine. Default search parameters for a label free quantification (LFQ) experiment were used with modifications. In brief, “Label free quantification” was set to “LFQ” using a minimum ratio count of 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates of 1% for proteins and peptides were applied by searching a reverse database, and ‘match from and to’, ‘match between runs’ options were enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min. Unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2 were used for quantification

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial defects are implicated in multiple diseases and aging. Exercise training is an accessible, inexpensive therapeutic intervention that can improve mitochondrial bioenergetics and quality of life. By combining multiple omics techniques with biochemical and in silico normalisation, we removed the bias arising from the training-induced increase in mitochondrial content to unearth an intricate and previously undemonstrated network of differentially prioritised mitochondrial adaptations. We show that changes in hundreds of transcripts, proteins, and lipids are not stoichiometrically linked to the overall increase in mitochondrial content. Our findings suggest enhancing electron flow to oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is more important to improve ATP generation than increasing the abundance of the OXPHOS machinery, and do not support the hypothesis that training-induced supercomplex formation enhances mitochondrial bioenergetics. Our study provides an analytical approach allowing unbiased and in-depth investigations of training-induced mitochondrial adaptations, challenging our current understanding, and calling for careful reinterpretation of previous findings.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Energy metabolism, Exercise, Fat metabolism, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Lipidomics, Oxphos

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
University of Melbourne


