### Accession
PXD008389

### Title
MUC1(insC) affects vesicular transport in renal epithelial cells

### Description
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease associated to the MUC1 gene (ADTKD-MUC1; formerly MCKD1) belongs to a heterogenous group of rare hereditary kidney diseases that is prototypically caused by frameshift mutations in the MUC1 repeat domain. The mutant MUC1(insC) lacks the transmembrane domaine, exhibits aberant cellular topology and hence might gain a function during the pathological process. To get insight into potential pathomechanisms we performed differential proteomics of extracellular vesicles shed by renal epithelia into the urine of patients. The study was based on three ADTKD patients and individual controls applying iTRAQ/LC-MS/MS. A total of 727 proteins were identified across all biological and technical replicates. A proportion of 47 proteins (6.5%) were fold-changed species. GO Term Enrichment analysis revealed proteins with significantly changed expression in ADTKD-associated extracellular vesicles as vesicular transport-associated proteins. Among these VTA1 is involved in the multivesicular body (MVB) pathway similar to the charged multivesicular body protein CHMP2B. VTA1 is also claimed to play roles as a cofactor of the AAA ATPases VPS4A and B in the disassembly of ESCRT III. Protein interaction databases list VPS4B, CHMP2A and IST1 as VTA1 binding partners.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were obtained from healthy individuals and three patients with a molecular diagnosis of ADTKD-MUC1. Diagnosis was based on SNaPshot minisequencing (SNaPshotTM Multiplex Kit, Applied Biosystems) for the predescribed  cytosine insertion also arbitrarily known as c.428dupC8 and additionally by SMRT sequencing for one patient from Family 2 (unpublished data). The study was approved by the local institutional review boards of the Universities of Cologne (IRB approval Nr 237/2013). Exovesicles were prepared by differential centrifugation/ultracentrifugation and using a discontinuous sucrose/deuterium oxide gradient to increase purity of the exosome fraction. Proteins were extracted with 2% SDS, and subsequently, SDS and lipids were removed by precipitating proteins with chloroform/methanol. Protein pellets were processed and digested with trypsin. Octoplex iTRAQ/LCMS was performed covering samples from three defined MCKD1 patients, three individual controls and two mixed controls. The iTRAQ labeling pattern was: patient P1 (113), P2 (114), P3 (115), controls C1 (116), C2 (117), C3 (118), and two mixed controls containing C1-C3 (119, 120).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant in the Perseus framework (MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8), a freely available software suite. Peak list files were searched by the Andromeda search engine, incorporated into the Max-Quant framework.  An initial qualitative evaluation of the data set was performed by searching in ExoCarta12, an exosome database that provides with the contents identified in exosomes from multiple organisms. Processed data were quantitatively evaluated in Perseus (version: 1.5.2.4). Ratios were calculated on the basis of the summed intensities of reporter ions. Ratios were transformed to log2 values and normalized by subtraction of the medians. Proteins were regarded as significantly changed in abundancy that exceeded a –log student’s t-test p-value of 1.3. Further data evaluation was performed by searches in the STRING protein interaction database to identify potential binding partners of significantly changed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease associated to the MUC1 gene (ADTKD-MUC1; formerly MCKD1) belongs to a heterogeneous group of rare hereditary kidney diseases that is prototypically caused by frameshift mutations in the MUC1 repeat domain. The mutant MUC1 (insC) lacks the transmembrane domaine, exhibits aberant cellular topology, and hence might gain a function during the pathological process. To get insight into potential pathomechanisms we perform differential proteomics of extracellular vesicles shed by renal epithelia into the urine of patients. The study is based on three ADTKD patients and individual controls applying iTRAQ/LC-MS/MS. A total of 796 proteins were identified across all biological and technical replicates, and 298 proteins were quantified. A proportion of 47 proteins were fold-changed species. GO Term Enrichment analysis revealed proteins with significantly changed expression in ADTKD-associated extracellular vesicles as vesicular transport-associated proteins. Among these VTA1 is involved in the endosomal multivesicular body pathway associated with transport to lysosomes or export via exosomes. VTA1 is also claimed to play roles as a cofactor of the AAA ATPases VPS4A and VPS4B in the disassembly of ESCRT III. Protein interaction databases list VPS4B, CHMP2A, and IST1 as VTA1 binding partners. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008389.).

### Keywords
Adtkd-muc1 / mdck1 / vesicular transport / multivesicular bodies, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC)
Institute of Biochemistry II, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Köln, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, 50931 Köln, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Franz-Georg Hanisch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Köln, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, 50931 Köln, Germany


