### Accession
PXD002214

### Title
Quantitative Proteome Analysis Reveals Increased Content of Basement Membrane Proteins in Arteries from Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Lower Levels among Metformin Users

### Description
We analyzed non-atherosclerotic repair arteries gathered at coronary by-pass operations from 30 patients with type 2 diabetes, as well as from 30 age- and gender-matched non-diabetic individuals. Quantitative proteome analysis was done by iTRAQ-labelling and LC-MS/MS analysis on individual arterial samples. The amounts of the basement membrane (BM) components, alpha-1- and alpha-2- type IV collagen, gamma-1- and beta-2-laminin were significantly increased in patients with diabetes. Moreover, the expressions of basement membrane components and other vascular proteins were significantly lower among metformin users, as compared to non-users. Patients treated with or without metformin had similar levels of HbA1c, cholesterol and blood pressure. In addition, quantitative histomorphometry showed increased area fractions of collagen-stainable material in tunica intima and media among patients with diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Our proteome analysis was based on material from one slice of the same formalin-fixed material as used for histology using a filter aided digestion protocol modified from 27. The paraffin was dissolved by washing with chloroform and the tissue released from the object glass and transferred to an Eppendorf tube in 2 µl extraction buffer (40 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8, 4 % SDS, 100 mM DTT). The samples were incubated 20 min. at 99ºC followed by 120 min. incubation at 80ºC with 600 rpm agitation. The extracted proteins were added 2x 200 µl 8 M urea in 40 mM TEAB pH 8 and centrifuged through a 3000 MWCO spin filter (Millipore Amicon Ultra) at 14.000xg at RT. Proteins were alkylated in the spin filter using 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea for 30 min in the dark. The buffers were exchanged by spinning 2x 100 µl 8 M Urea and 2x 100 µl 200 mM TEAB through the filters before digesting overnight with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37ºC. Samples (3.5 ug each) were labelled with 8-plex iTRAQ as follows: Label 113: Pool non DM, 114: pool DM, 115: non DM 1, 116: DM 1, 117: non DM 2, 118: DM 2, 119: non DM 3, 121: DM 3. DM= type 2 diabetes. non-DM=control. The 10 resulting itraq mix were HILIC fractionated prior to nano-LC-MSMS analysis. in

### Data Protocol
All Q-Exactive raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). The Mascot search Engine v. 2.2.3 integrated with Proteome Discoverer was used to search the data with the following criteria: Protein database: Swissprot. Enzyme: Trypsin/P, Maximum missed cleavage sites: 2. Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm. Fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), Variable modifications: Oxidation (M). Only high confidence peptides (FDR 1%) were included and only proteins identified with at least two peptides were included.  To be able to quantitate proteins in all 60 samples individually, quantitation was done relative to the pool of arterial material from non-diabetics (iTRAQ 113) in each run. After this quantitation, a reduction of variance was performed by standardizing each protein in each patient sample to the result of the protein pre-lamin A/C. This protein was chosen for standardization because no difference was observed in the raw data between diabetic and non-diabetic samples and because the intra-individual variation of this protein was the lowest of all identified proteins

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes artery proteomics

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Sdr Boulevard 29, DK-5000 Odense C, Dept Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Odense University Hospital, Sdr Boulevard 29, DK-5000 Odense C, Dept Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology


