### Accession
PXD015045

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of Roseburia grown on human milk oligosaccharides and of Roseburia grown on mucin in co-culture with Akkermansia muciniphilia.

### Description
The main objective of the present proteomic study is to identify the metabolic response, in particular theglycan uptake and degradation machinery, conferring members of Roseburia growth on HMOs and/or onrelated O-glycans. Accordingly, the proteomes of R. hominis and R. inulinivorans bothgrown on humanmilk oligosaccharides (HMOs), were compared to glucose to reveal the molecular basis for growth onHMOs. Furthermore, we compare the proteomes of R. hominis and R. inulinivorans grownin co-culturewith A. muciniphilia either on mucin or on glucose to identify potential metabolic routes of mucin derivedO-glycan utilization in Roseburia.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as described elsewhere (Kulak et al., 2014), (Ejby et al., 2019). Cellswere lysed by boiling (5 min 95°C) followed by bead beating (3mm beads, 30 Hz for 1 min)(TissueLyser II, Qiagen) and sonication bath (3x 30 sec at 4°C) (Bioruptor, Diagenode). Lysateswere centrifuged (14.000x  g, 10 min at 4°C) and soluble protein concentrations weredetermined by a Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For digestion, 20 μg protein werediluted 1:3 with 50 mM HEPES, 10% (v/v) ACN, pH 8.5 and incubated with LysC (MS grade,Wako) in a ratio of 1:50 (LysC:protein) for 4 h at 37°C. Subsequently, samples were diluted to1:10 with 50 mM HEPES, 10% (v/v) ACN, pH 8.5 and further digested with trypsin (MS grade,Promega) in a ratio of 1:100 for 18 h at 37°C. Next, samples were diluted 1:1 with 2% (w/v)trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench enzymatic activity and peptides were processed for massspectrometry using in house packed stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) as described below.Peptides from single strain cultures were desalted using 3 discs of C18 resin packed into a 200μL tip and activated by successive loading of 40 μL of Methanol and 40 μL of 80% (v/v) ACN,0.1% (w/v) FA using centrifugation at 1800x g. Tips were further equilibrated twice with 40 μL of3% (v/v) ACN, 1% (w/v) TFA before samples were loaded in steps of 50 μL. After loading, tipswere washed three times with 100 μL 0.1% (w/v) FA and peptides were eluted in two steps with40 μL each of 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (w/v) FA into a clean 500 μL Eppendorf LoBind tube.Peptides derived from co cultures were desalted and fractionated using strong cation exchange(SCX) chromatography filter pugs (3M Empore). Per sample 6 SCX discs were packed into a200 μL tip and tips were activated and equilibrated by loading 80 μL (v/v) of ACN and then 80 μLof 0.2% (w/v) TFA. Samples were applied in 50 μL steps and tips were washed twice with 600μL 0.2% (w/v) TFA. Subsequently peptides were stepwise eluted in 3 fractions with 60 μL of 125mM NH4OAc, 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (w/v) FA, then with 60 μL of 225 mM ammonium acetate,20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (w/v) FA and lastly with 5% (v/v) NH4OH, 80 % (v/v) ACN into clean 500μL Eppendorf LoBind tubes. Eluted peptides were dried in an Eppendorf Speedvac (3 h at 60°C)and reconstituted in 2% (v/v) ACN, 1% (w/v) TFA prior to Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.Peptides from biological triplicates of each culture condition were loaded on the massspectrometer by reverse phase chromatography through an inline 50 cm C18 column (ThermoEasySpray ES803) connected to a 2 cm long C18 trap column (ThromoFisher 164705) using a Thermo EasyLc 1000 HPLC system. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 4.8─48 % (v/v)ACN, 0.1% (w/v) FA and a flow rate of 250 nL min−1 over 260 min (samples from single straincultures) or 140 min (SCX fractionated samples from co cultures). Mass spectrometry wasperformed on a Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) run in a data-dependentmanner using a “Top 10” method. Full MS spectra were collected at 70,000 resolution, with anAGC target set to 3x106 ions or maximum injection time of 20 ms. Peptides were fragmented viahigher-energy collision dissociation (normalized collision energy=25). The intensity thresholdwas set to 1.7x104, dynamic exclusion to 60 s and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown wereexcluded. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of1x106 ions or a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The scan range was limited from 300─1750m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer versions 2.2 & 2.3 were used to process and analyse the raw MS datafiles and label free quantification was enabled in the processing and consensus steps. Thespectra from single strains proteomics were matched against the proteome database of R.hominis DSM 16839 (ID: UP000008178) or R. inulinivorans DSM 16841 (ID: UP000003561)respectively, as obtained from Uniprot. The spectra from co-culture experiments were searchedagainst a constructed database consisting of the reference proteomes of  R. hominis DSM16839 (ID: UP000008178), R. inulinivorans DSM 16841 (ID: UP000003561) and A. muciniphilaDSM 22959 (ID: UP000001031). For spectral searches, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q) andN-terminal   acetylation   were   specified   as   dynamic   modifications   and   cysteinecarbamidomethylation was set as a static modification. Obtained results were filtered to a 1%FDR and protein quantitation was done by using the built-in Minora Feature Detector. Foranalysis of the label-free quantification data, proteins were considered present if at least 2unique peptides (as defined in Proteome Discoverer) were identified and proteins had to beidentified in at least 2 out of the 3 samples analysed per culture condition with high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
The early life human gut microbiota exerts life-long health effects on the host, but the mechanisms underpinning its assembly remain elusive. Particularly, the early colonization of Clostridiales from the Roseburia-Eubacterium group, associated with protection from colorectal cancer, immune- and metabolic disorders is enigmatic. Here, we describe catabolic pathways that support the growth of Roseburia and Eubacterium members on distinct human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs). The HMO pathways, which include enzymes with a previously unknown structural fold and specificity, were upregulated together with additional glycan-utilization loci during growth on selected HMOs and in co-cultures with Akkermansia muciniphila on mucin, suggesting an additional role in enabling cross-feeding and access to mucin O-glycans. Analyses of 4599 Roseburia genomes underscored the preponderance and diversity of the HMO utilization loci within the genus. The catabolism of HMOs by butyrate-producing Clostridiales may contribute to the competitiveness of this group during the weaning-triggered maturation of the microbiota.

### Keywords
Mucin, Lc-msms, Metaproteomics, Akkermansia muciniphilia, Roseburia, Proteomics, Hmos, O-glycans

### Affiliations
DTU
DTU BIOENGINEERING Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine PCET-Protein Glycoscience and Biotechnology Technical University of Denmark 2800 Kgs. Lyngby

### Submitter
Michael Pichler

### Lab Head
Dr Maher Abou Hachem
DTU BIOENGINEERING Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine PCET-Protein Glycoscience and Biotechnology Technical University of Denmark 2800 Kgs. Lyngby


