### Accession
PXD014510

### Title
Clavibacter nebraskensis secretome analysis

### Description
The project aimed to study the secretome profile of the Goss's bacterial wilt and blight disease of corn caused by the phytobacterial pathogen Clavibacter nebraskensis (Cn). The experiment was carried out in Vitro using two Cn isolates (A highly aggressive isolate Cmn14-5-1 and a weakly aggressive DOAB232) from Manitoba, Canada grown in two different xylem sap media (Host xylem sap from corn (CXS), and non-host xylem sap from tomato (TXS), besides M9 medium.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were removed from the xylem sap by centrifugation for 20 min at 12,000 g, and the supernatant liquid was filtered (0.22 μm) to remove any remaining cells.  The filtrates were concentrated to approximately 300 µL using centrifugal devices (10 kDa cut-off, Millipore Sigma, USA).  Proteins were harvested by precipitation in 10% w/v, acetone-TCA, and 0.07% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) overnight at -20˚C.  Samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 min and protein pellets washed three times with acetone-DTT.  The final pellet was air-dried and suspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were reduced in 5 mM DTT and incubated for 25 min at 56˚C. After cooling to room temperature, alkylation was performed in 14mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. Protein samples were then dialyzed using dialysis cups (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 2 h. at room temperature, and then overnight in fresh dialysis buffer at 4˚C. Proteins were quantified using a Bradford assay with a BSA standard (BioRad Laboratories, USA).  Approximately 2 µg of soluble protein was digested using trypsin (GoldTM MS grade: Promega, USA) at 37˚C for 18 h. The digestion reaction was stopped by adding 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), and the samples dried under vacuum. Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) desalted using C18 spin cartridges (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) and eluted using 0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN, vacuum dried, and stored at -20˚C.Mass spectrometric analysis of the tryptic peptides was performed using Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with a nanoflow HPLC unit (NLeasy 1000, Thermofisher Scientfic, USA).  Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18 column (5 μm particles, 300 Å pores, 10 cm) eluting at 300 nL/min.  A 2% (v/v) ACN to 80% ACN (v/v) gradient in 0.1% (v/v) FA was used for HPLC, with a total run time of 120 minutes

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (v4.8.6: Proteome Software Inc., USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.5% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet Algorithm

### Publication Abstract
The Gram-positive bacterium <i>Clavibacter nebraskensis</i> (Cn) causes Goss's wilt and leaf blight on corn in the North American Central Plains with yield losses as high as 30%. Cn strains vary in aggressiveness on corn, with highly aggressive strains causing much more serious symptoms and damage to crops. Since Cn inhabits the host xylem, we investigated differences in the secreted proteomes of Cn strains to determine whether these could account for phenotypic differences in aggressiveness. Highly and a weakly aggressive Cn strains (Cn14-15-1 and DOAB232, respectively) were cultured, in vitro, in the xylem sap of corn (CXS; host) and tomato (TXS; non-host). The secretome of the Cn strains were extracted and processed, and a comparative bottom-up proteomics approach with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to determine their identities and concentration. Relative quantitation of peptides was based on precursor ion intensities to measure protein abundances. In total, 745 proteins were identified in xylem sap media. In CXS, a total of 658 and 396 proteins were identified in strains Cn14-5-1 and DOAB232, respectively. The unique and the differentially abundant proteins in the secretome of strain Cn14-5-1 were higher in either sap medium compared to DOAB232. These proteins were sorted using BLAST2GO and assigned to 12 cellular functional processes. Virulence factors, e.g., cellulase, &#x3b2;-glucosidase, &#x3b2;-galactosidase, chitinase, &#x3b2;-1,4-xylanase, and proteases were generally higher in abundance in the aggressive Cn isolate. This was corroborated by enzymatic activity assays of cellulase and protease in CXS. These proteins were either not detected or detected at significantly lower abundance levels in Cn strains grown in non-host xylem sap (tomato), suggesting potential factors involved in Cn-host (corn) interactions.

### Keywords
Ms, Clavibacter, Xylem sap

### Affiliations
University of Manitoba
Department of Plant Science, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada

### Submitter
Atta Soliman

### Lab Head
Dr Fouad Daayf
Department of Plant Science, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada


