### Accession
PXD033157

### Title
Evidence for a widespread third system for bacterial polysaccharide export across the outer membrane comprising a composite OPX/β-barrel translocon

### Description
Wzx/Wzy- and ABC transporter-dependent pathways, an outer membrane (OM) polysaccharide export (OPX) type translocon exports the polysaccharide across the OM. The paradigm OPX protein WzaE. coli is an octamer, in which the eight C-terminal domains form an α-helical OM pore, and the eight copies of the three N-terminal domains (D1-D3) a periplasmic cavity. In synthase-dependent pathways, the OM translocon is a 16- to 18-stranded β-barrel protein. In Myxococcus xanthus, the secreted polysaccharide EPS is synthesized in a Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Here, using experiments and computational structural biology, we characterize EpsX as an OM 18-stranded β-barrel protein important for EPS synthesis and identify AlgE, a β-barrel translocon of a synthase-dependent pathway, as its closest structural homolog. We also find that EpsY, the OPX protein of the EPS pathway, only consists of the periplasmic D1 and D2 domains and lacks the domain for spanning the OM (henceforth D1D2OPX protein). In vivo, EpsX and EpsY mutually stabilize each other, supporting their direct interaction. Based on these observations, we propose a model whereby EpsY and EpsX make up a novel type of translocon for polysaccharide export across the OM. Specifically, in this composite translocon, EpsX functions as the OM-spanning translocon together with the periplasmic D1D2OPX protein EpsY. Based on computational genomics, similar composite systems are present widespread in Gram-negative bacteria. This model provides a framework for these proteins' future experimental characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated M.xanthus lysates were resuspended in buffer containing 0.5% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then reduced by adding 5 mM Tris(2-caboxyethyl)phosphine at 95°C for 15 minutes, followed by alkylation (10mM iodoacetamide, 30min at 25°C). 50 µg total protein was then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 30°. Following digestion, SLS was precipitated with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 1.5% final concentration) and peptides were purified using Chromabond C18 microspin columns (Macherey-Nagel).  Acidified peptides were loaded on spin column that were equilibrated with 400 µl acetonitrile and then 400 µl 0.15 % TFA.  After peptide load, a washing step with 0.15 % TFA was performed, followed by elution using 400 µl 50% acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were then dried and reconstituted in 0.15 % TFA. Peptide mixtures were then analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on an Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 94% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 6% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 25% solvent B over 95 minutes and to 35% B for additional 25 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. DIA-MS acquisition method was adapted from  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7124470/). In short, Spray voltage were set to 2.0 kV, funnel RF level at 55, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. For DIA experiments full MS resolutions were set to 120.000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT of 50 ms. Mass range was set to 350–1400. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 3000%. 49 windows of 15 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms. Stepped HCD collision energy of 25, 27.5, 30 % was used. MS1 data was acquired in profile, MS2 DIA data in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of DIA data was performed using DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6949130/) using a uniprot protein database from Myxococcus xanthus. Full tryptic digest was allowed with two missed cleavage sites, and oxidized methionines and carbamidomethylated cysteins. Match between runs and remove likely interferences were enabled. The neural network classifier was set to the single-pass mode, and protein inference was based on genes. Quantification strategy was set to any LC (high accuracy). Cross-run normalization was set to RT-dependent. Library generation was set to smart profiling. DIA-NN outputs were further evaluated using Phython scripts.

### Publication Abstract
In Gram-negative bacteria, secreted polysaccharides have multiple critical functions. In Wzx/Wzy- and ABC transporter-dependent pathways, an outer membrane (OM) polysaccharide export (OPX) type translocon exports the polysaccharide across the OM. The paradigm OPX protein Wza of Escherichia coli is an octamer in which the eight C-terminal domains form an &#x3b1;-helical OM pore and the eight copies of the three N-terminal domains (D1 to D3) form a periplasmic cavity. In synthase-dependent pathways, the OM translocon is a 16- to 18-stranded &#x3b2;-barrel protein. In Myxococcus xanthus, the secreted polysaccharide EPS (exopolysaccharide) is synthesized in a Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Here, using experiments, phylogenomics, and computational structural biology, we identify and characterize EpsX as an OM 18-stranded &#x3b2;-barrel protein important for EPS synthesis and identify AlgE, a &#x3b2;-barrel translocon of a synthase-dependent pathway, as its closest structural homolog. We also find that EpsY, the OPX protein of the EPS pathway, consists only of the periplasmic D1 and D2 domains and completely lacks the domain for spanning the OM (herein termed a <sup>D1D2</sup>OPX protein). <i>In vivo</i>, EpsX and EpsY mutually stabilize each other and interact in <i>in vivo</i> pulldown experiments supporting their direct interaction. Based on these observations, we propose that EpsY and EpsX make up and represent a third type of translocon for polysaccharide export across the OM. Specifically, in this composite translocon, EpsX functions as the OM-spanning &#x3b2;-barrel translocon together with the periplasmic <sup>D1D2</sup>OPX protein EpsY. Based on computational genomics, similar composite systems are widespread in Gram-negative bacteria. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacteria secrete a wide variety of polysaccharides that have critical functions in, e.g., fitness, surface colonization, and biofilm formation and in beneficial and pathogenic human-, animal-, and plant-microbe interactions. In Gram-negative bacteria, export of these chemically diverse polysaccharides across the outer membrane depends on two known translocons, i.e., an outer membrane OPX protein in Wzx/Wzy- and ABC transporter-dependent pathways and an outer membrane 16- to 18-stranded &#x3b2;-barrel protein in synthase-dependent pathways. Here, using a combination of experiments in Myxococcus xanthus, phylogenomics, and computational structural biology, we provide evidence supporting that a third type of translocon can export polysaccharides across the outer membrane. Specifically, in this translocon, an outer membrane-spanning &#x3b2;-barrel protein functions together with an entirely periplasmic OPX protein that completely lacks the domain for spanning the OM. Computational genomics support that similar composite systems are widespread in Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
Myxococcus xanthus, Dia

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


