### Accession
PXD042137

### Title
N-glycoproteomics and SESTAR++ analysis based on SeMOE

### Description
The isotopic envelope pattern of selenium is guaranteed by its six stable isotopes with distinctive distribution (74Se, 0.89%; 76Se, 9.37%; 77Se, 7.63%; 78Se, 23.77%; 80Se, 49.61%; 82Se, 8.73%). We postulated that the effective incorporation of selenosugar in glycoproteins would achieve direct isotopic pattern prediction for glycopeptides, without the need for secondary tagging procedures. Consequently, we performed comparative studies using a previously reported computational algorithm, the updated version of selenium-encoded isotopic signature targeted profiling (SESTAR++)31, 32, and a glycan-first glycopeptide search engine, pGlyco3 to comprehensively analyze the intact N-glycopeptides in cells treated with SeMOE probes.

### Sample Protocol
For protein sample preparation, HeLa cells were treated with vehicle or indicated selenosugar (2 mM SiaNSe, 2 mM 9AzSiaNSe, 200 μM 1,6-Pr2ManNSe or 200 μM 1,6-Pr2GalNSe), collected, washed, re-suspended in 4% SDS (m/v) in PBS containing protease inhibitor, and lysed by sonication, followed by heating at 95℃ for 10 min and centrifugation (20,000 g, 10 min, 18℃) to remove debris. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Then, cell proteins were precipitate by eight volumes of cold methanol at -80°C overnight. Precipitated proteins (1 mg) were denatured in 8 M urea, reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37℃ for 1 h, alkylated in the dark by 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min, and diluted in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final urea concentration of 0.8 M. After that, trypsin (Promega) was added to a ﬁnal enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated at 37 °C for 18-20 h, followed by the centrifugation (20,000 g, 20 min). The supernatants were added 0.5% triﬂuoroacetic acid (v/v) to make the pH less than 3. All digested samples were desalted using the C18 column (Waters), dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C for further use. Then, glycopeptides were enriched using ZIC-HILIC (Merck Millipore). Briefly, desalted peptides (1-2 mg) were dissolved in 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (v/v), loaded onto an in-house ZIC-HILIC micro-column containing 30 mg of ZIC-HILIC particles packed onto a C8 disk. The ﬂow through was collected and passed back through the column for four additional times. Then, the column was washed seven times with 200 μL 80% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (v/v) to remove hydrophobic peptides. Enriched glycopeptides were eluted twice with 70 μL 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid, collected, and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MC/MS analysis, all above enriched glycopeptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA in water, separated over a 50 cm EasySpray reversed phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 2 μm, 100 Å, PepMap C18 particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solvents (A: water with 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient was 6 h in total:1-7% solvent B in 10 min, followed by an increase from 7-35% solvent B from 11 to 311 min, an increase from 35-44% solvent B from 311 to 353 min, and an increase from 44% to 99% solvent B from 353 to 356 min. The MS parameters for glycopeptide analysis was: (1) MS: resolution = 120,000; AGC target = 500,000; maximum injection time = 50 ms; included charge state = 2–6; dynamic exclusion duration = 15 s; each selected precursor was subject to one sount HCD-MS/MS; (2) scout HCD-MS/MS: isolation window = 2; resolution = 15,000; AGC target = 500,000; maximum injection time = 250 ms; collision energy = 30%; stepped collision mode on, energy difference of ± 10%. RAW data of MS1 and MS2 were then searched by SESTAR++ or pGlyco3, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Semoe, Sestar, N-glycoproteomics, Hela cell

### Affiliations
Nanjing University
State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chemistry and Biomedicine Innovation Center (ChemBIC), Nanjing University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
Xiao Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Ran Xie
State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chemistry and Biomedicine Innovation Center (ChemBIC), Nanjing University, Nanjing, China


