### Accession
PXD006406

### Title
MHC class I loaded ligands from breast cancer cell lines: A potential HLA-I-typed antigen collection

### Description
We sought to build a catalog of epitopes presented by breast cancers using a renewable resource of well-characterized breast cancer cell lines. Starting from 70 breast cancer cell lines, we measured MHC class I abundance and used pre-existing RNAseq data to identify either HLA-A*02 or MHC class I-positive cell lines. For 20 of these cell lines, we used “reverse” immunogenetics, in which MHC class I-loaded peptides are recovered and their sequences are determined by mass spectrometry. We identified more than 2,700 unique MHC class I-bound peptides from a panel of basal, luminal, and claudin-low subtype of cell lines. HLA-A*02 binding prediction across all tested cell lines revealed a model which described the distribution of HLA-A*02-binding peptides and allowed us to identify those peptides most likely to be presented on HLA-A*02. Comparing the peptides that we identified to published literature found that more than 1500 peptides had been identified in previous studies and that 18 of these peptides have been shown to be immunogenic. Overall, this high throughput identification of MHC class I-loaded peptides is an effective strategy for systematic characterization of cancer epitopes and could be employed in a design of multipeptide-based anticancer vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines, antibodies, and reagents. Unless otherwise indicated, breast cancer and non-transformed cell lines used in this study were from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Breast cancer T4 cell line and non-transformed S1 cell line were from Dr. Bissell [Kenny, P.A., Lee, G.Y., Myers, C.A., Neve, R.M., Semeiks, J.R., Spellman, P.T., Lorenz, K., Lee, E.H., Barcellos-Hoff, M.H., Petersen, O.W. and Gray, J.W., 2007. The morphologies of breast cancer cell lines in three‐dimensional assays correlate with their profiles of gene expression. Molecular oncology, 1(1), pp.84-96.]. Unless special medium is required, cells were cultured in DMEM or RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS (DMEM/FBS or RPMI/FBS) and 10 μg/mL gentamicin. Unless otherwise indicated all reagents were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Ms MHC class I (HLA-A, B, C) antibodies (clone W6/32) were from Cedarlane (Burlington, NC). Ms HLA-A*02 antibodies (clone BB7.2), N-octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside, SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate, interferon (IFN)-alpha, IFN-gamma, and protein G plus agarose were from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Rockford, IL). HRP-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG and Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG were from Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, PA).  Immunoprecipitation and elution of MHC class I-bound epitopes and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of eluted peptides. MHC class I-bound peptides were isolated according to standard protocols (22-24) using Ms MHC class I (clone W6/32)-specific antibodies followed by acid treatment and concentration by speedvac. Peptides were separated using liquid chromatography with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters), then delivered to an LTQ Velos linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using electrospray ionization with a Captive Spray Source (Microm Biosciences). Samples were applied at 15 ul/min to a Symmetry C18 trap cartridge (Waters) for 10 min, then switched onto a 75 um x 250 mm nanoAcquity BEH 130 C18 column with 1.7 um particles (Waters) using mobile phases water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid, 7-30% acetonitrile gradient over 106 min, and 300 nL/min flow rate. Data-dependent collection of MS/MS spectra used the dynamic exclusion feature of the instrument’s control software (repeat count equal to 1, exclusion list size of 500, exclusion duration of 30 sec, and exclusion mass width of -1.0 to +4.0) to obtain MS/MS spectra of the ten most abundant parent ions (minimum signal of 5,000) following each survey scan from m/z 400 to 1,400.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis. Similar versions of Swiss-Prot human FASTA protein databases (2011.06, 2011.08, 2011.11, 2012.03, and 2012.06 versions with roughly 20,200 sequences) were used. We used a sequence-reversed database strategy to estimate error thresholds [Elias, J.E. and Gygi, S.P., 2007. Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nature methods, 4(3), pp.207-214.]. The database sequences and their reversed sequences were appended to 179 common contaminant sequences and their reversed forms for a final database sizes of about 40,800 sequences. Peptide identification was performed with the SEQUEST/PAWS processing pipeline [Wilmarth, P.A., Riviere, M.A. and David, L.L., 2009. Techniques for accurate protein identification in shotgun proteomic studies of human, mouse, bovine, and chicken lenses. Journal of ocular biology, diseases, and informatics, 2(4), pp.223-234.], using no enzyme specificity, average parent ion mass tolerance of 2.5 Da, monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, and variable modification of +16 Da on methionine residues with a maximum of 2 modifications per peptide. Peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) false discovery rates were estimated from the decoy matches and PSMs were nominally filtered at a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Peptide sequencing, Immunoprecipitation, Hla typing, Rna-seq, Cell lines, Mhc class 1 ligands, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry, Immune system

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Spellman
Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR USA


