### Accession
PXD033555

### Title
Analysis of citrullination of extracellular matrix proteins in spheroid cultures of fibroblasts and cancer cells

### Description
Eight different human cancer cell lines were cocultured with human cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF) as spheroid cultures. In another setup UT-SCC-7 cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma cells, together with human skin fibroblasts (SFB) and UT-SCC-2 cells together with gingival fibroblasts (GFB) were cultured as spheroid cocultures. These spheroids were treated with PAD4 or with citrullination buffer only. All spheroids were hypotonically lysed, and the remaining insoluble material was digested to peptides and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The pellets from hypotonic lysis of spheroids were resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 5% SDS, pH 7.5. The dissolved samples were then clarified at 13,000g for 8 minutes. Each sample was digested in an S-Trap micro column (ProtiFi, USA) according to the standard protocol provided by the manufacturer. Briefly, the proteomic mixture in the supernatant was reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 95 °C for 20 minutes and then at 60 °C for 2 hours. The reduced proteins were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide in dark for 30 minutes. The samples were then treated with 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, 7.5 M urea, pH 7.5 to solubilize the matrisome proteins. These ECM solubilized samples were acidified with 1.2% aqueous phosphoric acid and mixed with 6× volumes of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1 (S-Trap binding buffer). A protein solution of 200 µl at a time was loaded onto the filter of the S-Trap micro column and centrifuged at 4000×g for 30 seconds. The flow-through was discarded each time and the samples were washed 9 times with the S-Trap binding buffer. Proteins trapped in the S-Trap column were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, USA) at 47 °C for 1 hour at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 1:25 (w/w). The digested peptides were eluted with buffers in order: 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0, 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile/0.2% aqueous formic acid. The eluted fractions were pooled, SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) dried, and desalted with C18 tips (Empore, USA). Finally, the desalted peptides were again SpeedVac dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. Liquid chromatography-Tandem mass spectrometry The peptide analysis was performed using a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated using a 15cm C18 column (75 µm × 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 3 µm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) with a gradient consisting of solvents A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (acetonitrile/water (95:5(v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid) from 8–35% B in 50 minutes, 35-100% B in 2 minutes and held at 100% B for 8 minutes. A full mass scan was acquired over the m/z range of 300-1750 at a resolution of 120,000 with a maximum allowed injection time (Maximum IT) of 50 milliseconds followed by data dependent acquisition of isolation window of 2.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds. The top 12 intense peaks from MS1 scan were fragmented with higher-energy collisional induced dissociation (HCD) and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000 m/z at a resolution of 15,000. A new survey scan of the full mass spectrum was initiated after the completion of the MS2 scan, and the process was repeated until the end of the gradient run.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with MSAmanda 2.0 search engine (36) was used to analyze MS data against Human reviewed Uniprot sequences including isoforms (release 2020_02). Trypsin-digested peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Parent ion tolerance of 5 ppm and product ion tolerance of 0.02 Da (for data from QExactive or Orbitrap Lumos) or 0.2 Da (for data from LTQ Orbitrap) were allowed. Oxidation (K, M, P) and deamidation (N, Q, R) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Only the PSMs with concatenated target-decoy database search-derived false discovery rate below 0.05 were included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Inflammation, Spheroid, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Life Technologies, University of Turku, Turku, Finland


