### Accession
PXD038767

### Title
Phosphoproteomic screening identifies physiological substrates of dTSSK kinase

### Description
TO identified its potential phosphorylated substrates by investigating differential phosphorylated sites in the testes of wild-type (w1118) and dTSSK-/- male flies using quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
three biological replicates of dTSSK-/- testis or wild-type testis were performed, cysteines were reduced and alkylated, and protein extracts were trypsinized. The six samples were isotopically labelled using tandem mass tags (TMT). TMT labelling allowed quantitative, multiplexed analysis of all six samples, which were combined and analysed in a parallel manner that enables quantitation of tryptic peptides in each of the individual samples with high accuracy. Phosphopeptides were enriched, and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a high-resolution mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed in the ProteomeDiscovererTM Software 2.4. MS/MS spectra were matched against uniprot-Drosophila melanogaster-taxonomy7227. Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5. TMT intensities were extracted, normalized for each condition and were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic studies elucidate a link between testis-specific serine/threonine kinases (TSSKs) and male infertility in mammals, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here, we identify a TSSK homolog in Drosophila, CG14305 (termed dTSSK), whose mutation impairs the histone-to-protamine transition during spermiogenesis and causes multiple phenotypic defects in nuclear shaping, DNA condensation, and flagellar organization in spermatids. Genetic analysis demonstrates that kinase catalytic activity of dTSSK, which is functionally conserved with human TSSKs, is essential for male fertility. Phosphoproteomics identify 828 phosphopeptides/449 proteins as potential substrates of dTSSK enriched primarily in microtubule-based processes, flagellar organization and mobility, and spermatid differentiation and development, suggesting that dTSSK phosphorylates various proteins to orchestrate postmeiotic spermiogenesis. Among them, the two substrates, protamine-like protein Mst77F/Ser<sup>9</sup> and transition protein Mst33A/Ser<sup>237</sup>, are biochemically validated to be phosphorylated by dTSSK in vitro, and are genetically demonstrated to be involved in spermiogenesis in vivo. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that broad phosphorylation mediated by TSSKs plays an indispensable role in spermiogenesis.

### Keywords
Drosophila testes lc-msms

### Affiliations
Shanghaitech university
Shanghaitech University

### Submitter
Xuedi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guanjun Gao
Shanghaitech University


