### Accession
PXD023829

### Title
Multilayered Omics Revealsl Sex- and Depot-Dependent Adipose Progenitor Cell Heterogeneity

### Description
White adipose tissue (WAT) harbors functionally diverse subpopulations of adipose progenitor cells that differentially impact tissue plasticity in a sex- and depot-dependent manner. To date, the molecular basis of this cellular heterogeneity has not been fully defined. Here, we describe a multilayered omics approach to dissect adipose progenitor cell heterogeneity from in three dimensions: progenitor subpopulation, sex, and anatomical localization. We applied state-of-the-art mass spectrometry methods to quantify 4870 proteins in eight different stromal cell populations from perigonadal and inguinal WAT of male and female mice and acquired transcript expression levels of 15477 genes using RNA-seq. Notably, our data highlight the molecular signatures defining sex differences in PDGFR+ preadipocyte differentiation and identify regulatory pathways that functionally distinguish adipose tissue PDGFRb+ subpopulations. The data are freely accessible as a resource at "Pread Profiler. Together, the multilayered omics analysis provides unprecedented insights into adipose stromal cell heterogeneity.

### Sample Protocol
PDGFRb+ subpopulations were sorted from perigonal and inguinal WAT from male and female mice. We applied high-pH resversed phase fractionation (HPRP) and data-dependent acquistion mass spectrometry (DDA-MS) for the combined sample and generated the peptide spectral library using the DDA-MS results. We performed data-independent acquistion mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for each of the samples and quantified 4870 proteins in all of the 24 samples. In the mean time, we quantifed expression of 15477 transcripts using RNA-seq.

### Data Protocol
The DDA-MS data were searched against the Uniprot mus musculus (10090) database using Proteome Discoverer. Protein quantification of the DIA-MS data were performed using Spectronaut.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has revealed that adult white adipose tissue (WAT) harbors functionally diverse subpopulations of mesenchymal stromal cells that differentially impact tissue plasticity. To date, the molecular basis of this cellular heterogeneity has not been fully defined. Here, we describe a multilayered omics approach to dissect adipose progenitor cell heterogeneity in three dimensions: progenitor subpopulation, sex, and anatomical localization. We applied state-of-the-art mass spectrometry methods to quantify 4,870 proteins in eight different stromal cell populations from perigonadal and inguinal WAT of male and female mice and acquired transcript expression levels of 15,477 genes using RNA-seq. Our data unveil molecular signatures defining sex differences in preadipocyte differentiation and identify regulatory pathways that functionally distinguish adipose progenitor subpopulations. This multilayered omics analysis, freely accessible at http://preadprofiler.net/, provides unprecedented insights into adipose stromal cell heterogeneity and highlights the benefit of complementary proteomics to support findings from scRNA-seq studies.

### Keywords
Ppar., Multilayered omics, Cellular heterogeneity, Preadipocytes, Inflammation, Adipogenesis, Adipocyte precursor cells

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences
RIKEN

### Submitter
Midy Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yibo Wu
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences


