### Accession
PXD005586

### Title
Characterization of the proteome of Theobroma cacao beans by nanoUHPLC-ESI MS/MS

### Description
Cocoa seed storage proteins play an important role in flavour development as aroma precursors are formed from their degradation during fermentation. Major proteins in the beans of Theobroma cacao are the storage proteins belonging to the vicilin and albumin fraction. Although both these classes of proteins have been fully characterized, there is still limited information on the expression and abundance of other proteins present in cocoa beans. This work is the first attempt to characterize the whole cocoa bean proteome by nanoUHPLC-ESI MS/MS analysis using tryptic digests of cocoa bean protein extracts. The results of this analysis show that a total of 906 proteins could be identified using a species-specific Theobroma cacao database. The majority of the identified proteins were involved with metabolism and energy. However, a significant number of the identified proteins were linked to protein synthesis and processing. Several proteins were also involved with plant response to stress conditions and defence. Albumin and vicilin storage proteins showed the highest intensity values among all detected proteins, although only seven entries were identified as storage proteins. A comparison of MS/MS data searches carried out against larger non-specific databases confirmed that using a species-specific database can increase the number of identified proteins, and at the same time reduce the number of false positives. The results of this work will be useful in developing tools which can allow the comparison of the proteomic profile of cocoa beans from different genotypes and geographic origins.

### Sample Protocol
The cocoa seeds were freeze-dried and defatted using petroleum ether. Polyphenols were then extracted from the defatted cocoa seeds to avoid complexation with protein. Albumin and vicilin fractions were extracted with a low and high ionic strength buffer, respectively. Proteins in the cocoa powder left after these buffer extractions were extracted with a solution containing chaotropic agents. This solution was also used for the protein extraction of unfractionated cocoa powder. An aliquot of each sample solution, containing a total amount of 10 µg of proteins based on the Bradford assay, was reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with trypsin (1:50 ratio). The trypsin digests were desalted and analyzed on a nanoUHPLC-MS/MS system consisting of an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Nano RSLC (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data acquisitions were processed using Mascot Distiller software (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK; Version 2.5.1.0). Mascot searches were carried out against the Cacao Matina1-6 Genome v1.1 Theobroma cacao database (http://www.cacaogenomedb.org/Tcacao_genome_v1.1#tripal_analysis-downloads-box; accessed on 31st May 2015; 59,577 sequences; 23,720,084 residues), the NCBInr database (downloaded on 16th June 2015; 67,841,823 sequences; 24,324,060,020 residues), the Uniprot\Swissprot database (downloaded on 31st March 2014; 542,782 sequences; 193,019,802 residues), a custom NCBInr database with entries restricted to Theobroma cacao only (downloaded on 7th July 2015; 43,683 sequences; 19,146,837 residues) and a custom Uniprot\Tremble database with entries restricted to Theobroma cacao only (downloaded on 1st July 2015; 40,941 sequences; 17,501,566 residues).

### Publication Abstract
Cocoa seed storage proteins play an important role in flavour development as aroma precursors are formed from their degradation during fermentation. Major proteins in the beans of Theobroma cacao are the storage proteins belonging to the vicilin and albumin classes. Although both these classes of proteins have been extensively characterized, there is still limited information on the expression and abundance of other proteins present in cocoa beans. This work is the first attempt to characterize the whole cocoa bean proteome by nano-UHPLC-ESI MS/MS analysis using tryptic digests of cocoa bean protein extracts. The results of this analysis show that &gt;1000 proteins could be identified using a species-specific Theobroma cacao database. The majority of the identified proteins were involved with metabolism and energy. Additionally, a significant number of the identified proteins were linked to protein synthesis and processing. Several proteins were also involved with plant response to stress conditions and defence. Albumin and vicilin storage proteins showed the highest intensity values among all detected proteins, although only seven entries were identified as storage proteins. A comparison of MS/MS data searches carried out against larger non-specific databases confirmed that using a species-specific database can increase the number of identified proteins, and at the same time reduce the number of false positives. The results of this work will be useful in developing tools that can allow the comparison of the proteomic profile of cocoa beans from different genotypes and geographic origins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005586.

### Keywords
Cocoa beans, Plant proteomics, Cocoa bean proteome, Storage proteins, Theobroma cacao

### Affiliations
University of Reading
Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AD, UK

### Submitter
Emanuele Scollo

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Rainer Cramer
Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AD, UK


