### Accession
PXD027586

### Title
Temporal Analysis of Protein Ubiquitylation and Phosphorylation During Parkin-dependent Mitophagy

### Description
Mitophagy, the selective degradation of mitochondria by autophagy, affects defective mitochondria following damage or stress. At the onset of mitophagy, parkin ubiquitylates proteins on mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM). While the role of parkin at the onset of mitophagy is well understood, less is known about its activity during later stages of the process. Here we used HeLa cells expressing catalytically active or inactive parkin to perform temporal analysis of the proteome, ubiquitylome and phosphoproteome during 18 hours after induction of mitophagy by mitochondrial uncoupler CCCP. Abundance profiles of proteins downregulated in parkin-dependent manner revealed a stepwise, “outside-in” directed degradation of mitochondrial subcompartments. While ubiquitylation of MOM proteins was enriched among early parkin-dependent targets, numerous mitochondrial inner membrane, matrix and cytosolic proteins were also found ubiquitinated at later stages of mitophagy. Phosphoproteome analysis revealed a possible cross-talk between phosphorylation and ubiquitylation during mitophagy on several key parkin targets, such as VDAC1/2.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, transfection and treatments HeLa cells expressing stable 3xFlag-Parkin WT or ligase-dead C431A parkin were generated as mentioned in Geisler et al. 2019. Cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Cells were transfected with Fugene with the defined plasmids for at least 24h. Mitochondrial depolarization was achieved by adding 10 µM of CCCP. Upon harvest, cells were washed and stored at -80°C.  Subcellular protein fractionation Mitochondrial proteins were enriched using subcellular protein fractionation kit for cultured cells. Cells were washed once with PBS, scraped in PBS and further pelleted at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C. All steps were performed according to vendor with around 1 × 107 cells per sample.  Sample preparation for MS Analysis Potentially present detergents in protein extracts were removed by 8:1 acetone:methanol precipitation overnight at -20°C. Proteins were pelleted. Pellets were resuspended in denaturation buffer, and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Within each experimental condition the cytoplasmic, membrane and nuclear extract were mixed 1:1:1. Disulfide bonds were reduced, before alkylation. Pre-digestion was performed with Lys-C. For full over-night digestion, trypsin was addded. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA. Peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges. For Ubiquitylome analysis, peptides were eluted, lyophilized and stored at -80°C.   Sample preparation for quantitative phosphorylation and ubiquitylation analysis Peptides of the phospho-/proteome samples were dimethyl-labeled on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges. 1 mg of peptide per sample were labeled as previously described (Boersema, Raijmakers et al. 2009).  Each sample from GlyGly-Proteome was loaded on C18 StageTips and flushed once with HEPES buffer pH 8. Six µl of TMT reagent were added to each sample and pushed through the C18 material to fully cover loaded peptides. After 1h labeled peptides were eluted with 80% ACN and labeling reaction was quenched with 5% Hydroxylamine in 80% ACN.  High pH Reverse phase chromatography An off-line Ultimate 3000 HPLC system was used to fractionate 3 mg per triple dimethyl (phospho-)proteome set under basic conditions, as  described in Batth and Olsen 2016. In total 66 fractions were collected in an 80 min gradient. Fractions were concentrated into 33 pools. After re-constitution in 80% ACN, 10 µg per fraction were concentrated and used for proteome analysis by LC-MS/MS measurement. The Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit was used to fractionate 50 µg of TMT10-plex labeled and mixed proteome. Peptides were eluted stepwise with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 13.3%, 15%, 17.5%, 20% and final 50% ACN/Ammonia. Fractions were acidified to pH 2-3 and desalted on C18 StageTips.   Phosphopeptide enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched using MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC in two consecutive rounds of enrichment. Re-constituted peptides were mixed 1:1 with loading buffer and transferred to the equilibrated beads. The mixture was incubated and the flow-through was applied for a second round of enrichment. Non-specifically bound peptides were removed by washing with 1% TFA in 80% ACN and twice with 0.2% TFA in 10% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted. Both eluates of the same fraction were pooled and desalted on C18 StageTips.   GlyGly-peptide enrichment and on-bead TMT labeling GlyGly-modified peptides were enriched using PTM-Scan ubiquitin remnant motif kit as described in Udeshi et al. 2020. Lyophilized peptides were re-conditioned in IAP buffer and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Supernatants were transferred to the beads and incubated. Un-bound peptides were removed by washing with IAP buffer and once with PBS. For TMT labeling beads were resuspended in HEPES buffer and incubated with 10 µl TMT for 15 min. The labeling reaction was quenched with 0.05% hydroxylamine. Before elution beads were washed twice with IAP and once with PBS. 0.15% TFA was used for elution in two consecutive rounds. TMT-labeled peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-MS analysis All phosphoproteome and TMT labelled samples were analyzed an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, all proteome samples were analysed on an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. An online-coupled Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC was used to separate peptides on a 20 cm analytical column in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin. Gradient was generated by solvent A and solvent B, at 40°C and a 200 nl/min flow rate. Phosphopeptides were eluted using a 90 min, GlyGly peptides in a 130 min gradient. Dimethyl labelled proteome sample were eluted in a 36 min gradient and TMT labelled proteome fractions in a fraction-specific segmented linear 90 min gradient. Eluted peptides were ionized on an ESI source. Both mass spectrometers were operated in a positive ion and data-dependent acquisition mode. All full MS were acquired in a scan range of 300-1750 m/z at resolution 60k. For proteome samples, the 20 most intense multiple-charged ions were selected for HCD fragmentation at resolution 15k. For phosphoproteome and all TMT samples top 7 most intense peptides were picked with maximum IT set to 220 ms for phospho and 110 ms set for TMT samples at MS2 resolution 60k. In addition, all TMT samples were measured with isolation window set to 0.7 m/z and NCE set to 35.  MS data analysis and statistical analysis Raw data files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.14.0). MS/MS data were searched against Uniprot Homo sapiens database (released 11.12.2019, 96,818 entries) containing PARK2 C431A mutant sequence and commonly observed contaminants. All search parameters were kept to default values except for the following. Dimethylation for light (28.03 Da), intermediate (32.06 Da), and heavy (36.08 Da) labels were allowed on lysine residues and peptide N termini for (phospho-)proteome data. Isobaric labeling and quantification on MS2 was enabled on lysine residues and peptide N termini with the TMT lot specific correction factors for ubiquitylome analysis. For all phospho raw files, phosphorylation on STY was defined as variable modification. GlyGly modification on K were configured to not create a new terminus and allowed for all GlyGly samples. In addition, a maximum 4 missed cleavages were allowed for GlyGly samples. Re-quantify and match-between runs, and iBAQ options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Mitophagy, the selective degradation of mitochondria by autophagy, affects defective mitochondria following damage or stress. At the onset of mitophagy, parkin ubiquitylates proteins on the mitochondrial outer membrane. While the role of parkin at the onset of mitophagy is well understood, less is known about its activity during later stages in the process. Here, we used HeLa cells expressing catalytically active or inactive parkin to perform temporal analysis of the proteome, ubiquitylome, and phosphoproteome during 18&#xa0;h after induction of mitophagy by mitochondrial uncoupler carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazine. Abundance profiles of proteins downregulated in parkin-dependent manner revealed a stepwise and "outside-in" directed degradation of mitochondrial subcompartments. While ubiquitylation of mitochondrial outer membrane proteins was enriched among early parkin-dependent targets, numerous mitochondrial inner membrane, matrix, and cytosolic proteins were also found ubiquitylated at later stages of mitophagy. Phosphoproteome analysis revealed a possible crosstalk between phosphorylation and ubiquitylation during mitophagy on key parkin targets, such as voltage-dependent anion channel 2.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Mitochondria, Quantitative proteomics, Mitophagy, Parkin

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Macek
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


