### Accession
PXD017089

### Title
Integrative genomic and proteomic studies of Leishmania donovani strains revealed genetic features associated with drug resistance

### Description
Leishmaniasis is a neglected tropical disease affecting millions of people worldwide. Emerging drug resistance of Leishmania species poses threaten to the effective control and elimination of this neglected tropical disease. Here we conducted whole genome resequencing, proteome profiling, and comparative analyses of a drug-resistant clinical isolate and two drug-susceptible strains of Leishmania donovani to explore genetic features that might contribute to the establishment of drug resistance in this parasite. By comparative genomic analysis, exclusive variations were identified in the drug-resistant isolate of L. donovani, including 86 copy number variations, 271 frameshift mutations in protein-coding genes and two site mutations in non-coding genes. Comparative proteomic analysis indicated significant differences in protein expression between resistant and susceptible strains of L. donovani, including 69 exclusive detected molecules and 84 consistent down-/up-regulations in the former. Integrating the genomic mutations and proteomic specificities linked nine of the genomic mutations (gene duplication, insertion and deletion) to significantly altered protein expression changes in the drug-resistant clinical isolate. These genetic features were inferred to be associated with nucleotide-binding and fatty acid metabolism (biosynthesis and degradation), which might contribute to fitness-gains allowing for the drug-resistant phenotype of L. donovani. This comparative and integrative work provided deep insights into the molecular basis underlying resistance establishment, suggesting new aspects to be investigated for novel intervention strategies against L. donovani and related species.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and LC-MS/MS Proteins were extracted from the same batch of L. donovani strains used for the genomic DNA isolation. In brief, the purified promastigotes were incubated in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) at 4 °C for 3 min, sonicated on ice for three times using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Sonicated samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to remove debris. Supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  For each of the L. donovani strains (HCZ, DD8 and 9044), protein sample was subjected to an in-solution reduction, alkylation and digestion approach. In brief, 300 µg protein aliquots (n = 3) was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 15 min, digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin-to-protein) at 37 °C overnight, and further digested with trypsin (1:100 trypsin-to-protein) at 37 °C for 4 h. The processed samples were dissolved in 1.0% (v/v) formic acid, and then subjected to liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q ExactiveTM Plus Orbitrap  mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant search engine v.1.5.2.8 [37]. In brief, tandem mass spectra were search against the reference proteome of L. donovani (BPK282A1 strain; BioProject: PRJEA61817) to identify and quantify peptides. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme (≤ 4 missing cleavages), mass tolerances for precursor ions were set as 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and mass tolerance for fragment ions as 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Gene Ontology (GO), domain architecture, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and subcellular localisation annotations were performed for the identified proteins based on UniProt-GOA database, InterPro, KEGG database and Wolfpsort databases using an internal R script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genomic; proteomic; leishmania donovani; drug resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Pathogenic Biology, West China School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
West China School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Jiao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jiao Li
Department of Pathogenic Biology, West China School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


