### Accession
PXD005699

### Title
Application of carbohydrate arrays coupled with mass spectrometry to detect activity of plant-polysaccharide degradative enzymes from the fungus Aspergillus niger

### Description
Renewables-based biotechnology depends on enzymes to degrade plant lignocellulose to simple sugars that are converted to fuels or high-value products. Identification and characterization of such lignocellulose degradative enzymes could be fast-tracked by availability of an enzyme activity measurement method that is fast, label-free, uses minimal resources and allows direct identification of generated products.    We developed such a method by applying carbohydrate arrays coupled with MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry to identify reaction products of carbohydrate active enzymes (CAZymes) of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus niger. We describe the production and characterization of plant polysaccharide-derived oligosaccharides and their attachment to hydrophobic self-assembling monolayers on a gold target. We verify effectiveness of this array for detecting exo- and endo-acting glycoside hydrolase activity using commercial enzymes, and demonstrate how this platform is suitable for detection of enzyme activity in relevant biological samples, the culture filtrate of A. niger grown on wheat straw.   In conclusion, this versatile method is broadly applicable in screening and characterisation of activity of CAZymes, such as fungal enzymes for plant lignocellulose degradation with relevance to biotechnological applications as biofuel production, the food and animal feed industry.

### Sample Protocol
fungus Aspergillus niger strain AB4.119 was grown on potato dextrose agar slopes at 28°C until spores were produced. All AB4.1 cultures were supplemented with 10 mM uridine. Spores were harvested with 0.1 % (v/v) Tween 20 and liquid cultures of 100 ml aspergillus minimal medium (AMM)9 with 1 % glucose were inoculated with 106 spores ml-1 and incubated at 28°C, 150 RPM for 48 h. Mycelium was harvested using Miracloth, washed with AMM without carbon source, and 1.5 g (wet weight) was transferred to cultures of 100 ml AMM with 1 % (w/v) ball milled wheat straw and incubated for 24 h at 28°C, 150 rpm.Mycelium and culture filtrate were separated by filtration through Miracloth. proteins were precipitated by adding 5 ml trichloroacetic acid to 20 ml culture filtrate, incubating for 1 h at 4°C and spinning at 16060 g for 10 min. Pellets were washed twice with 200 µl acetone, loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and electrophoresis performed until the dye front had moved approximately 1 cm into the separating gel. Each gel lane was then cut into a single slice, on which in-gel tryptic digestion was performed using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd). Peptides were analysed generally as described by reference with the following exceptions: an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific) was used for injection.  Peptides were resolved with a 7 segment gradient ( 1-6 % solvent B over 1 min, 6-15 % B over 58 min, 15-32 % B over 58 min, 32-40 % B over 5 min, 40-90 % B over 1 min, held at 90 % B for 6 min and then reduced to 1 % B over 1 min), Tandem mass spectra were acquired in the mass range m/z 300 to 2000, followed  by MS/MS for the top twenty multiply charged ions.   MS as in Matia-Gonzalez, A. M., Laing, E. E., Gerber, A. P. Conserved mRNA-binding proteomes in eukaryotic organisms. Nat Struct Mol Biol 22, 1027-1033 (2015).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific), searched against the A. niger SwissProt database (downloaded 23-03-16) using the SEQUEST algorithm, with a 10 ppm peptide precursor tolerance and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage, and peptide data was filtered to meet a false discovery rate of 1 % while retaining only proteins identified by ≥ 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Renewables-based biotechnology depends on enzymes to degrade plant lignocellulose to simple sugars that are converted to fuels or high-value products. Identification and characterization of such lignocellulose degradative enzymes could be fast-tracked by availability of an enzyme activity measurement method that is fast, label-free, uses minimal resources and allows direct identification of generated products. We developed such a method by applying carbohydrate arrays coupled with MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry to identify reaction products of carbohydrate active enzymes (CAZymes) of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus niger. We describe the production and characterization of plant polysaccharide-derived oligosaccharides and their attachment to hydrophobic self-assembling monolayers on a gold target. We verify effectiveness of this array for detecting exo- and endo-acting glycoside hydrolase activity using commercial enzymes, and demonstrate how this platform is suitable for detection of enzyme activity in relevant biological samples, the culture filtrate of A. niger grown on wheat straw. In conclusion, this versatile method is broadly applicable in screening and characterisation of activity of CAZymes, such as fungal enzymes for plant lignocellulose degradation with relevance to biotechnological applications as biofuel production, the food and animal feed industry.

### Keywords
Lignocellulose, Plant-polysaccharide degrading enzymes, Aspergillus niger, Cazymes

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
University of Nottingham, School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Jolanda van Munster

### Lab Head
Dr David Archer
University of Nottingham, School of Life Sciences


