### Accession
PXD013814

### Title
Essential role of GEXP15, a specific Protein Phosphatase type 1 partner in Plasmodium berghei in asexual erythrocytic proliferation and transmission

### Description
In the absence of an effective vaccine and the emerging resistance to artemisinin combination therapy, malaria is still a significant threat to human health. Increasing our understanding of the specific mechanisms of the biology of Plasmodium is essential to propose new strategies to control this infection. Here, we demonstrated that GEXP15, a specific protein in Plasmodium, was able to interact with the PP1 and regulate its phosphatase activity. We showed that both proteins are implicated in common protein complexes involved in the mRNA splicing and proteasome pathways. We reported that the deletion of GEXP15 leads to a loss of parasite virulence during asexual stages and a total abolishment of the capacity of deficient parasites to develop into oocysts. We also found that this deletion affects both protein phosphorylation status and significantly decreases the expression of essential proteins in schizont and gametocyte stages. This study characterizes for the first time a novel molecular pathway through the control of PP1 by an essential and specific Plasmodium regulator, which may contribute to the discovery of new therapeutic targets to control malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry. P. berghei schizonts or gametocytes were purified as described above and treated with 0.15% saponin to avoid host contamination. Soluble proteins were extracted in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were quantified with the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies). 82 μg of proteins for the schizonts and 100 μg of proteins for the gametocytes were first reduced with 0.1 M DTT final concentration at 60°C for 1h. MS sample preparation was performed using a FASP method (filter aided sample preparation) according to Lipecka et al [76]. We set aside around 10 µg of the digested proteins for the analysis of total proteomes, while the remaining samples were used for phosphopeptide enrichments. The expression of PbGSK3 was examined by western blot on purified gametocyte extracts and probed with anti-PfGSK3 (1:1000 dilution, Covalab, pab0250) followed by HRP-labeled anti-rabbit (1:20000 dilution). Relative quantification of PbGSK3 in parental and Δgexp15 gametocytes was normalized using PbActin-1.  Phosphopeptide enrichment by titanium dioxide (TiO2). Phosphopeptide enrichments were carried out using Titansphere TiO2 Spin tips (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere PHOS-TiO, GL Sciences Inc) on the digested proteins for each biological replicate. Briefly, the TiO2 Spin tips were conditioned with 20 µL of solution A (80% acetonitrile, 0,4% TFA), centrifuged at 3,000 g for 2 min and equilibrated with 20 µL of solution B (75% acetonitrile, 0,3% TFA, 25% lactic acid) followed by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 2 min. Peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of solution A, mixed with 100 µL of solution B and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 10 min. Sample was applied back to the TiO2 Spin tips twice more in order to increase the adsorption of the phosphopeptides to the TiO2. Spin tips were washed sequentially with 20µL of solution B and twice with 20µL of solution A. Phosphopeptides were eluted by the sequential addition of 50 µL of 5% NH4OH and 50 µL of 5% pyrrolidine. Centrifugation was carried out at 1,000 g for 5 min. Phosphopeptides were purified using GC Spin tips (GL-Tip, Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc). Briefly, the GC Spin tips were conditioned according to manufacturer’s instructions, then eluted phosphopeptides from the TiO2 Spin tips were added to the GC Spin tips and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min. GC Spin tips were washed with 20 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 70 µL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA (1,000 g for 5 min) and vacuum dried. nanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification. Peptides for the analysis of total proteomes were resuspended in 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water, 10% acetonitrile and 500 ng of each sample was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides were resuspended in 42 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water and 5 µL of each sample was injected into the mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Samples were eluted from the column with the following gradient: 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (6 min). At 127 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 min before the next injection. One blank was run between biological replicates to prevent sample carryover. Samples eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Peptides and phosphopeptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the database of Mus musculus from swissprot 07/2017 and Plasmodium berghei ANKA from PlasmoDB (v37) [20]. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Strict specificity for trypsin/P cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. For the analysis of MS files issuing from of TiO2 enrichment, the variable modification of phosphorylation on S, T and Y were also added. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously [77]. Match between runs was allowed. The reverse hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm [77,78] using LFQ intensities and phosphopeptides according to intensity. Protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including volcano plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) freely available at Perseus [79] while the heatmaps were obtained with Heatmapper [80]. For statistical comparison we set two groups: P. berghei parental and Δgexp15. Each group contained four and three biological replicates for schizonts and gametocytes respectively and each sample was run in technical triplicates. For the total proteomes, we analyzed the proteingroups.txt file and the Phospho(STY).txt fil for the phosphoproteomes. Protein LFQ and phosphopeptides intensities were transformed in log2 and the site table was expanded to analyze all phosphosites separately. Proteins derived from mouse were filtered out from the analysis and the P. berghei protein and phosphosite distributions were normalized using width adjustment. We further filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 4 valid values in the parental and/or the Δgexp15 schizonts and 3 valid values for gametocytes. Data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 2.5 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed a t-test, FDR<0.05 (250 randomizations), S0=0.1 for the proteomes and FDR<0.01 (250 randomizations), S0=0.1 for the phosphoproteomes. Hierarchical clustering of proteins and phosphosites that survived the tests was performed in Perseus on logarithmized LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
The essential and distinct functions of Protein Phosphatase type 1 (PP1) catalytic subunit in eukaryotes are exclusively achieved through its interaction with a myriad of regulatory partners. In this work, we report the molecular and functional characterization of Gametocyte EXported Protein 15 (GEXP15), a Plasmodium specific protein, as a regulator of PP1. In vitro interaction studies demonstrated that GEXP15 physically interacts with PP1 through the RVxF binding motif in P. berghei. Functional assays showed that GEXP15 was able to increase PP1 activity and the mutation of the RVxF motif completely abolished this regulation. Immunoprecipitation assays of tagged GEXP15 or PP1 in P. berghei followed by immunoblot or mass spectrometry analyses confirmed their interaction and showed that they are present both in schizont and gametocyte stages in shared protein complexes involved in the spliceosome and proteasome pathways and known to play essential role in parasite development. Phenotypic analysis of viable GEXP15 deficient P. berghei blood parasites showed that they were unable to develop lethal infection in BALB/c mice or to establish experimental cerebral malaria in C57BL/6 mice. Further, although deficient parasites produced gametocytes they did not produce any oocysts/sporozoites indicating a high fitness cost in the mosquito. Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of GEXP15 deficient schizonts revealed a profound defect with a significant decrease in the abundance and an impact on phosphorylation status of proteins involved in regulation of gene expression or invasion. Moreover, depletion of GEXP15 seemed to impact mainly the abundance of some specific proteins of female gametocytes. Our study provides the first insight into the contribution of a PP1 regulator to Plasmodium virulence and suggests that GEXP15 affects both the asexual and sexual life cycle.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Phosphoproteomics, Ppp1

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr GUERRERA Ida Chiara
Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France.


