### Accession
PXD021769

### Title
Extracellular Vesicles released by Leishmania donovani infected mouse macrophages

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by Leishmania donovani infected RAW264.7 murine macrophages were evaluated for their proteomic composition and potential function in pathogenesis. EVs were collected after 72 hours infection and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using both in gel and in solution digestion approaches to identify protein composition of both host and parasite origin.

### Sample Protocol
Media supernatant fluid was collected from cultures at 72 hours post-infection and pooled from 10 plates. The supernatant fluid was then centrifuged at 3,000xg for 10 mins, followed by 30 mins at 16,000xg to remove parasites and cellular debris. The supernatant was passed through a 0.22 µm Polyethersulfone (PES) syringe filter. The filtrate was then centrifuged for 3 hours at 100,000xg to pellet extracellular vesicles. The supernatant fluid was removed, and the pelleted vesicles were washed with 1X PBS and centrifuged for 18 hours at 100,000xg. Pelleted vesicles were resuspended in 100µL 1X PBS. Vesicles were then quantified using nanoparticle tracking analysis on the Nanosight NS300 instrument. For in gel digestion approach, approximately 1x10^10 particles from each sample were resolved on a 4-20% gradient gel, then visualized by SimplyBlue SafeStain. Each lane was cut into 8 slices of approximately the same size, then reduced, alkylated, and digested with 400 ng of trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid (FA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer/50% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were dried using a speed-vac and stored at -20°C. For LC-MS analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 3% ACN/0.1% FA. For in solution digestion approach, 20 µg of EVs were solubilized using 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant then precipitated using methanol/chloroform as described previously. Samples were then resuspended with 6M urea buffer before being reduced and alkylated. The samples were then diluted with MilliQ water to reduce the urea concentration and digested with 400 ng of trypsin overnight at 37˚C. The following day, the digestion was quenched using concentrated acetic acid. The peptides were then desalted using two ziptip Pipette tips per sample following manufacturer's suggested protocol, dried using a speed-vac, and stored at -70°C prior to analysis.  Peptides generated from both in-gel and in-solution digestion were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, ThermoFisher) using an Agilent 1260 Infinity capillary pump and auto sampler (Agilent Technologies). The autosampler was maintained at 4°C, the capillary pump flow rate was set to 1.5 µL/min, and an isocratic solvent system consisting of 3% ACN/0.1% FA. After 10 minutes, the trap column valve was switched to be in-line with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (50 µm x 25 cm, ThermoFisher), using an Agilent 1290 Infinity II column compartment, kept at 42°C. Peptides were resolved on the analytical column using an Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC with nanoflow passive split flow adapter, maintaining 200 µL/min flow pre-split, resulting in ~300 nL/min flow on the analytical column at the beginning of the run. A two solvent system consisting of (A) water/0.1% FA and (B) ACN/0.1% FA was used, with a gradient as follows: 7% B at 0 min, ramping to 35% B at 15 min, then ramping to 70% B at 16, held at 70% B until 18 min, before returning to 7% at 19 min and holding until the end of the run at 30 min, with a post run equilibration of 10 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by an Agilent 6550 QToF mass spectrometer equipped with a G1992A nanoESI source (Agilent Technologies). The source parameters were as follows: drying gas temperature was set to 200°C, flow of 11 L/min, a capillary voltage of 1200 V, and fragmentor voltage of 360 V was used. Data was acquired in positive ion mode using data dependent acquisition, with an MS scan range of 290 to 1700 m/z at 8 spectra/s, MS/MS scan range of 50-1700 m/z at 3 spectra/s, and an isolation width set to narrow (~1.3 m/z). Maximum precursors per cycle was set to 10, with dynamic exclusion enabled after 2 spectra, and release time set to 0.5 min. Peptides were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) using N2 gas and a variable collision energy depending on the precursor charge and m/z. Reference mass correction in real time was enabled, with lock masses of 299 and 1221 m/z used.

### Data Protocol
Data acquired for each analyzed sample was converted to Mascot Generic Format (.MGF) using the Agilent Data Reprocessor (Agilent Technologies). Database searching of .MGF files was done using three search engines; X! Tandem (Bjornson et al, 2008) and OMSSA (Geer et al, 2004) via SearchGUI (Barsnes and Vaudel, 2018) v3.3.16 (Compomics), and Mascot Daemon v2.2.2 (Matrix Science). Data was searched against a concatenated decoy FASTA file containing mouse and Leishmania donovani strain BPK282A1 proteins downloaded from Uniprot. Search results from all three engines were combined and analyzed using Scaffold 4 (v4.8.1, Proteome Software Inc.). Thresholds of 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR) protein, 1% FDR peptide, and 2 peptides minimum were set for protein identification. In Scaffold, fold change was calculated using total spectra with ceEVs as the reference category. The Fisher exact test was then used to calculate statistical significance, and a p-value of <0.05 indicated proteins with statistically significant changes in abundance. The Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Exosome, Leishmania donovani, Leishmaniasis, Extracellular vesicle, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, USA

### Submitter
Anna Gioseffi

### Lab Head
Dr Peter E Kima
Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, USA


