### Accession
PXD022191

### Title
Spectral library for SARS-COVID proteome and immunopeptidome

### Description
This project will provide spectra information for COVID-19 proteome and immunopeptidome

### Sample Protocol
A peptide library (15 amino acid length with 9 amino acid overlapping) has been synthesized from the entire SARS-Covid-19 proteome (Mimotopes, Australia). In total 1809 peptides have been synthesized. Peptide were dissolved in 100 ul of 5% DMSO (supplementary figure).  Each sample were digested with four enzyme individually. For trypsin, chymotrypsin and elastase digesting, 10 ul of each sample were mixed with 5l of 1M TRIS and pH adjusted at ~8. For each enzyme 4ug of enzyme were added to each sample. Tryptic digest were incubated for 60 min and elastase and chymotrypsin digest were incubated for 20 min at 37°C. After digestion, 4 ul of formic acid were added for stopping digestion.  For pepsin digestion, 1ul of 50% formic acid were added to each sample (pH=3). 50u of pepsin were added to each sample for 5 minutes at room temperature. All sample were centrifuged for 2min at 13000 rpm and peptide contacting supernatant were taken for the next step. C18 clean-up performed by using Omix-mini-bed (Agilent technologies). Vacuum concentrated peptide samples were reconstituted to 12 mL with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Five samples were generated from each pool (one without digestion and 4 after digestion). Each sample were run two times on two different instruments.  We used a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS Autosampler. The samples were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trap Column (100 mm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 mm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC Analytical Column (75 mm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 mm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN/0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nL/minute for 158 minutes and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Six microliters of each sample fraction were loaded onto the trap column at a flow rate of 15 mL/minute. Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was set to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following settings: all MS spectra (MS1) profiles were recorded from full ion scan mode 375 to 1,800 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with AGC target of 400,000 and dynamic exclusion of 15 seconds. The top 12 precursor ions were selected using top speed mode at a cycle time of 2 seconds. For tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS), a decision tree was made that helped in selecting peptides of charge state 1 and 2 to 6 separately. For single charged analytes, only ions falling within the range of m/z 800 to 1,800 were selected. For þ2 to þ6 charge states, no such parameter was set. The c-trap was loaded with a target of 200,000 ions with an accumulation time of 120 milliseconds and isolation width of 1.2 amu. Normalized collision energy was set to 32 (high energy collisional dissociation) and fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution. Peptides also was carried out using a SCIEX TripleTOF® 6600 equipped with an on-line Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 415 (SCIEX, Canada). 10 μL of each sample was directly loaded onto a trap column (ChromXP C18, 3 μm 120 Å, 350 μm × 0.5 mm [SCIEX]) maintained at an isocratic flow of buffer A (2 % v/v acetonitrile in water supplemented with 0.1 % v/v formic acid) at 5 μL/min for 10 min and then separated using an analytical column (ChromXP C18, 3 μm 120 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm [SCIEX]) by increasing linear concentrations of buffer B (0.1 % v/v formic acid, 80 % v/v acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 75 min. Up to 20 MS/MS spectra were acquired per cycle using an IDA strategy with accumulation times of 200 ms and 150 ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The MS1 scan range was set to 300-1800 m/z and MS2 set to 80-2000 m/z. To prevent multiple sequencing of the same peptide, MS1 masses were excluded for sequencing after two occurrences for 30 seconds. MS/MS data were searched against the SARS-COVID proteome by PEAKS Studio X plus (Bioinformatics Solutions) using the sapiens Uniprot database (XXX entries, dated XXX). MS data files were imported into PEAKS Studio subjected to default data refinement. For 6600 generated MS data, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 15 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.1 Da. For Fusion MS data, the parameters were set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For all searches enzyme specificity was turned off. Oxidation of Methionine, deamidation of Asn or Gln, and cystenialtion of cysteine were included as variable modifications in the database peptide searches. A –logp> 15 threshold was applied to allow selection of high-confidence peptides. Spectral library exported from PEAKS X plus and spectra which had at least 30% predicted b and y ions were kept in the library.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 has caused a significant ongoing pandemic worldwide. A number of studies have examined the T cell mediated immune responses against SARS-CoV-2, identifying potential T cell epitopes derived from the SARS-CoV-2 proteome. Such studies will aid in identifying targets for vaccination and immune monitoring. In this study, we applied tandem mass spectrometry and proteomic techniques to a library of &#x223c;40,000 synthetic peptides, in order to generate a large dataset of SARS-CoV-2 derived peptide MS/MS spectra. On this basis, we built an online knowledgebase, termed virusMS (https://virusms.erc.monash.edu/), to document, annotate and analyse these synthetic peptides and their spectral information. VirusMS incorporates a user-friendly interface to facilitate searching, browsing and downloading the database content. Detailed annotations of the peptides, including experimental information, peptide modifications, predicted peptide-HLA (human leukocyte antigen) binding affinities, and peptide MS/MS spectral data, are provided in virusMS.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Sars-covid, Hla, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


