### Accession
PXD021035

### Title
Ketohexokinase-A acts as a nuclear protein kinase that mediates fructose-induced metastasis in breast cancer

### Description
Harmful effects of high fructose intake on health have been widely reported in epidemiological and laboratory studies. Although it has been reported that fructose promotes cancer development and progression, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms. Here, we found that fructose triggers breast cancer metastasis through the ketohexokinase-A signaling pathway. Molecular experiments showed that ketohexokinase-A, rather than ketohexokinase-C, is necessary and sufficient for fructose-induced cell invasion. An orthotopic xenograft experiment revealed that ketohexokinase16 A-overexpressing breast cancer is highly metastatic in fructose-fed mice. Mechanistically, ketohexokinase-A moves from the cytoplasm to the nucleus during fructose stimulation, which is mediated by the nuclear importers LRRC59 and KPNB1. In the nucleus, ketohexokinase-A phosphorylates YWHAH at Ser25 and, in turn, YWHAH recruits SLUG to the CDH1 promoter, 20 which weakens cell adhesion and triggers cell migration. This study provides a new insight into the effect of nutrition on breast cancer metastasis. High intake of fructose should be restricted in cancer patients to reduce the risk of metastasis. From a therapeutic perspective, the ketohexokinase-A signaling pathway could be a potential target to prevent cancer metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with empty vector, His-KHK-A, or His-KHK-C, incubated with 5 mM fructose for 8 hr. To identify protein interactions, cell lysates were incubated with nickel-NTA beads at 4°C for 4 hr. The bound proteins were eluted by 250 mM imidazole. Protein concentration of the elute was measured using the BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockfold, IL). After the Filter Aid Sample Preparation procedure was performed using a 30K Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter (Millipore, UK), peptides were separated on Nanoflow Easy-nLC1000 system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark), which was equipped with a packing column (100 Å, 1.8-um particle, 75 m x 50 cm). A gradient that ranged from 5 to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was run at a fixed flow rate of 300 nL/min for 90 min. Ionized peptides were analyzed on a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). MS1 spectra were measured in DDA mode at a resolution of 70,000 with an m/z scan range of 300 to 1800. For MS2 spectra, peptides were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30 and a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files for the label-free quantification were processed using the Maxquant (ver.1.5.5.1), to match the spectra against the uniprotKB FASTA database (74,540 entries, version from June 2014). MS/MS peaks searches were performed with the following parameters: peptide length of at least six amino acids, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, variable methionine oxidation, and variable N-terminal acetylation. The tolerance was set to the 6 ppm, and 20 ppm for main search and first search, respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied to all proteins and peptide searches.

### Publication Abstract
Harmful effects of high fructose intake on health have been widely reported. Although fructose is known to promote cancer, little is known about the underlying mechanisms. Here, we found that fructose triggers breast cancer metastasis through the ketohexokinase-A signaling pathway. Molecular experiments showed that ketohexokinase-A, rather than ketohexokinase-C, is necessary and sufficient for fructose-induced cell invasion. Ketohexokinase-A-overexpressing breast cancer was found to be highly metastatic in fructose-fed mice. Mechanistically, cytoplasmic ketohexokinase-A enters into the nucleus during fructose stimulation, which is mediated by LRRC59 and KPNB1. In the nucleus, ketohexokinase-A phosphorylates YWHAH at Ser25 and the YWHAH recruits SLUG to the CDH1 promoter, which triggers cell migration. This study provides the effect of nutrition on breast cancer metastasis. High intake of fructose should be restricted in cancer patients to reduce the risk of metastasis. From a therapeutic perspective, the ketohexokinase-A signaling pathway could be a potential target to prevent cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Breast cancer metastasis; fructose; ketohexokinase-a; nuclear translocation; serine kinase

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Jongmin Woo
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


