### Accession
PXD019019

### Title
NsiR6/NblD is a small protein factor involved in the degradation of phycobilisomes under N-limiting conditions

### Description
Small proteins are an under investigated class of gene products in all domains of life. Here we describe the role of NsiR6/NblD, a cysteine-rich 66 amino acid small protein in the acclimation response of cyanobacteria to nitrogen starvation. Phycobilisomes, the macromolecular pigment-protein complexes for photosynthetic light harvesting, are rapidly degraded upon nitrogen depletion. Deletion of nblD in Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 prevents this degradation, indicated by the non-bleaching (nbl) phenotype. Complementation by a plasmid-localized gene copy fully restored the phenotype of the wild type, while overexpression of NblD under nitrogen-replete conditions did not lead to any phenotypical effect, different from the unrelated proteolysis adaptors NblA1 and NblA2, which can trigger phycobilisome degradation ectopically. However, transcriptome analysis revealed that nitrogen starvation induced nblA1/2 transcription in the ΔnblD strain, which excluded the possibility that the nbl phenotype was due to a possible NblD function as transcriptional co-regulator. In contrast, fractionation experiments indicated the presence of NblD in the phycobilisome fraction. Pull-down experiments with NblD fused to a triple FLAG tag identified the α and β phycocyanin subunits as the only two co-purifying proteins. Homologs of NblD exist in all cyanobacteria that use phycobilisomes but not in the genera Prochlorococcus and Acaryochloris which use alternative light-harvesting mechanisms. These data suggest that NblD plays a crucial role in the coordinated dismantling of phycobilisomes when nitrogen becomes limiting.

### Sample Protocol
Cells for the preparation of total protein samples were collected by centrifugation (3,200 x g, 10 min, RT), washing in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor (cOmplete, Roche) and resuspension in the same buffer. For cell lysis, mechanical disruption using a prechilled Precellys homogenizer (Bertin technologies) was used. To remove cell debris and glass beads, the culture was centrifuged  (1000 x g, 5 min, 4°C) and the supernatant kept for further analysis. Western Blots targeting FLAG-tagged proteins were performed using FLAG® M2 monoclonal antibody (Sigma) as described (Baumgartner et al., 2016).  For the preparation of FLAG-tagged NblD and interacting proteins from total cell lysates and processing of mock samples, ANTI-FLAG M2 affinity agarose gel (Sigma) was used. The expression of nblD was induced in exponentially growing cultures (800 mL at OD 0.8) by removing nitrogen. After another 3 hours of cultivation, cells were harvested by centrifugation (3750 x g, 4°C, 10 min). Cell lysates were obtained like stated above (except using FLAG buffer instead of PBS) and then incubated for 45 min in the presence of 2% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside to solubilize membrane proteins in darkness at 4°C. After loading the lysate to the packed volume of 100 µL FLAG agarose on gravity column (Bio-Rad) and reloading flow through twice, bound proteins were washed 3 times with FLAG buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7, 5mM MgCl2, 25 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Tween-20) and twice with FLAG buffer lacking glycerol and Tween-20. For shown MS-data, elution was performed using 0.2% RapiGest (Waters) in 0.1 M HEPES pH 8 (MS-grade) and heating for 10 min to 95°C.  The RapiGest concentration was decreased to 0.1% by adding 0.1 M HEPES pH 8. Proteins were reduced by incubating in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated using 15 mM iodacetamide (IAM) in the dark, each step was performed for 20 min at 37°C. Tryptic digestion was performed in two steps, first 1 µg of trypsin for 2 h at 50°C and second another 1 µg overnight at 37°C, both shaking at 600 rpm. Peptides were desalted by acidification of the sample to 0.3% TFA final concentration and applying HyperSep C18 tips (ThermoScientific). Afterwards, peptide concentration was measured using the BCA assay (ThermoScientific). For mass spectrometry analysis, 4 µg500 ng of peptide per sample was analyzed with an EASY-nLC™ 1000 UHPLC system (ThermoScientific) coupled to an Q-Exactive plus™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (ThermoScientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 1.6.0.16) and Perseus (Version 1.6.1.3) using cyanobase (Fujisawa et al., 2017) data for Synechocystis (Version 2018/08/01) including the small proteins described in (Baumgartner et al.,( 2016). Intensities were compared using LFQ (label-free quantification) values. In summary, contaminants, reverse sequences and proteins only identified by site were removed from the matrix and LFQ intensities were log2-transformed.Prior to t-test and visualization using volcano plot, missing values were replaced by imputation with normal distribution for each column separately (default settings). For hierarchical clustering (default parameters), only proteins with three valid values in at least one declared group (NblD_3xFLAG and ∆nblD) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small proteins, Cyanobacteria, Co-ip ms, Nsir6/nbld

### Affiliations
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center – University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center – University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany


