### Accession
PXD000790

### Title
PIA - Mouse Benchmark Dataset -  PIA - An intuitive protein inference engine with a web-based user interface

### Description
This Dataset is no actual new study but the mouse benchmark dataset used in the PIA manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
For the creation of the mouse dataset cultured cells of a murine myoblast cell line were harvested and centrifuged for 5 min at 800 x g. The cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (3 mM Tris-HCl, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8.5), homogenized and lysed via sonification (6 times for 10 sec, on ice). After centrifugation (15 min, 16,000 x g) the supernatant was collected and protein content was determined by Bradford protein assay. For the following tryptic in-solution digestion 20 µg of sample was diluted in 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (pH 7.8) to a final volume of 100 µl, reduced by adding DTT and alkylated with iodacetamide as described previously in 37. After digestion the peptide concentration was determined by aminoacid analysis and 200 ng of the peptide sample was subsequently analyzed by a label-free mass spectrometry approach using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system directly coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany).

### Data Protocol
For spectrum identification an mzML file was created from a Thermo RAW file using the msConvertGUI of ProteoWizard38 and further converted into an MGF file by OpenMS. This MGF was searched against a decoy database of the Mouse Complete Proteome Set downloaded from UniProtKB on 26.11.2014 (44,467 entries). A shuffled decoy database was created with the DecoyDatabaseBuilder39. The search engines used a parent mass tolerance of 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.4 Da and allowed one missed cleavage. Oxidation of M, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, Glu to pyro-Glu and Gln to pyro-Glu were used as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of C as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Protein inference connects the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) obtained from database search engines back to proteins, which are typically at the heart of most proteomics studies. Different search engines yield different PSMs and thus different protein lists. Analysis of results from one or multiple search engines is often hampered by different data exchange formats and lack of convenient and intuitive user interfaces. We present PIA, a flexible software suite for combining PSMs from different search engine runs and turning these into consistent results. PIA can be integrated into proteomics data analysis workflows in several ways. A user-friendly graphical user interface can be run either locally or (e.g., for larger core facilities) from a central server. For automated data processing, stand-alone tools are available. PIA implements several established protein inference algorithms and can combine results from different search engines seamlessly. On several benchmark data sets, we show that PIA can identify a larger number of proteins at the same protein FDR when compared to that using inference based on a single search engine. PIA supports the majority of established search engines and data in the mzIdentML standard format. It is implemented in Java and freely available at https://github.com/mpc-bioinformatics/pia.

### Keywords
['Mouse', 'Benchmark']

### Affiliations
['Ruhr-Universität Bochum,\r\nMedical Faculty,\r\nMedizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics', 'Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center']

### Submitter
['Julian Uszkoreit']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center', 'email': 'katrin.marcus@rub.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Katrin Marcus', 'id': '16820100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Mus musculus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['Cell culture']
characteristics[cell type]: ['NT=C2C12;AC=EFO:0001098']
characteristics[disease]: ['unavailable']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap;AC=MS:1000449']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation; MT=variable; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:35; TA=M; MM=15.994915']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Acetyl; MT=variable; PP=Protein N-Term; AC=Unimod:1; TA=.; MM=42.010567']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=  Gln->pyro-Glu;  MT=variable; PP=Protein N-Term; AC=Unimod:28; TA=.; MM=-17.0305']
comment[modification parameters].3: ['NT=  Carbamidomethyl;  MT=variable; PP=Protein C-Term; AC=Unimod:4; TA=.; MM=57.0513']
comment[modification parameters].4: ['NT=  Glu->pyro-Glu  MT=variable; PP=Protein N-Term; AC=Unimod:27; TA=.; MM=  -18.0153']
comment[modification parameters].5: ['NT=    Dehydration  MT=variable; PP=Protein C-Term; AC=Unimod:23; TA=.; MM=  -18.0153']

