### Accession
PXD007698

### Title
Proteomic analysis of IL33-proximal proteins in squamous cell carcinoma cells

### Description
Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is required for the expression of pro-inflammatory genes that inhibit anti-tumour immunity. Here, we show a novel and crucial role for the dual-function cytokine IL33 in FAK-dependent immune evasion. Specifically, nuclear FAK is required for the expression of IL33, the chemokine Ccl5 and the soluble form of the IL33 receptor, sST2, which are required for evasion of CD8+ T-cell-mediated anti-tumour immunity. Mechanistically, nuclear IL33 associates with FAK and a network of chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators, including Taf9, WDR82 and BRD4, while sST2 likely negates effects of IL33 secreted into the tumour microenvironment by infiltrating host immune cells. Finally, protein interaction network analysis implies that nuclear FAK–IL33 complexes impact on transcription factors that regulate NFkB and chemokines like Ccl5 downstream. Our data therefore provide new mechanistic insight into how FAK controls the tumour immune environment via a FAK–IL33/sST2 pathway and demonstrate a novel role for nuclear IL33 downstream of FAK as a component of transcription regulatory complexes that critically modulate anti-tumour immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Squamous cell carcinoma FAK-wt IL33-CRISPR cells expressing IL33-BirA or empty vector-BirA were incubated with 50 μM biotin in complete cell culture medium at 37°C for 24 h, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer. Cell lysates were sonicated using a Bioruptor (30-s pulses with 30-s intervals over 5 min) and clarified by centrifugation (16,000g for 15 min at 4°C). Protein concentration was measured by micro-BCA protein assay, and 1 mg total cell lysate was incubated with 50 μl streptavidin-C1 Dynabeads overnight at 4°C with agitation. Beads were washed thrice with ice-cold RIPA buffer and twice with ice-cold PBS using a magnetic particle separator. Captured proteins (from experiments performed in biological triplicate) were subjected to on-bead proteolytic digestion, followed by desalting and liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Label-free analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). Peptide lists were searched against the mouse UniProtKB database and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in some LC runs were matched and transferred between runs.  Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, determined by searching a reversed database. Proteins matching to the reversed database were omitted.

### Publication Abstract
Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) mediates tumor cell-intrinsic behaviors that promote tumor growth and metastasis. We previously showed that FAK also induces the expression of inflammatory genes that inhibit antitumor immunity in the microenvironment. We identified a crucial, previously unknown role for the dual-function cytokine interleukin-33 (IL-33) in FAK-dependent immune evasion. In murine squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells, specifically nuclear FAK enhanced the expression of the genes encoding IL-33, the chemokine CCL5, and the soluble, secreted form of the IL-33 receptor, called soluble ST2 (sST2). The abundance of IL-33 and CCL5 was increased in FAK-positive SCC cells but not in normal keratinocytes. IL-33 associated with FAK in the nucleus, and the FAK-IL-33 complex interacted with a network of chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators, including TAF9, WDR82, and BRD4, which promote the activity of nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) and its induction of genes encoding chemokines, including CCL5. We did not detect secretion of IL-33 from FAK-positive SCC cells; thus, we propose that the increased production and secretion of sST2 likely sequesters IL-33 secreted by other cell types within the tumor environment, thus blocking its stimulatory effects on infiltrating host immune cells. Depleting FAK, IL-33, or sST2 from SCC cells before implantation induced tumor regression in syngeneic mice, except when CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells were co-depleted. Our data provide mechanistic insight into how FAK controls the tumor immune environment, namely, through a transcriptional regulatory network mediated by nuclear IL-33. Targeting this axis may boost antitumor immunity in patients.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Bioid, St2, Fak, Il33, Il1rl1, Scc, Chromatin, Transcription, Proteomics, Tumour growth

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret C Frame
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom


