### Accession
PXD021299

### Title
The temperature-regulation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cmaX-cfrX-cmpX operon reveals an intriguing molecular network involving the sigma factors AlgU and SigX

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a highly adaptable Gram-negative opportunistic pathogen, notablydue to its large number of transcription regulators. The extracytoplasmic sigma factor (ECF sigma AlgU, responsible for alginate biosynthesis, is also involved in responses to cell wall stress and heat shock via the RpoH alternative sigma factor. The SigX ECF sigma emerged as a major regulator involved in the envelope stress response via membrane remodelling, virulence and biofilm formation. However, their functional interactions to coordinate the envelope homeostasis in response to environmental variations remain to be determined. The regulation of the putative cmaX-cfrX-cmpX operon located directly upstream sigX was investigated by applying sudden temperature shifts from 37°C. We identified a SigX- and an AlgU- dependent promoter region upstream of cfrX and cmaX, respectively. We show that cmaX expression is increased upon heat shock through an AlgU-dependent but RpoH independent mechanism. In addition, the ECF sigma SigX is activated in response to valinomycin, an agent altering the membrane structure, and up-regulates cfrX-cmpX transcription in response to cold shock. Altogether, these data provide new insights into the regulation exerted by SigX and networks that are involved in maintaining envelope homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, total proteins were extracted from cells, exposed or not to a CS during 30 min, as follow: bacteria were harvested from 10 mL of three independent control or CS-treated cultures by centrifugation (7500g for 20 min at 4°C) and suspended in 5 mL of lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Cl pH8 and 0.1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride) prior to sonication. 350 µg of proteins were solubilized in 325 µL of re-hydratation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS (3-((3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonate, Bio-Rad Laboratories), 65 mM DTT, 0.5% carrier ampholytes mixture pH3-10 (Bio-Rad Laboratories) prior to loading on ReadyStripTM IPG strip (17 cm, pH 4-7, Bio-Rad Laboratories). After a passive rehydration step during 16h, isoelectric focusing parameters were set as 50 µA / strip at 20°C and carried out using the following conditions: 0-100 V linear ramp for 45 min, 100-250 V rapid ramp for 15 min, 250-10000 V gradual ramp for 2 h 45 and hold at 10000 V until a total of 52000 V x h was reached. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE 10% and coomassie blue stained. Two gels per protein sample were performed and scanned using a GS-800 densitometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories) to allow normalization and quantification of reproducible spots detected with PDQuest 2-DE analysis 7.4.0 software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Protein spots were excised from gels and characterized through matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Search parameters and statistical analyses of the sequences for proteins identification weredetermined by the probability-based Mowse score offered by MASCOT software as described previously (Barbey et al., 2012) using SwissProt 2020.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is a highly adaptable Gram-negative opportunistic pathogen, notably due to its large number of transcription regulators. The extracytoplasmic sigma factor (ECF&#x3c3;) AlgU, responsible for alginate biosynthesis, is also involved in responses to cell wall stress and heat shock via the RpoH alternative &#x3c3; factor. The SigX ECF&#x3c3; emerged as a major regulator involved in the envelope stress response via membrane remodeling, virulence and biofilm formation. However, their functional interactions to coordinate the envelope homeostasis in response to environmental variations remain to be determined. The regulation of the putative <i>cmaX-cfrX-cmpX</i> operon located directly upstream <i>sigX</i> was investigated by applying sudden temperature shifts from 37&#xb0;C. We identified a SigX- and an AlgU- dependent promoter region upstream of <i>cfrX</i> and <i>cmaX</i>, respectively. We show that <i>cmaX</i> expression is increased upon heat shock through an AlgU-dependent but RpoH independent mechanism. In addition, the ECF&#x3c3; SigX is activated in response to valinomycin, an agent altering the membrane structure, and up-regulates <i>cfrX-cmpX</i> transcription in response to cold shock. Altogether, these data provide new insights into the regulation exerted by SigX and networks that are involved in maintaining envelope homeostasis.

### Keywords
2d-electrophoresis, Cold shock, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
LMSM EA4312
University of Rouen
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Signaux et Microenvironnement (LMSM) EA 4312, Normandie Université, Université deRouen Normandie, Centre de Sécurité Sanitaire de Normandie, Evreux, France.

### Submitter
Emeline Bouffartigues

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Marc Feuilloley
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Signaux et Microenvironnement (LMSM) EA 4312, Normandie Université, Université deRouen Normandie, Centre de Sécurité Sanitaire de Normandie, Evreux, France.


