### Accession
PXD032317

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Identification of Proteins that are Responsive to RNF12 E3 Ligase Ubiquitin Activity

### Description
Rlim-/y mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) were transfected with either empty pCAGGS vector, HA-RNF12 or HA-RNF12 (H569A/C572A). Experiment was performed in biological triplicate (9 samples in total).

### Sample Protocol
mESCs were washed in PBS and then lysed in 8.5 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitors. Lysate was sonicated using Biosonicator operated at 50% power for 30 s on/off each on ice water bath for 5 min. The lysates were then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 mins at 4 °C and supernatants collected. Protein concentration of the lysate was determined by BCA protein assay. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 55 °C for 30 min and cooled to room temperature. Reduced lysates were then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 mins in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by the addition of another 5 mM DTT. After 20 min of incubation at room temperature, the lysate was digested using Lys-C with the weight ratio of 1:200 (Enzyme/lysate) at 37 °C for 4 h. The samples were further diluted to 1.5 M Urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), and the sequencing-grade trypsin was added with the weight ratio of 1:50 (enzyme/lysate) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digest was acidified to pH 3.0 by addition of TFA to 0.2% and gently mix at room temperature for 15 min; the resulting precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 7100 RCF for 15 min. The acidified lysate was then desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge (Waters) and the eluate was aliquoted into 100 μg and dried by vacuum centrifugation. To check the digests, 1 µg of each sample was analysed by mass spectrometry prior to TMT labelling. 100 µg of peptide from each sample was re-suspended into 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). Then 0.8 mg of TMT tag (Thermo) dissolved in 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile was transferred to the peptide sample and incubated with 60 min at room temperature. The TMT labelling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. 1 µg of each labelled sample was analysed by mass spectrometry to assess the labelling efficiency before pooling. After checking the labelling efficiency, the TMT-labelled peptides were mixed together and dried by vacuum centrifugation. After dryness, the mixture of TMT-labelled peptides was dissolved into 0.2% TFA and then desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge. The desalted peptides were subjected to orthogonal basic pH reverse phase fractionation, collected in 96-well plate and consolidated for a total of 20 fractions for vacuum dryness. Each fraction was dissolved in 0.1% FA and quantified by Nanodrop. 1 µg of peptide was loaded on C18 trap column at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. Peptide separations were performed over EASY-Spray column (C18, 2 µm, 75 mm × 50 cm) with an integrated nano electrospray emitter at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LC separations were performed with a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano liquid chromatography instrument. Peptides were separated with a 180 min segmented gradient as follows: 7%~25% buffer B (80% ACN/0.1% FA) in 125 min, 25%~35% buffer B for 30 min, 35%~99% buffer B for 5 min, followed by a 5 min 99% wash and 15 min equilibration with buffer A (0.1% FA). Data acquisition on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid platform with instrument control software version 3.0 was carried out using a data-dependent method with multinotch synchronous precursor selection MS3 scanning for TMT-9plex tags. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent most intense precursors Top Speed mode with 3 s per cycle. The survey scan was acquired from m/z 375 to 1500 with a resolution of 120,000 resolving power with AGC target 400,000. The maximum injection time for full scan was set to 60 ms. For the MS/MS analysis, monoisotopic precursor selection was set to peptide. AGC target was set to 50,000 with the maximum injection time 120 msec. Charge states unknown and 1 or higher than 7 were excluded. The MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.2 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, normalised HCD collision energy of 37% and analysis of fragment ions in the Orbitrap using 15,000 resolving power with auto normal range scan starting from m/z 110. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. For the MS3 scan, the MS3 precursor population from MS2 scan ranging from m/z 300-100 was isolated using the SPS waveform and then fragmented by HCD. The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 65. The MS3 scan were acquired from m/z 100 to 500 with a resolution of 50,000 and AGC target 50,000/ The maximum injection time for full scan was set to 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data from the Orbitrap Fusion were processed using Proteome Discoverer Software (version 2.2). MS2 spectra were searched using Mascot against a UniProt Mouse database appended to a list of common contaminants (10,090 total sequences). The searching parameters were specified as trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Daltons. Oxidation of methionine and TMT at lysine and peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptide spectral match error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of positive and false matches. Data were filtered at the peptide spectral match-level to control for false discoveries using a q-value cut off of 0.01, as determined by Percolator. For quantification, the signal-to-noise values higher than 10 for unique and razor peptides were summed within each TMT channel, and each channel was normalized with total peptide amount. Quantitation was further performed by adjusting the calculated p-values according to Benjamini-Hochberg. The significance of regulated proteins with p-value less than 0.05 were further manually investigated with the standard deviations of biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF12 plays essential roles during development, and the gene encoding it, <i>RLIM</i>, is mutated in the X-linked human developmental disorder Tonne-Kalscheuer syndrome (TOKAS). Substrates of RNF12 include transcriptional regulators such as the pluripotency-associated transcriptional repressor REX1. Using global quantitative proteomics in male mouse embryonic stem cells, we identified the deubiquitylase USP26 as a putative downstream target of RNF12 activity. RNF12 relieved REX1-mediated repression of <i>Usp26</i>, leading to an increase in USP26 abundance and the formation of RNF12-USP26 complexes. Interaction with USP26 prevented RNF12 autoubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation, thereby establishing a transcriptional feed-forward loop that amplified RNF12-dependent derepression of REX1 targets. We showed that the RNF12-USP26 axis operated specifically in mouse testes and was required for the expression of gametogenesis genes and for germ cell differentiation in vitro. Furthermore, this RNF12-USP26 axis was disrupted by <i>RLIM</i> and <i>USP26</i> variants found in TOKAS and infertility patients, respectively. This work reveals synergy within the ubiquitylation cycle that controls a key developmental process in gametogenesis and that is disrupted in human genetic disorders.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ubiquitin, E3 ligase, Quantification, Mescs, Tmt, Rnf12

### Affiliations
The MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, The University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Greg Findlay

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Findlay
The MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, The University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


