### Accession
PXD040388

### Title
CD31 defines a subpopulation of human adipose-derived regenerative cells with potent angiogenic properties

### Description
A major challenge in realizing regenerative treatment using freshly isolated Adipose Derived Regenerative Cells (ADRCs) is the cellular heterogeneity and donor variability. Ex vivo expanded ADRCs (=ASCs) are available at larger quantities and represent a more homogeneous population suitable for allogenic use. Emerging pre-clinical and clinical data however suggest similar, or even superior efficacy of ADRCs as compared to ASCs for indications involving (micro)vascular deficiency. Since CD31+ ADRCs lack in cultured ASCs, we hypothesized that these cells account for improvement of vascular function in the heterogenous ADRCs. Herein, we found that in patients with erectile dysfunction (ED), the number of injected CD31+ ADRCs correlates positively with erectile function 12 months after one bolus of autologous ADRCs. Comprehensive in vitro and ex vivo analyses confirmed superior pro-angiogenic and paracrine effects of human CD31+ enriched ADRCs compared to the corresponding CD31- and parent ADRCs. CD31+, CD31- and ADRCs were co-cultured in aortic ring-, as well as in ED-relevant corpus cavernousum tube formation assays, both showing a significantly higher ability of the CD31+ ADRCs to support tube development. This effect was corroborated using conditioned medium (CM), while quantitative mass spectrometric analysis suggested that this is explained by secretory pro-angiogenic proteins such as DKK3, ANGPT2, ANAX2 and VIM, all being enriched in CD31+ADRC CM. To gain further specification of the ADRC subpopulations expressing these proteins, single-cell RNA sequencing was performed and showed that transcripts of the upregulated and secreted proteins were  present in 9 endothelial ADRC subsets including endothelial progenitor cells in the heterogenous non-cultured ADRCs. Our data  thus suggest that the vascular benefit of using ADRCs in regenerative medicine is dictated by CD31+ ADRCs, which likely represent an improved alternative to heterogenous ADRCs as well as ASCs when aiming for vascular repair in cell therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were acetone precipitated, re-dissolved in 0.2 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, and trypsinized over night. Samples (4 µg tryptic peptides per sample) were randomly labelled with 11-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA); mass tag 126 was a pool of all AAA samples and served as internal control

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) also as previously described with the exception that our database search was restricted to the human and bovine database

### Publication Abstract
Cellular heterogeneity represents a major challenge for regenerative treatment using freshly isolated Adipose Derived Regenerative Cells (ADRCs). Emerging data suggest superior efficacy of ADRCs as compared to the ex vivo expanded and more homogeneous ADRCs (=&#x2009;ASCs) for indications involving (micro)vascular deficiency, however, it remains unknown which ADRC cell subtypes account for the improvement. Surprisingly, we found regarding erectile dysfunction (ED) that the number of injected CD31+ &#x2009;ADRCs correlated positively with erectile function 12 months after one bolus of autologous ADRCs. Comprehensive in vitro and ex vivo analyses confirmed superior pro-angiogenic and paracrine effects of human CD31+ enriched ADRCs compared to the corresponding CD31- and parent ADRCs. When CD31+, CD31- and ADRCs were co-cultured in aortic ring- and corpus cavernous tube formation assays, the CD31+ &#x2009;ADRCs induced significantly higher tube development. This effect was corroborated using conditioned medium (CM), while quantitative mass spectrometric analysis suggested that this is likely explained by secretory pro-angiogenic proteins including DKK3, ANGPT2, ANAX2 and VIM, all enriched in CD31+ &#x2009;ADRC CM. Single-cell RNA sequencing showed that transcripts of the upregulated and secreted proteins were present in 9 endothelial ADRC subsets including endothelial progenitor cells in the heterogenous non-cultured ADRCs. Our data suggest that the vascular benefit of using ADRCs in regenerative medicine is dictated by CD31+ &#x2009;ADRCs.

### Keywords
Cd31, Regenerative cells, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab, Odense University Hospital, Odense DK
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Proteomics Lab, Odense University Hospital, Odense DK


