### Accession
PXD023142

### Title
Serine biosynthesis is a metabolic vulnerability in IDH2-driven breast cancer progression

### Description
Cancer-specific metabolic phenotypes and their vulnerabilities are one among the viable areas of cancer research. We studied the association of breast cancer subtypes with different metabolic phenotypes and identified isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 (IDH2) as a key player in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and HER2. Functional assays combined with mass spectrometry-based analyses reveal the oncogenic role of IDH2 in cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, glycolysis, mitochondrial respiration and antioxidant defense. Genome-scale metabolic modeling identified PHGDH and PSAT1 as the synthetic dosage lethal (SDL) partners of IDH2. In agreement, CRISPR-Cas9 knockout of PHGDH and PSAT1 showed the essentiality of serine biosynthesis proteins in IDH2-high cells. The clinical significance of the SDL interaction showed patients with IDH2-high/PHGDH-low have better survival than IDH2-high/PHGDH-high. Furthermore, we show the efficacy of PHGDH inhibitors in treating IDH2-high cells in vitro and in in vivo. Altogether, our study creates a new link between two known cancer regulators and emphasizes PHGDH as a promising target for TNBC with IDH2 overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 6M urea, 2M thiourea in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH, 8.5). 40ug of proteins were reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at RT for 30 min and alkylated with 5mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min in the dark. The lysates were diluted 4-fold with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by overnight digestion with sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega). Resulting peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation followed by desalting on C18 Stage Tips and vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed using nano-ultra high performance liquid chromatography (nano-UPLC; Easy-nLC1000; Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 140-minutes linear gradient of water/acetonitrile. The Q-Exactive instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS scans. Top 10 precursor m/z values from each MS scan were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant version (1.5.6.9) and the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant parameters were the same as mentioned in the data analysis section except for the peptide quantification, which was performed using label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ).

### Data Protocol
All the statistical analyses of the MaxQuant output tables were performed with the Perseus software. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and the data were filtered to retain proteins with at least 70% quantitative values from all the samples. HCC38 cells with IDH2 overexpression, HCC1599 and HCC1143 cells with control knockdown were categorized as 'high IDH2' group and compared to their counterparts with 'low IDH2' expression. Student’s t-test was performed with FDR threshold of 0.1. Enrichment analysis was performed on the t-test significant proteins using Fisher exact test (FDR 0.02) ANOVA (FDR 0.05) was performed to evaluate the differentially expressed proteins between HCC38 cells with PHGDH or PSAT1 knockout with transient IDH2/mCherry overexpression.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer / isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 / mass spectrometry / metabolic vulnerability /serine biosynthesis

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel


