### Accession
PXD013643

### Title
Bovine Coronary Artery Endothelial Cells-SWATH Proteomics

### Description
Here, we evaluated the appearance and abundance of Multinucleated varian endothelial cells after prolonged exposure (9 days) to high-glucose and high-insulin and characterized their morphology, as well as their mitochondrial mass and function. In addition, we performed a quantitative proteomic differential analysis among endothelial cells cultured under normal-glucose and high glucose+high-insulin.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted, reduced, alkylated and digested using the PierceTM Mass Spec Sample Prep Kit for Cultured Cells (Cat. No. 84840) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Tryptic peptides were dried down by SpeedVac and reconstituted in water/acetonitrile 95:5 v/v with 0.1% formic acid. The peptide concentration was analyzed by using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Cat. No. 23275) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
MS data mining Data from DDA samples were processed using ProteinPilot software version 4.2 (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) with the Paragon algorithm. MS/MS data were searched against a SwissProt Bos taurus database containing 6 006 reviewed proteins. The parameters used were as follows: Sample type, Identification; Cys Alkylation, Iodoacetamide; digestion, trypsin; Instrument, TripleTOF 5600; Special Factors, none; Species, Bos Taurus; ID Focus, Biological modifications, and amino acid substitutions; Search Effort, Thorough ID. False discovery rate analysis was also performed.  Targeted data extraction of SWATH files was done using the SWATH® Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView version 1.2 (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) along with the spectral library generated by DDA. Retention time calibration among samples was done manually using two endogenous peptides (>10,000 intensity) every 10 minutes throughout the LC gradient. The parameters used were as follows: Number of peptides per protein, 6; Number of transitions per peptide, 6; Peptide confidence threshold, 99%; False discovery rate threshold, 1%; exclude modified peptides, checked; XIC extraction window, 10 min, and; XIC width, 75 ppm. Protein peak areas were exported to Markerview (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) for further processing. Protein areas were normalized by the Total Area Sums algorithm in Markerview and exported to Microsoft Excel version 15.13.3 for statistical analysis. The reversed and common contaminants hits were removed before further processing. Proteins with a fold change ≥ 1.3 or ≤ 1/1.3 and a p-value <0.05 (Welch’s t-test) were considered differentially abundant between NG and HG+HI conditions.   Bioinformatic analysis Gene ontology enrichment analysis of biological process and molecular function annotations were done using ClueGo app for Cytoscape (version 3.7.0) [18]. An enrichment/depletion (two-sided hypergeometric test) method with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was performed. A minimum and maximal GO level of 3 and 8 were used, respectively. Kappa Score was set to 0.4.

### Publication Abstract
Coronary artery endothelial cells (CAEC) exert an important role in the development of cardiovascular disease. Dysfunction of CAEC is associated with cardiovascular disease in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, comprehensive studies of the effects that a diabetic environment exerts on this cellular type are scarce. The present study characterized the molecular perturbations occurring on cultured bovine CAEC subjected to a prolonged diabetic environment (high glucose and high insulin). Changes at the metabolite and peptide level were assessed by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS<sup>2</sup>) and chemoinformatics. The results were integrated with published LC-MS<sup>2</sup>-based quantitative proteomics on the same in vitro model. Our findings were consistent with reports on other endothelial cell types and identified novel signatures of DNA/RNA, amino acid, peptide, and lipid metabolism in cells under a diabetic environment. Manual data inspection revealed disturbances on tryptophan catabolism and biosynthesis of phenylalanine-based, glutathione-based, and proline-based peptide metabolites. Fluorescence microscopy detected an increase in binucleation in cells under treatment that also occurred when human CAEC were used. This multi-omics study identified particular molecular perturbations in an induced diabetic environment that could help unravel the mechanisms underlying the development of cardiovascular disease in subjects with T2DM.

### Keywords
Swath-proteomics, Diabetes, Bcaec

### Affiliations
CICESE
Biomedical Innovation Department, CICESE, México

### Submitter
Aldo Moreno 

### Lab Head
Dr Aldo Moreno Ulloa
Biomedical Innovation Department, CICESE, México


