### Accession
PXD046273

### Title
A quality control factor for chromatin complexes is synthetic lethal in SMARCB1-mutant cancers

### Description
While oncogenes can potentially be inhibited with small molecules, the loss of tumor suppressors is more common and is problematic because the tumor suppressor proteins are no longer present to be targeted. Notable examples include SMARCB1-mutant cancers, which are highly lethal malignancies driven by the inactivation of a subunit of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes.  To generate mechanistic insight into the consequences of SMARCB1 mutation and to identify vulnerabilities, we contributed 14 SMARCB1-mutant cell lines to a near genome-wide CRISPR screen as part of the Cancer Dependency Map Project1-3.  Here, we report that the little-studied gene DDB1-CUL4 Associated Factor 5 (DCAF5) is required for the survival of SMARCB1-mutant cancers. We show that DCAF5 serves a quality control function for SWI/SNF complexes and promotes degradation of incompletely assembled SWI/SNF complexes in the absence of SMARCB1. Upon depletion of DCAF5, SMARCB1-deficient SWI/SNF complexes re-accumulate, bind to target loci, and restore SWI/SNF-mediated gene expression to levels sufficient to reverse the cancer state, including in vivo. Consequently, cancer results not from the loss of SMARCB1 function per se but rather from DCAF5-mediated degradation of SWI/SNF complexes.  These data indicate that therapeutic targeting of ubiquitin-mediated quality control factors may effectively reverse the malignant state of some cancers driven by disruption of tumor suppressor complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Two different clones of G401 cells expressing dTAG-DCAF5 were treated with DMSO or 50nM of dTAGV-1 for 4 or 24h in biological duplicate and cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4ºC. Cell lysis was performed by the addition of Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) followed by manual homogenization by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle. Lysate was clarified by centrifugation and protein quantified using bradford (Bio-Rad) assay. 100 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described 7. The resulting precipitated protein was resuspended in 4M Urea, 50mM HEPES pH 7.4, buffer for solubilization, followed by dilution to 1M urea with the addition of 200mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were digested for 12h at room temperature with LysC (1:50 ratio), followed by dilution to 0.5M urea and a second digestion step was performed by addition of trypsin (1:50 ratio) for 6h at 37 ºC. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30%, followed by addition of Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents at a labelling ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. TMT labelling occurred over a 1.5h incubation at room temperature followed by quenching with the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. Each of the samples were combined using adjusted volumes and dried down in a speed vacuum followed by desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). The sample was offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 5 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The resulting 96 fractions were recombined in a non-contiguous manner into 24 fractions and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC lump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 μm inner diameter EasySpray ES903 microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Quantification was performed using a MS3-based TMT method as described previously8. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (January 2021) containing both the forward and reverse sequences. Searches were performed using a 20ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, tryptic peptides containing a maximum of two missed cleavages, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (304.2071), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels <100 and precursor isolation specificity <0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework 9. Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework 10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Protein degradation, Chromatin, E3 ligase, Swi/snf, Smarcb1, Dcaf5, Cancer

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


