### Accession
PXD000895

### Title
Human hnRNP H1 knockdown proteomics

### Description
HNRNP1 was characterized in a multi-dimensional study involving RNAi knockdown of the protein in HeLa cells. Label-free proteomics was used to characterize protein expression changes.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were grown under standard conditions. HNRNP1 was knocked down in two replicate HeLa cell lines using RNAi. A scramble sequence was used as control, also in replicate. Protein samples were fractionated into cytosolic (soluble, CYT) and membrane (insoluble, NUC)  Protein samples were processed with standard protocols involving TFE based denaturation, IAM modification, tryptic digest and cleanup via C18 tips. The samples were analyzed 3 times by reverse phase LC coupled to tandem MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software and post-processed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
hnRNPs are polyvalent RNA binding proteins that have been implicated in a range of regulatory roles including splicing, mRNA decay, translation, and miRNA metabolism. A variety of genome wide studies have taken advantage of methods like CLIP and RIP to identify the targets and binding sites of RNA binding proteins. However, due to the complex nature of RNA-binding proteins, these studies are incomplete without assays that characterize the impact of RBP binding on mRNA target expression. Here we used a suite of high-throughput approaches (RIP-Seq, iCLIP, RNA-Seq and shotgun proteomics) to provide a comprehensive view of hnRNP H1s ensemble of targets and its role in splicing, mRNA decay, and translation. The combination of RIP-Seq and iCLIP allowed us to identify a set of 1,086 high confidence target transcripts. Binding site motif analysis of these targets suggests the TGGG tetramer as a prevalent component of hnRNP H1 binding motif, with particular enrichment around intronic hnRNP H1 sites. Our analysis of the target transcripts and binding sites indicates that hnRNP H1s involvement in splicing is 2-fold: it directly affects a substantial number of splicing events, but also regulates the expression of major components of the splicing machinery and other RBPs with known roles in splicing regulation. The identified mRNA targets displayed function enrichment in MAPK signaling and ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, which might be main routes by which hnRNP H1 promotes tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Hnrnph1

### Affiliations
New York University

### Submitter
Christine Vogel

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
New York University


