### Accession
PXD007714

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis in brain of fathead minnows exposed to ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel

### Description
Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) are conceptual frameworks that organize and link contaminant-induced molecular changes to adverse biological responses at the individual and population level. The development of AOPs is a priority area of research in ecotoxicology as a means to leverage molecular and high content mechanistic information obtained through top-down ‘omic approaches in regulatory decision-making. Current AOPs for hormonally active agents (HAAs) focus on nuclear receptor-mediated effects despite the overwhelming evidence that HAAs also activate membrane receptors. Activation of membrane receptors triggers propagation of non-genomic signaling cascades often transduced by protein phosphorylation leading to phenotypic changes. To promote investigations of rapid non-genomic signaling mechanisms of environmental contaminants in aquatic species for top-down AOP development, we developed a phosphoproteomic pipeline using label-free LC-MS/MS. We used our optimized pipeline to identify proteins differentially phosphorylated in the brain of fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) aqueously exposed for 30 minutes to two HAAs, 17α-ethinylestradiol (EE2), a strong estrogenic substance, and levonorgestrel (LNG), a progestin, both components of the birth control pill. Results revealed differential phosphorylation of proteins involved in neuronal processes such as nervous system development, synaptic transmission, and neuroprotection by EE2 while LNG induced differential phosphorylation of proteins involved in axon cargo transport and calcium ion homeostasis. EE2 and LNG caused similar enrichment of cell processes including synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis. This study is the first to identify molecular changes in vivo in fish after short-term exposure and highlights membrane receptors and transduction of rapid, non-genomic signaling mechanisms as targets of HAAs in addition to the well-established nuclear receptor-mediated pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were precipitated with acetone and solubilized in 110 μL of ABC buffer (50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0). EZQ protein assay (Molecular Probes) was performed and 200 μg of protein aliquots were taken for trypsin digestion. Samples were digested with 1:50 (enzyme:protein) sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and then a phosphopeptide enrichment was done with TiO2 NuTip micro columns (GlygenSci) following the method reported by Gates et al.85. Briefly, the microcolumns were equilibrated by washing the TiO2 resin with 5 μL binding solution (80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 15% H2O, 5% TFA, pH < 3) and excess buffer was aspirated from the tip. The digested sample was mixed 1:1 with binding solution and loaded onto the tip by aspirating and expelling 2.5 μL aliquots ~ 20 times over several minutes. Next, the micro columns were washed with 80% ACN, 19% H2O, 1% TFA (pH < 3) and the bound peptides were eluted with 10 μL elution solution (2% NH4OH in water, pH = 11). Phosphopeptides were solubilized in 20 μL of loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid, 0.01% TFA). An aliquot of 5 μL was taken and mixed with 5 μL of loading buffer. Flow-through samples were solubilized in 100 μL of loading buffer and prepared and a 5 μL aliquot was mixed with 5 μL of loading buffer.  To ensure optimum coverage, phosphopeptides were analyzed on both a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). For analysis on Q-Exactive plus MS, a total of 10 μL of sample was injected to the nano LC-MS/MS using an automated Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive plus MS. A pre-column (20 mm× 75 μm; 3 μm-C18) and an analytical column (500 mm× 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) were used (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The phosphopeptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: 2–25% mobile phase B from 0–95 min, 25–98% mobile phase B from 95–100 min, and 98% mobile phase B from 100–120 min. Data dependent mass spectra were acquired for 120 min for the top 5 peaks. The full MS surveys were collected over a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 400–2000 m/z, with the resolution set to 70,000, and Max IT 100 ms. For MS/MS, we used a resolution of 17,500 and Max IT 64 ms, with an isolation window of 2 m/z and NCE of 28.  For analysis on the LTQ Orbitrap XL MS, a total of 10 μL of sample was injected to a C18 capillary trap cartridge (LC Packings, United States), and separated on a 15 cm nanoflow analytical C18 PepMap column (0.075 mm inner diameter, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a nanoLC ultra 1D plus system (AB Sciex, United States). For peptide separation Solvent A was 3% (vol/vol) ACN and 0.1% (vol/vol) acetic acid. Solvent B was 97% (vol/vol) ACN and 0.1% (vol/vol) acetic acid. Peptide separation was performed using a linear gradient from 3 to 40% solvent B for 100 min, followed by an increase to 90% solvent B in 10 min and holding for 10 min. The flow was directly sprayed onto an LTQ Orbitrap XL MS. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode. An Orbitrap MS full scan (resolution, 3 × 104; molecular-mass range, 300 to 2000 Da) was followed by 10 MS/MS scans in the ion trap, which were performed by collision-induced dissociation on the top 10 most abundant ions. The isolation window for ion selection was 2 Da. The normalized collision energy was set at 35%. The dynamic exclusion time was 20 s. Additionally, if a phosphate neutral loss of 98, 49, 32.66, or 24.5 m/z below the precursor ion mass was detected, a  multistage activation (MSA) event was repeated for the top five ions in a data-dependent manner provided the precursor exceeded a threshold of 6000 ion counts.

### Data Protocol
A custom database was constructed for searching for protein identification.  This database was a composite of an in-house FHM protein database and the zebrafish, Danio rerio, database on uniprot.  The in-house FHM database was created by selecting the longest open reading frame from the 6-frame translation of each sequence in our transcriptome database in Blast2Go with the ORF Predictor function.  The software chose the longest open reading frame for each sequence, which was subsequently annotated against zebrafish NR database using blastx and blastp, resulting in 56,099 annotated sequences.  Once combined with the Uniprot zebrafish protein database our composite database consisted of 117,445 entities.  Development of this custom composite database was essential to making high confidence protein identifications.       All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search our custom composite database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a subset of the database also assuming trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot and !X-Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide which is widely accepted for phosphoproteomic studies which rely on fewer peptides for protein identification due to the substoichiometry of phosphorylated peptides relative to non-phosphorylated peptides87,88. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm89. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Spectra were combined if they mapped to the same protein in different species in the database.

### Publication Abstract
Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) are conceptual frameworks that organize and link contaminant-induced mechanistic molecular changes to adverse biological responses at the individual and population level. AOPs leverage molecular and high content mechanistic information for regulatory decision-making, but most current AOPs for hormonally active agents (HAAs) focus on nuclear receptor-mediated effects only despite the overwhelming evidence that HAAs also activate membrane receptors. Activation of membrane receptors triggers non-genomic signaling cascades often transduced by protein phosphorylation leading to phenotypic changes. We utilized label-free LC-MS/MS to identify proteins differentially phosphorylated in the brain of fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) aqueously exposed for 30&#x2009;minutes to two HAAs, 17&#x3b1;-ethinylestradiol (EE2), a strong estrogenic substance, and levonorgestrel (LNG), a progestin, both components of the birth control pill. EE2 promoted differential phosphorylation of proteins involved in neuronal processes such as nervous system development, synaptic transmission, and neuroprotection, while LNG induced differential phosphorylation of proteins involved in axon cargo transport and calcium ion homeostasis. EE2 and LNG caused similar enrichment of synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis. This study is the first to identify molecular changes in vivo in fish after short-term exposure and highlights transduction of rapid signaling mechanisms as targets of HAAs, in addition to nuclear receptor-mediated pathways.

### Keywords
Fathead minnow qe plus ltq orbitrap phosphopeptide toxicology

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and Health Profession, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL

### Submitter
Ley Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Sabo-Attwood
Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and Health Profession, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL


