### Accession
PXD025276

### Title
Liver proteome response of turbot to lysine and leucine in free and dipeptide forms

### Description
In this iTRAQ quantification project, there were 6 Scophthalmus_maximus samples named CAA-1, CAA-2, CAA-3, Lys-Leu-1, Lys-Leu-2, Lys-Leu-3 and we did one technical duplicate experiments. Totally 935928 spectrums were generated, 32261 peptides and 5708 proteins were identified with 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of liver in turbot were extracted using the method reported by Wu et al. (2019). Liver tissue from each fish was homogenized in lysis buffer 3 (8 mol/L urea, 40 mmol/L Tris-HCl or tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 1 mmol/L phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 2 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT), pH 8.5) by a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). After centrifugation with 25,000g ×g for 20 min at 4℃, 10 mmol/L DTT was added to the supernatant at 56 ℃ for 1 h, and then incubated with 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. The precipitated protein was washed three times with acetone. The quality and quantity of protein sample was measured by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Bradford method, respectively.      The protein solutions (100 µg) were digested with 2.5 µg Trypsin gold (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37 ℃ for 4 h. Trypsin gold was added once more with the same ratio, and trypsin digestion was continued at 37 ℃ for 8 h. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and vacuum-dried.      The vacuum dried peptides were dissolved in 30µL 0.5mol/L TEAB with vortexing. After the iTRAQ labeling reagents were recovered to ambient temperature, peptide labeling was performed by iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The labeled samples were desalted with a Strata X C18 column and then vacuum-dried.     The peptides were separated using a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Kyoto, Japan) equipped with C18 column (Gemini C18, 4.6*250 mm, 5 μm; Phenomenex, Torrance, USA). The peptides were dissolved with buffer A (5% acetonitrile (ACN), 95% H2O, pH 9.8) to 2 ml. Elution is monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions are collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides are pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was reconstituted in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded on Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), equipped with a trap and an analytical column. The samples were desalted in a trap column, and then eluted into a nanocapillary C18 column (inner diameter, 75 μm; column diameter, 3 μm; column length, 25 μm). The peptides separated from nano-HPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data-dependent acquisition detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The raw data was firstly transformed into mascot generic format (MGF) for bioinformatics analysis. And, the exported MGF files were searched using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, UK). For protein quantitation, an automated software (IQuant software) was used to analyze the labeled peptides with isobaric tags (Wen et al., 2014). The peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were pre-filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% to assess the confidence of peptides. Then, identified peptide sequences were assembled into proteins. In order to reduce the rate of false-positive at protein level, proteins were identified at FDR of 1% (Savitski et al., 2015). Proteins with 1.2-fold change (mean value) and P-value (T-test) less than 0.05 were defined as differential proteins. Cluster analysis was used to visualize differential proteins. For pathway analysis, KEGG was used to predict the main metabolic pathways of differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Liver, Turbot

### Affiliations
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Yuliang Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Yuliang Wei
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


