### Accession
PXD001737

### Title
c-Abl Dependent Tyrosine Phosphorylation  of theCo-chaperone Aha1  Regulates Interaction with Hsp90

### Description
The ability of Heat Shock Protein 90 (Hsp90) to hydrolyze ATP is essential for its chaperone function. The co-chaperone Aha1 stimulates Hsp90 ATPase activity tailoring the chaperone function to specific “client” proteins. The intracellular signaling mechanisms directly regulating Aha1 association with Hsp90 remain unknown. Here we show that c-Abl kinase phosphorylates Y223 in human Aha1 (hAha1) promoting its interaction with Hsp90. This also increases Hsp90 ATPase activity,enhancesHsp90 interaction with kinase clients,and compromises the chaperoning of non-kinase clients such as glucocorticoid receptor and CFTR. Suggesting a new regulatory paradigm, we find that Y223 phosphorylation leads to ubiquitination and degradation of hAha1 in the proteasome. Finally pharmacologic inhibition of c-Abl prevents hAha1 interaction with Hsp90 thereby, hypersensitizing cancer cells to Hsp90 inhibitors bothin vitro and ex vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast Strains, Plasmids and Growth Media The yeast strains yaha1∆ and the parent FY1679-28C (MATa, ura3-52, trp1Δ63, leu2Δ1, his3Δ200) were used in this study(Panaretou et al., 2002).Plasmids were constructed as described previously (Mollapour et al., 2014; Mollapour et al., 2011).   Protein Extraction, Co-immunoprecipitation, and Immunoblotting Total protein extracts were prepared and analyzed by Western blotting, as described previously(Mollapour et al., 2011).   hAha1 Comparative Interactome Analysis Interactomes of FLAG-hAha1-Y223E to FLAG-hAha1-Y223F were analyzed as described previously (Truman et al. 2012).   Trypsin digestion of samples from SDS-PAGE Gel Plugs. IP eluates were loaded onto a 12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and run for 10m at 200v resulting in a ~2cm “gel plug”.  The gel was stained with 25mL Imperial Stain (Pierce) at room temperature, and destained overnight in dH2O at 4C. The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, divided into 2 sections ~1cm each, and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried. Isotopic labeling Peptide digests were reconstituted with 70 μl of Tris–HCl Buffer Solution (10 mM of Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2, pH 7.6), vortexed for at least 20 min to reconstitute the peptide mixture, then split into two vials of 30 μl each (16O vial and 18O vial) , and 10ul was retained unlabeled and stored in -80C. In a separate vial Mag-Trypsin beads (Clontech) were prepared as follows.  30ul mag-trypsin beads per rxn (16O or 18O) were pooled and washed 3 times with 800 μl of Tris–HCl Buffer Solution, then brought back up in 30ul/sample of Tris-HCL buffer, and aliquoted to a new 1.5ml vial in the quantity of 30ul, vortexing lightly after each aliquot to keep the mag-trypsin beads in suspension.  Using a magnetic rack, the Tris-HCL buffer was removed from the beads, and the 30ul of sample digest from above was added to the beads and vacuum dried.  30 μl of either 16O H2O or 97% 18O H2O (Cambridge Isotopes Laboratories) was added to the respective 16O or 18O prepared Mag-Trypsin bead vial and vortexed for 20 min to reconstitute the peptide mixture, and allowed to exchange overnight at 37 °C. After 18O exchange, the solution was transferred to a new vial and any free trypsin in solution was inactivated with 1 mM PMSF for 30 min at 4 °C. For each sample section, the AHA-1 (E/F) digests were combined 1:1 as follows: Forward (FWD) Sample Set: (F)-16O:(E)-18O and Reversed (REV) Sample Set: (E)-16O:(F)-18O, dried and stored at − 80 °C until analysis. Three biological replicate experiments were performed. HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated. LC–MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 10 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data analysis, statistical analysis  All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.2.2, searching against the SPROT Human database using the following criteria:  18O heavy label was selected for quantitation with a min of 1 high confidence peptide to assign quantitation H/L ratio.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), and Phosphorylation (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da.  1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the MS level light and heavy peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt file as heavy/light or (E-Constitutively Phospo mutant/F-Non-Phospo mutant).  Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Complete three biological replicates were performed, with each biological replicate split into two technical replicates (18O forward (FWD) labeling, and 18O reverse (REV) labeling). The abundance data from each biological replicate were normalized to the ratio of the bait protein in that run (e.g. normalized to the Flag-AHA1 ratio).  Light and Heavy peak intensities were analyzed in each run to determine protein hits that fell into the category of either E-only hits or F-only hits and retained if they confirmed to this state across all 6 runs.  In the case of E-only or F-only protein hits, spectra counts can be used as a proxy for abundance as these would not of been assigned a quantitation ratio. This produced a list of interactors and their respective quantitated changes between the two AHA-1 phosphorylation states. Further statistical analysis was performed using the R statistical package (http://www.r-project.org/). Proteins with three out of the six observations were retained. Missing values were imputed using row mean imputation. An ANOVA test was then performed to identify proteins that indicate significant variability (P-value < 0.05) between biological replicates within each group.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of Heat Shock Protein 90 (Hsp90) to hydrolyze ATP is essential for its chaperone function. The co-chaperone Aha1 stimulates Hsp90 ATPase activity, tailoring the chaperone function to specific "client" proteins. The intracellular signaling mechanisms directly regulating Aha1 association with Hsp90 remain unknown. Here, we show that c-Abl kinase phosphorylates Y223 in human Aha1 (hAha1), promoting its interaction with Hsp90. This, consequently, results in an increased Hsp90 ATPase activity, enhances Hsp90 interaction with kinase clients, and compromises the chaperoning of non-kinase clients such as glucocorticoid receptor and CFTR. Suggesting a regulatory paradigm, we also find that Y223 phosphorylation leads to ubiquitination and degradation of hAha1 in the proteasome. Finally, pharmacologic inhibition of c-Abl prevents hAha1 interaction with Hsp90, thereby hypersensitizing cancer cells to Hsp90 inhibitors both in vitro and ex vivo.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, 18o labeling, Co-chaperone, C-abl, Aha1, Quantative proteomics, Molecular chaperone, Heat shock protein 90

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Urology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 E. Adams St.,  Syracuse, NY 13210, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour
Department of Urology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 E. Adams St.,  Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


