### Accession
PXD025933

### Title
Proteomics characterisation of induced pluripotent stem cells and cortical brain organoids.

### Description
A method was developed to reproducibly produce neural retina and cortical brain regions from confluent cultures of stem cells. The spontaneously generated cortical organoids were isolated and cultured in suspension conditions for maturation. Proteomic analysis of both the original induced pluripotent stem cells and the cortical organoids demonstrated the increased presence of synaptic components, indicating maturity.

### Sample Protocol
The UCLiOO017-A-1 induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line was derived from peripheral blood monocytes. The iPSCs were differentiated into cortical organoids using a novel method (see corresponding article). Both the iPSCs and 10-week mature cortical organoids were prepared for proteomics analysis. Three of the cortical organoids were either cultured in IDMA or BrainPhys medium for two weeks. Medium was removed from organoids which were then homogenised and lysed with a drill and pestle in 200 μL 2% SDS Lysis Buffer [2% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM ethylene glycol-bis (β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Roche)] and freezing on dry ice. Frozen organoid lysate was thawed and reduction was performed with 10 mM TCEP at 85 °C for 10 min with shaking. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 23 °C in the dark. Protein was precipitated from using the chloroform-methanol method. Protein pellet was reconstituted in 20 μL of 7.8 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Protein was digested by the addition of 3 μg Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) and incubation for 8 hours at 25 °C, with shaking. Sample was then diluted 8-fold with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested by the addition of 5 μg TrypZean recombinant trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation for 8 hours at 30 °C, with shaking. The trypsin digestion was repeated for each sample. Protein content of each digest was estimated by measuring the absorption of 280 nm light. 50 μg aliquots of each sample were desalted on an in-house made STAGE tip with C18 material. Samples were eluted in 50% acetonitrile, dried and then reconstituted in a solution of 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) fractionation. HILIC fractionation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system with a 250 mm long and 1 mm inside diameter TSKgel Amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences). HILIC gradient was between a solution of 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA (Buffer A) and a solution of 0.1% TFA (Buffer B). The sample was injected into a 250 μL sample loop to be loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 60 μL/min in Buffer A for 10 min. Gradient was from 100% Buffer A to 60% Buffer A (balanced with Buffer B) for 35 min at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. Fractions were collected into a 96-well plate using a Probot (LC Packings) at 1-minute intervals, monitored by absorbance of UV at 214 nm. UV signal was used to combine selected fractions into similar amounts of peptide. Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system and Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The content of HILIC fractions was loaded directly onto an in-house 300 × 0.075 mm column packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch, Germany). The column was heated to 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation lab solutions, Germany) integrated with the nano flex ion source with an electrospray operating at 2.3 kV. The S lens radio frequency level was 60 and capillary temperature was 250 °C. The 5 µL sample was injected into a 20 µL loop and loaded onto the column in 99% reversed phase buffer A (solution of 0.1% formic acid) and 1% buffer B (solution of 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile) for 25 min at 300 µL/min. The sample was loaded in 99% buffer A for 25 min. The gradient was from then from 99% buffer A to 95% buffer A in 1 min, to 75% buffer A in 75 min, to 35% buffer A in 8 min, to 1% buffer A in 1 min, held at 1% buffer A for 2 min, to 99% buffer A in 1 min and held for 10 min. MS acquisition was performed for the entire 120 min. All samples and fractions were analysed using data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS. For data-dependent acquisition, the MS scans were at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control target of 1,000,000 for a maximum ion time of 100 ms from m/z 375 to 1500. The MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target of 200,000 and maximum ion time of 115 ms. The loop count was 12, the isolation window was 1.2 m/z, the first mass was fixed at m/z 140 and the normalized collision energy was 28. Singly charged ions and those with charge >8 were excluded from MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was for 35 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0 using the following settings: variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus), deamidation (NQ); carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification; digestion was set to specific for trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages; Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled; Homo sapiens reference proteome with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded March 9 2020 was used as well as the inbuilt contaminants file; minimum peptide length was 7 and maximum peptide mass was 5000 Da; second peptides search was enabled while dependent peptides searches were disabled; peptide spectrum matching and protein false discovery rates were set at 1%; minimum score for modified peptides was 40; all modified peptides and counterpart non-modified peptides were excluded from protein quantification; matching between runs was disabled. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
Advances in the study of neurological conditions have been possible because of pluripotent stem cell technologies and organoids. Studies have described the generation of neural ectoderm-derived retinal and brain structures from pluripotent stem cells. However, the field is still troubled by technical challenges, including high culture costs and variability. Here, we describe a simple and economical protocol that reproducibly gives rise to the neural retina and cortical brain regions from confluent cultures of stem cells. The spontaneously generated cortical organoids are transcriptionally comparable with organoids generated by other methods. Furthermore, these organoids showed spontaneous functional network activity and proteomic analysis confirmed organoids maturity. The generation of retinal and brain organoids in close proximity enabled their mutual isolation. Suspension culture of this complex organoid system demonstrated the formation of nerve-like structures connecting retinal and brain organoids, which might facilitate the investigation of neurological diseases of the eye and brain.

### Keywords
Brain, Neural retina, Stem cell, Proteomics, Organoid, Pluripotent, Cortical

### Affiliations
Children's Medical Research Institute
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Insitute, The University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Mark Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Evan Graham
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Insitute, The University of Sydney, Australia


