### Accession
PXD006475

### Title
Global phosphoproteome analysis of human bone marrow reveals predictive phosphorylation markers for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia with quizartinib

### Description
Treatment with inhibitors of the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 are currently studied as promising therapies in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, only a subset of patients benefit from these treatments and the presence of activating mutations within FLT3 can predict response to a certain extent only. AC220 (quizartinib) is an example of a potent FLT3 inhibitor1 that was studied in a recent phase II open-label study in patients with relapsed/refractory AML. The complete remission rate (including CRp and CRi) in FLT3-ITD-positive patients was 54% (50/92) and the corresponding partial remission rate (PR) was 17% (16/92)2 Thus, although the FLT3-ITD mutation status correlates with response, the error rate in stratification of patients into responders and non-responders is high, as still 29% of the FLT3-ITD-positive patients failed to respond. Exclusion of FLT3-ITD-negative patients from AC220 treatment also seems critical, as the total response rate (CRþPR) in FLT3-ITD-negative patients is substantially lower (41%, 17/41). As AC220 is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, we hypothesized that investigating phosphorylation-based signaling on a system-wide scale in AML cells allows for identification of markers enabling more accurate prediction of therapy response as compared to commonly used genetic markers. Hence, we applied quantitative mass spectrometry to decipher a multivariate phosphorylation site marker, which we refer to as phosphosignature, in patient-derived AML blasts that might be useful as predictive biomarkers for AC220 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Viable stocks of frozen AML cells were thawed on ice, centrifuged (3 min, 2,000 rpm, 4°C) and then lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.2, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM β-glycerophosphat, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, phospha-tase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma, 1:100 (v/v)) and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Roche). After sonication the cell debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min at 13,000 rpm, 4°C) and the protein concentration was determined utilizing the Bradford Protein Assay (BIO-RAD).  Equal pro-tein amounts of the Super-SILAC reference were added and subsequently subjected to reduction (10 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min 37°C) and alkylation (50 mM chloroacetic acid, 30 min RT). The alkylation reac-tion was quenched by adding 20 mM DTT. Proteins were initially digested with lysyl enpopeptidase (Wako, 1:200 (w/w)) for 4 hours then diluted 5-times with 20 mM Tris pH 8.2 prior to overnight proteo-lytic cleavage with trypsin (Promega, 1:100 (w/w)). The peptide mixtures were acidified by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 % and subsequently desalted via C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophi-lized.  Phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides were initially fractionated by strong-cation-exchange (SCX) chromatography based on a previously described protocol (ref. 6) using a PolySUL-FOETHYL A column (200x2.1 mm, 200 Å pore size and 5 mm particle size; PolyLC) operated with an Äkta Purifier system (GE Healthcare). Briefly, the dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 µl SCX buffer A (5 mM K2HPO4, pH 2.7, 30% acetonitrile) and loaded onto the SCX column. The peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 0 to 25% SCX buffer B (buffer A supplemented with 500 mM KCl) over 32 min at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. Fractions of 1 ml were collected across the gradient and combined to 12 distinct samples. These samples were then lyophilized and the dried peptides were subsequently re-constituted in 1 ml of 0.1% TFA and desalted using C18 reversed phase cartridges (Waters) as described by the manufacture. The desalted peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and ly-ophilized again.  Dried phosphopeptides of each fraction were reconstituted in IMAC binding buffer (40% acetonitrile, 25 mM formic acid) and phosphopeptides were captured using PHOS-Select® iron affinity beads (Sig-ma) based on the protocol by Villen et.al. (ref. 6). Briefly, 5 µl of equilibrated IMAC beads were loaded onto in-house made IMAC-C18-STAGE-Tips (IMAC-StageTips) and the peptide samples were loaded by centrifugation (3,000 rpm). After washing with 1 % formic acid, phosphopeptides were eluted onto the C18 frit with 500 mM K2HPO4. Phosphopeptides were then eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid after additional washing steps with 0.1 % TFA and 0.5 % acetic acid and dried in a vacuum concen-trator (Eppendorf). For MS-anaylsis phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 0.5% acetic acid.   All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sam-ples were loaded by an Proxeon  easy nano LC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a 15 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with reversed phase material (Reprusil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a maximum pressure of 275 bar. The bound peptides were eluted by a gradi-ent from 10% to 60% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by applying a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a nanoelec-trospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data depend-ent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. To improve mass accuracy in the MS mode, the lock-mass option was enabled as described (ref. 7). Full scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution R = 60,000 and a target value of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense ions detected in the MS scan were selected for collision induced dissociation in the LTQ at a target value of 5000 ion counts. The resulting fragmentation spectra were also recorded in the linear ion trap. To im-prove complete dissociation of phosphopeptides, the multi-stage activation option was enabled  for all MS-analyses of phosphopeptide-enriched samples by applying additional dissociation energy on po-tential neutral loss fragments (precursor ion minus 98, 49 and 32.7 m/z) (ref. 8). Ions that were once selected for data dependent acquisition were dynamically excluded for 90 sec for further fragmenta-tion.  General used mass spectrometric settings were: spray voltage, 2.2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 230°C; normalized collision energy, 35% and an activation q = 0.25.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files from the training and the validation subgroup were processed separately with MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.2) (ref. 9) applying the Andromeda search engine (ref. 10). The human UNIPROT data-base (version: 08.2011) was used comprising 125,676 database entries including the UNIPROT splice variants database. The minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, trypsin was selected as proteo-lytic enzyme and maximally 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, protein N-acetylation as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was allowed as variable modifications. As MaxQuant automatically extracts isotopic SILAC peptide doublets, the corresponding isotopic forms of lysine and arginine were automatically selected. The maximal mass deviation of precursor and frag-ment masses was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da before internal mass recalibration by MaxQuant. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for proteins, peptides, and phosphorylation sites. The MaxQuant results were uploaded to the MaxQB database (version 2.9) (ref. 11) for further analysis.  The regulation of a phosphosite is provided as ratio of the site’s abundance between the spike-in SILAC reference (heavy) and the bone marrow samples (light). The normalized ratios provided by MaxQuant were log-transformed (base 10) for further analysis. Sites that satisfy the constraints Localization Prob-ability>= 0.75 and Score Diff>=5 were considered to be sufficiently reliable (class I sites (ref. 12)). Fur-thermore, sites that are flagged as Reverse or Contaminant hits were excluded. The identification and quantification data for all class I sites are accessible in Suppl. Information 1 and 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker; classification; aml; ac220; quizartinib; phosphoproteomics;  response prediction

### Affiliations
Evotec, Martinsried, Germany
Evotec

### Submitter
Christoph Schaab

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Schaab
Evotec, Martinsried, Germany


