### Accession
PXD024688

### Title
IL-22 Prevents Epithelial Dysfunction During Citrobacter rodentium-induced Infectious Colitis

### Description
IBD is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by dysregulated interactions between host immune responses and microbiome at the intestinal epithelium interface. Here we identified shared protein alterations in intestinal epithelial differentiation and function between IBD and Citrobacter rodentium infected FVB mice. We discovered that prophylactic treatment with the mucosal healing therapy IL-22.Fc in the infected FVB mice reduced disease severity and rescued the mice from lethality. Notably, we observed an emergence of intermediate undifferentiated intestinal epithelial cells upon infection, with disrupted expression of the solute transporter machinery as well as components critical for intestinal barrier integrity. Multi-omics analyses revealed that with IL-22.Fc treatment several disease associated changes were prevented (including disruption of the solute transporter machinery), and proper physiological homeostatic  functions of the intestine was restored. Taken together, we unveiled the disease relevance of the C. rodentium induced colitis model to IBD and demonstrated the protective role of the mucosal healing therapy IL-22.Fc in ameliorating the epithelial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
The 2-4 Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) scrolls (5 μm of thickness) mounted on glass slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated automatically on Leica ST5010 Autostainer XL with consecutive incubation of xylene, 100% ethanol, 95% ethanol and 75% ethanol. Then a 50 μl lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.5% PEG400, 50mM DTT in 400 mM Tris, pH8.0) was added to each sample scraped into 1.5 ml LoBind Eppendorf tube. Protein was extracted extensively by i) homogenization with FastPrep-24 bead beating grinder (MP Biomedicals) (20s, 3 cycles, speed setting at 5.5), ii) heating at 99°C for 1 h, iii) sonication with water bath sonicator (Branson 2800) for 15 min. The protein extracts then were reduced by adding 1 μl 250 mM DTT solution (final concentration of 5 mM). After incubation at 60°C for 30 min in a water bath, 7.5 μl 500 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM) solution was added (final concentration of 20 mM) to alkylate proteins and incubated for  30 min at room temperature in the dark.  Protein precipitation was performed with a chloroform-methanol procedure. One volume of chloroform was added to each sample and mixed, then four volumes of methanol was added followed by three volumes of H2O. After vortexing, the mixture was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 min. The upper phase and lower phase were removed carefully to obtain protein precipitants at the interface. After washing the protein pellet with methanol, the air-dried protein pellet was dissolved in 80 μl 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer and sonicated in a water bath for protein digestion. The protein concentration was measured with a NanoDrop UV spectrometer (Caliper Life Sciences). The activated trypsin/LysC (V5072, Promega) was added to the samples at a ratio of 1:100 (enzyme: substrate) and incubated overnight at 37°C. To terminate the digestion, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample, gently vortexed followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was carefully transferred and dried out, the solution was concentrated with reconstitution of 20 μl 2% MeOH with 0.1% TFA and then transferred into a vial for LC-MS analysis after UV measurement. The nano-RPLC was executed with EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation employed a long nano-LC column (75 μm ID × 75 cm) with Pepmap 2 μm C18 particles, and a Thermo Acclaim PepMap C18 Trap (75 μm ID × 2 cm) allowing sample loading. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ H2O, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile. A 2 μg peptide sample was loaded onto the trap and separated at a 200 nl/min flow rate following 221 min gradient: 5% B for 20 min; 5 - 22 % B for 170 min; 22 - 60 % B for 20 min; 60 - 100 % B for 1 min; 100 % B for 10 min. The analytical column was warmed homogeneously at 50°C, which helped improve the chromatographic resolution and reproducibility. A Q Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide identification and quantification. Data collection was operated in a 3-second cycle with a data-dependent top-20 mode. MS1 survey scan (m/z 375-1500) was at a resolution of 240,000, with automated gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors were fragmentized in HCD activation mode at a normalized collision energy of 27% and the dynamic exclusion was set with 30s. Precursors were filtered by quadrupole using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data were processed and quantified using an IonStar-based method as described previously (Shen et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018). In brief, mass spectrometry raw files were imported into SIEVE (v2.2) for chromatographic alignment and frame generation. Database search was performed using MSGF+ search engine (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) against the Uniprot-SwissProt mouse protein database. IDPicker (v3.1.11537) was used for protein grouping and global FDR control. At least two distinct peptides were required for protein identification with FDR set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by a dysregulated intestinal epithelial barrier leading to breach of barrier immunity. Here we identified similar protein expression changes between IBD and Citrobacter rodentium-infected FVB mice with respect to dysregulation of solute transporters as well as components critical for intestinal barrier integrity. We attribute the disease associated changes in the model to the emergence of undifferentiated intermediate intestinal epithelial cells. Prophylactic treatment with IL-22.Fc in C. rodentium-infected FVB mice reduced disease severity and rescued the mice from lethality. Multi-omics and solute analyses revealed that IL-22.Fc treatment prevented disease-associated changes including disruption of the solute transporter machinery and restored proper physiological functions of the intestine, respectively. Taken together, we established the disease relevance of the C. rodentium-induced colitis model to IBD, demonstrated the protective role of IL-22 in amelioration of epithelial dysfunction and elucidated the molecular mechanisms with IL-22's effect&#xa0;on intestinal epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hfx, Citrobacter

### Affiliations
Drug Metablism and Pharmackinetics, Abbvie Bioresearch Center
AbbVie Bioresearch Center

### Submitter
Liang Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Tian
Drug Metablism and Pharmackinetics, Abbvie Bioresearch Center


