### Accession
PXD017425

### Title
Transferrin receptor is a specific ferroptosis marker

### Description
Ferroptosis is a form of regulated cell death driven by the iron-dependent accumulation of oxidized polyunsaturated-fatty-acid-containing phospholipids (PUFA-PLs). Three key molecular features of ferroptosis are peroxidation of PUFA-PLs, accumulation of redox-active ferrous iron, and defective lipid peroxide repair (Dixon and Stockwell, 2019). However, there is currently no reliable way to selectively stain ferroptotic cells in tissue sections to characterize the extent of ferroptosis in animal models of disease and in patient tissue samples. We sought to address this gap by immunizing mice with membranes from lymphoma cells treated with the ferroptosis inducer piperazine erastin (PE), and screening ~4,750 of the resulting monoclonal antibodies generated for their ability to selectively detect cells undergoing ferroptosis. We found that one antibody, termed 3F3 Ferroptotic Membrane Antibody (3F3-FMA), was effective as a selective ferroptosis-staining reagent using immunofluorescence (IF). The antigen of 3F3-FMA was identified by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry as the human transferrin receptor 1 protein (TfR1), which imports iron from the extracellular environment into cells. We validated this finding with several additional anti-TfR1 antibodies, and compared them to other potential ferroptosis-detecting reagents via immunofluorescence staining, using fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. We found that anti-TfR1 and anti-malondialdehyde (MDA) adduct antibodies were effective at reliably staining ferroptotic tumor cells in numerous cell culture and tissue contexts. In summary, these findings suggest that anti-TfR1 antibodies can be used to selectively label cells undergoing ferroptosis.

### Sample Protocol
HT-1080 cells were seeded in DMEM (Corning 10-013-CM) and 10% Hi-FBS with 1% penicillin and streptomycin (PS) with 1% MEM Non-Essential Amino Acids Solution (100X) (Thermo Fisher Scientific 11140-076) 16 h prior to use. DMSO or 1 μM of RSL3 was added and incubated for 4 h. Following treatment, the medium was aspirated from each dish and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed with 70 µl lysis buffer (RIPA buffer from ThermoFisher, cat. 89900, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 1X HaltTM protease inhibitor cocktail from ThermoFisher, cat. 78430 and 1X HaltTM phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from ThermoFisher, cat. 78426). Unlysed cells and debris were pelleted for 15 min at 16,000 x g at 4 ˚C. The samples were incubated with 10 μg of 3F3-FMA overnight at 4 ˚C with shaking. The next day, Thermo Scientific Pierce Protein AG Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific 88802) were washed with TBS with 0.05% Tween 20 (wash buffer) and then were incubated with sample/antibody mixture for 1 h with mixing. The beads were collected with a magnetic stand and then washed with wash buffer for three times. The beads were used for mass spectrometry.    Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. Supernatants were collected and dried down in a speed-vac, and peptides were dissolved in a solution containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with C18 disk-packed stage-tips. Desalted peptides were injected onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm x 75 μm column (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 110 min gradient of 5-30% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was maintained at a constant 50 ˚C during all experiments. Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer was used for peptide MS/MS analysis. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 400 to 1575 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 2 x 105 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 of greater than 5 x 103 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 Th. CID fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the ion trap. The AGC target for MS/MS was set to 1 x 104 and the maximum injection time limited to 35 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed using MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008)  (MaxQuant, RRID:SCR_014485) and employed Andromeda for database search(Cox et al., 2011) at default settings with a few modifications. The default was used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance: 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively. MaxQuant was set up to search the reference Human proteome database downloaded from Uniprot. MaxQuant performed the search trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide, Site and Protein FDR were all set to 1% with a minimum of 1 peptide needed for Identification but 2 peptides needed to calculate a protein level ratio. The following modifications were used as fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine (M), Deamination for asparagine or glutamine (NQ) and acetylation on N-terminal of protein were used as variable modifications. MaxQuant combined folder was uploaded in scaffold for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis is a type of regulated cell death driven by the iron-dependent accumulation of oxidized polyunsaturated fatty acid-containing phospholipids. There is no reliable way to selectively stain ferroptotic cells in tissue sections to characterize the extent of ferroptosis in animal models or patient samples. We address this gap by immunizing mice with membranes from lymphoma cells treated with the ferroptosis inducer piperazine erastin and screening &#x223c;4,750 of the resulting monoclonal antibodies generated for their ability to selectively detect cells undergoing ferroptosis. We find that one antibody, 3F3 ferroptotic membrane antibody (3F3-FMA), is effective as a selective ferroptosis-staining reagent. The antigen of 3F3-FMA is identified as the human transferrin receptor 1 protein (TfR1). We validate this finding with several additional anti-TfR1 antibodies and compare them to other potential ferroptosis-detecting&#xa0;reagents. We find that anti-TfR1 and anti-malondialdehyde adduct antibodies are effective at staining ferroptotic tumor cells in multiple cell culture and tissue contexts.

### Keywords
Antigen, Ip-msms, Ferroptosis

### Affiliations
Columbia University
Columbia University Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Jenny Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Brent R. Stockwell
Columbia University Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Chemistry


