### Accession
PXD009440

### Title
Human Salivary Prolactine Inducible Protein (PIP)

### Description
In the HPLC high-resolution ESI-MS profiles of both multiple sclerosis subjects and healthy controls saliva samples three proteins, with exp. monoisotopic ion [M+H]+ at 13493.9 ± 0.2 m/z, 13696.9 ± 0.2 m/z (+203 Da, with respect to 13493.9), and 13843.1 ± 0.2 m/z (+147 Da, with respect to 13696.9) eluting between 37.8-38.2 minutes, were detected. The mass difference of 203 Da suggested that the protein with exp. monoisotopic [M+H]+ at 13696.9 ± 0.2 m/z could correspond to the N-acetylhexosamine (theor. monoisotopic ion at 203.1 m/z) derivative of the 13493.9 ± 0.2 m/z protein. On the other hand, the mass difference of 146 Da between the proteins with exp. monoisotopic [M+H]+ at 13843.1 ± 0.2 m/z and 13696.9 ± 0.2 m/z was in agreement with an additional deoxyhesose moiety (theor. monoisotopic ion at 146.1 m/z). Manual inspection of the high-resolution MS/MS spectra of the [M+10H]+10 ions at 1351.00, 1371.32 and 1386.11 m/z allowed to establish that the three proteins were different proteoforms of PIP with the N-terminal glutamine residue converted to pyro-glutamic acid and with two disulfide bonds, but not to assign the glycosylation site. The presence in the MS/MS spectra of low-molecular weight saccharide oxoniun ions at 204.087 and 138.106 m/z confirmed the presence of an N-acetylhexosamine moiety in the protein with [M+H]+ at 13696.9 ± 0.2 m/z.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection: Resting whole saliva (WS) (from 0.2 to 1 mL) was collected with a soft plastic aspirator at the basis of the tongue from 3 to 5 p.m., when salivary secretion is at a maximum [31]. Samples were collected at least 30 min after any food or beverage had been consumed and teeth had been cleaned. After collection, salivary samples were kept in an ice bath and immediately mixed with an equal volume of 0.2% 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (v/v; TFA) containing 50 μM of leucine enkephalin as internal standard [32]. The acidic solution was centrifuged at 13400 rpm for 10 min to remove the precipitate and the acidic soluble fraction of saliva was either immediately analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS or stored at −80 °C until analysis. Structural characterization of Prolactin-inducible proteins by RP-HPLC High-resolution ESI-MS and MS/MS experiments: The characterization of proteoforms of Prolactin-inducible protein (PIP) was performed by a top-down proteomic approach on the intact proteins present in the acidic soluble fraction of WS. The experiments were carried out by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano System HPLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The injection volume was 20 μL. The column was a Zorbax 300SB-C8 (3.5 µm particle diameter; 1.0 x 150 mm), and eluents were: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and (eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile-water 80/20. The gradient was: 0-2 min 5% B, 2-40 min from 5% to 55% B (linear), 40-45 min from 70% to 99% B, at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 60000. The acquisition range was from 350 to 2000 m/z. Tuning parameters: capillary temperature was 300°C, and the source voltage 4.0 kV, S-Lens RF level 60%. In data-dependent acquisition mode the five most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), with 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, activation q of 0.25. HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. Protein sequences and sites of covalent modifications were validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the ProteinProspector website (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm).

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. In top-down experiments protein sequences and sites of covalent modifications were validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the ProteinProspector website (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm).  The relative abundance of the salivary proteins was determined by measuring the area of RP-HPLC low-resolution ESI-MS eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) peaks, considered when the S/N ratio was at least 5. This value is linearly proportional to the peptide concentration and it can be used to monitor relative abundances, under constant analytical conditions [36]. To determine reliable XIC peak area, the choice of m/z values of the protein of interest is relevant, in particular in crowded chromatographic where ESI spectra belonging to other proteins might share ions with the same m/z value. The window for all these values was in a range of ±0.5 m/z. In order to minimize errors associated with sample dilution, the XIC peak value of each protein/peptide analyzed was correct with respect to the XIC peak value of the leucine encephalin internal standard. Statistical analyses were performed with the software GraphPad Prism 6.0. Data distributions were tested for normality by D'Agostino-Pearson test. A comparison between multiple sclerosis subjects and healthy controls  was performed by using the following statistical tests depending on data distribution (normal or skewed), and variance (homogeneous or unequal): parametric t-test (variance homogeneous); t-test with Welch correction (normal distribution, variance unequal), and the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test (skewed distribution, variance unequal).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ltq orbitrap, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari
Dip. Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente (DISVA) Macrosezione Biomedica - laboratorio di Biochimica Università degli Studi di Cagliari

### Submitter
Barbara Manconi

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Manconi
Dip. Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente (DISVA) Macrosezione Biomedica - laboratorio di Biochimica Università degli Studi di Cagliari


