### Accession
PXD005417

### Title
Ubiquitin remnant analysis in melanoma post inhibition of Usp9x

### Description
Assay the ubiquitinated protein remmants post depletion or inhibition of the deubiquitinase Usp9x in melanoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty mg of protein protein was prepared from melanoma cells as control, Usp9x knock down and treated for 6 hrs with 5 micromolar of G9 (Usp9x inhibitor).  Ubiquitinated peptide enrichment using the following antibody: Ubiquitin Branch Motif Antibody (K-ε-GG) #3925  LC-MS/MS Analysis using LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos, ESI-CID and SEQUEST search results

### Data Protocol
Peptides were loaded directly onto a 10 cm x 75 μm PicoFrit capillary column packed with Magic C18 AQ reversed-phase resin. The column was developed with a 90-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min. MS Parameter Settings: MS Run Time 120 min, MS1 Scan Range (300.0 – 1500.00), Top 20 MS/MS (Min Signal 500, Isolation Width 2.0, Normalized Coll. Energy 35.0, Activation-Q 0.250, Activation Time 20.0, Lock Mass 371.101237, Charge State Rejection Enabled, Charge State 1+ Rejected, Dynamic Exclusion Enabled, Repeat Count 1, Repeat Duration 35.0, Exclusion List Size 500, Exclusion Duration 40.0, Exclusion Mass Width Relative to Mass, Exclusion Mass Width 10ppm).  MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST (J.K.Eng et. al.(1994) J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 5(11) 976-989) and the Core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the NCBI homo sapiens database with mass accuracy of +/-50 ppm for precursor ions and 1 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of +/– 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif (K-εGG).

### Publication Abstract
ETS transcription factors are commonly deregulated in cancer by chromosomal translocation, overexpression or post-translational modification to induce gene expression programs essential in tumorigenicity. Targeted destruction of these proteins may have therapeutic impact. Here we report that Ets-1 destruction is regulated by the deubiquitinating enzyme, Usp9x, and has major impact on the tumorigenic program of metastatic melanoma. Ets-1 deubiquitination blocks its proteasomal destruction and enhances tumorigenicity, which could be reversed by Usp9x knockdown or inhibition. Usp9x and Ets-1 levels are coincidently elevated in melanoma with highest levels detected in metastatic tumours versus normal skin or benign skin lesions. Notably, Ets-1 is induced by BRAF or MEK kinase inhibition, resulting in increased NRAS expression, which could be blocked by inactivation of Usp9x and therapeutic combination of Usp9x and MEK inhibitor fully suppressed melanoma growth. Thus, Usp9x modulates the Ets-1/NRAS regulatory network and may have biologic and therapeutic implications.

### Keywords
Usp9x, G9, Deubiquitinase, Melanoma, Inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
University of Michigan Dept Internal Medicine/Div Heme-Onc

### Submitter
Luke Peterson

### Lab Head
Dr Luke Peterson
University of Michigan Dept Internal Medicine/Div Heme-Onc


