### Accession
PXD021455

### Title
Disclosing proteins in cork oak plants associated with the immune response to P. cinnamomi inoculation in a long-term assay

### Description
The pathological interaction between oak trees and Phytophthora cinnamomi has implications in the cork oak decline observed over the last decades in the Iberian Peninsula. During host colonization, the phytopathogen secretes effector molecules like elicitins to increase disease effectiveness.  The objective of this study was to unravel the proteome changes associated to with the cork oak immune response triggered by P. cinnamomi inoculation in a long-term assay, through SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics performed in the oak leaves. Using the Arabidopis thaliana proteome database as a reference, 424 proteins have been confidently quantified in cork oak leaves, of which 80 proteins showed a p-value below 0.05 or a fold-change greater than 2 or less than 0.5 in their levels between control and inoculated samples being considered as altered. The inoculation of cork oak roots with P. cinnamomi increased the levels of proteins associated with protein-DNA complex assembly, lipid oxidation, response to endoplasmic reticulum stress, and pyridine-containing compound metabolic process in the leaves. In opposition, several proteins associated with cellular metabolic compound salvage and monosaccharide catabolic process had significantly decreased abundances. The most significant abundance variations were observed for the Ribulose 1,5-Bisphosphate Carboxylase small subunit (RBCS1A), Heat Shock protein 90-1 (Hsp90-1), Lipoxygenase 2 (LOX2) and Histone superfamily protein H3.3 (A8MRLO/At4G40030) revealing a pertinent role for these proteins in the host-pathogen interaction mechanism. This work represents the first SWATH-MS analysis performed in cork oak plants inoculated with P. cinnamomi and highlights host proteins that have a relevant action in the homeostatic states that emerge from the interaction between the oomycete and the host in the long term and in a distal organ.

### Sample Protocol
Cork oak plants used in this experimental project germinated from acorns with provenance in six cork oak trees located in Cachopo, Algarve, Portugal.  Parental cork oak trees showed signs of decline at distinct development stages, based on visual observation of the canopy defoliation level. The study included two experimental conditions: 6 cork oak plants inoculated with the PA45 P. cinnamomi isolate and 6 non-inoculated plants. Seeds from six parental cork oak trees germinated and were distributed between the control and inoculated groups so that each inoculated plant had a paired control from the same progenitor. Briefly, P. cinnamomi mycelium isolate PA45, grown in solid agar, directly contacted with root tissues of 77 day-hold cork oak plantlets. Forty-eight hours after P. cinnamomi inoculation all plants were potted in plastic containers, transferred outside and watered regularly. The experimental assay lasted for 248 days. At the end, the leaves of cork oak plants, were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Then the biological material was stored at -80ºC until further use. The optimized extraction of proteins from cork oak leaves included eight steps: 1) Leaf tissue (200 mg) was grinded ground in a mortar and pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen to obtain a fine powder. 2) Buffer 1 (1.25 mL/100 mg sample; DTT –Dithiothreitol 60 mM; 10% TCA-Trichloroacetic acid solubilized in acetone) was added to the mortar and samples were macerated in the presence of the buffer with the pestle. 3) The heterogeneous solution was transferred to a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube and incubated for 1 hour at -80 ºC. 4) The samples were centrifuged at 15,000× g for 15 min at 4 ºC and the supernatant was discarded. 5) The pellets were dissolved in 1 mL of Buffer 2 (2.5 ml/100 mg sample; DTT 60 mM solubilized in acetone). 6) These solutions were incubated for 1 hour at -80 ºC. Procedures 5 and 6 were repeated until the solution was clear green. 7) The samples were centrifuged at 15,000× g for 15 min at 4 ºC and the supernatant was discarded. 8) Pellets were dried and resuspended in 250 µL of Tris-glycine followed by incubation at 95 ºC for 5 min and centrifugation at 20,000x g for 15 min at 4 ºC. Protein concentration was estimated by using the 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). For the proteomic screening, the short GeLC-SWATH-MS strategy was used with minor modifications. Briefly, 50 μg of each sample and a pooled sample per group (control or inoculated samples) were subjected to in-gel digestion after a partial SDS-PAGE run. The same amount of a recombinant protein (malE-GFP)) was added to each sample and proteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides were eluted and desalted with C18 SPE pipette tips. The Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex) was operated in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each fraction of the pooled samples; followed by SWATH acquisition of each sample. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm, 120Å, Eksigent) at 5 µL/min with a 45 min linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA, and the peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, Sciex). IDA experiments were performed by analysing 3 fractions of the pooled samples. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 counts per second (cps) – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum of 10 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. The SWATH setup used the same chromatographic conditions as IDA and the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analysed, in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 250 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according with the window.

### Data Protocol
Specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0.1, Sciex), with the following search parameters: reviewed entries for plant from SwissProt database (release of April 2018) or reference proteomes downloaded from uniprot (April 2018) for populus trichocarpa (UP000006729) or Arabidopsis thaliana (UP000006548), to all databases the sequence of malE-GFP was added; acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and the gel based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot™ software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. Data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.2, Sciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the ProteinPilot™ software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches. Peptide’s retention time was adjusted by using the malE-GFP peptides. In SWATH™ Acquisition data, peptides are confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups, which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Up to 5 target fragment ions were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least three replicates per group were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 minutes. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total intensity at the protein level. The fold change (FC) between inoculated and control plants was calculated by dividing the respective median protein levels for all quantified proteins. Statistical comparisons between protein levels were carried out using the software SPSS v23 (IBM) and the non-parametric Mann Whitney U-test (MW). Proteins were considered as differentially modified when FC was greater than 2 or less than 0.5 or MW p--value was below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cork oak plant, Quercus suber, Swath-ms, P. cinnamomi

### Affiliations
Center for Electronic, Optoelectronic and Telecommunications (CEOT), Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal
University of Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal
CEOT-Center for Electronic, Optoelectronic and Telecommunications, University of Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.
 

### Submitter
Ana Cristina Coelho

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Cristina Hurtado de Matos Coelho
Center for Electronic, Optoelectronic and Telecommunications (CEOT), Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal


