### Accession
PXD007600

### Title
Arabidopsis diurnal LFQ proteome and  labelled phosphoproteome

### Description
Plant growth and survival depends to a large extent on the diurnal regulation of cellular processes. Although extensively studied at the transcript level, notably less is known about diurnal fluctuations at the protein level. Here, we report a high-resolution quantitative time-course of the Arabidopsis rosette proteome and phosphoproteome over a 12 h light:12 h dark diel cycle. We monitored the proteome every 2 h and the phosphoproteome immediately before and after the light-to-dark and dark-to-light transitions. Notably, we quantified nearly 5000 proteins and 1800 phosphopeptides, of which 288 and 225, respectively, were found to fluctuate over the time-course. Diurnal proteome and phosphoproteome changes were related to diverse biological processes, including protein translation, light detection, photosynthesis, metabolism and transport. Together, these datasets represent the most comprehensive proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis rosettes to date, allowing us to make multi-level inferences about the diurnal regulation of key cellular plant processes plants.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis Col-0 wild type plants were grown in a chamber under a 12 h light/12 h dark photoperiod and optimal conditions (Baerenfaller et al 2012). At 31 days after sowing, several rosettes were pooled into one sample and 4 biological replicates were taken on each time point. For total proteome analyses, samples were taken every 2 h during 24 h. For protein phosphorylation analyses, samples were harvested around the transitions from light to dark and dark to light (30 min before each transition, 10 min after and 30 min after). Samples were snap-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C.  Proteome Analysis Rosettes were ground in liquid N2. Samples were processed by the FASP method with minimal modifications. An amount of 140 µg of protein was digested per sample. Peptides were desalted using SPE C18 columns (Finisterre) and dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator. Peptide samples were fractionated by HILIC on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system with a YMC Pack Polyamine II, 250 x 3.0 mm, 5 μm, 120 Å column. Samples were dissolved in 100 μL Buffer A (75% ACN, 8 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5) and got separated with a system of buffers A and B (5% ACN, 100 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5). For each sample, fractions were pooled down to 5, dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator and dissolved in 200 µl of 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA before desalting and drying again. Mass spectrometry queues were arranged so comparable fractions were run in the same batch. Peptide samples were dissolved in 20 µl 3% ACN, 0.1% FA. LC-MS/MS shotgun analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion couple to an Eksigent nanoLC ultra (Sciex). Samples were separated on a self packed reverse phase column (75 µm x 150 mm, ReproSil-Pur, C18, 120 Å, AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Peptides were eluted using a buffer system of A and B (0.1% FA in ACN). All precursor signals were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole transmission in the range of 300-1500 m/z. Spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120K at 200 m/z, a target value of 4e5 and a maximum cycle of 3 s. Data dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation at 30% energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 100 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Precursor signals were selected with a charge state from + 2 to + 7 and a signal intensity of at least 5e3. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 30 s and maximum parallelizing ion injections was activated.  Phosphoproteome Analysis Per sample, 200 mg of ground leaf material was used. In parallel, 200 mg of a pool containing equal parts of each sample was prepared. Proteins were extracted in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 2 mM NaOV, 5 mM NaF, 50 µg/mL PhosSTOP (Roche). Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide. Soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation. The insoluble fractions were re-suspended in 300 µL of 60% MeOH, 40% 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 with shaking and digested by 0.5 µg chymotrypsin and 1.0 µg trypsin at 37°C for 20 h. For the soluble fraction, 1 mg was diluted with 1 vol 50 mM TEAB and then water to a final volume of 1.2 mL and digested for 20 h at 37°C using a 1:50 ratio of trypsin to protein. Digestion reactions were stopped using TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. The insoluble material was discarded by centrifugation. Supernatants were dried and re-suspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA. All samples were desalted using SPE C18 columns and dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator. Total peptide fractions from each experimental (light label) and pool (heavy label) samples were labeled as by Boersema et al. 2009. Heavy and light samples were then mixed 1:1 and desalted prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, performed using TiO2 as per a protocol by the EU consortium Prime-XS (www.primexs.eu/protocols/func-startdown/103). Phosphorylated peptide samples were analyzed using a Thermo QExactive hybrid mass spectrometer. Dissolved samples were injected by an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a self-made reverse-phase column (75 µm x 150 mm, ReproSil-Pur, C18, 120 Å, AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Peptides were eluted using an A and B (0.1% FA in ACN) buffer system. All precursor signals were recorded in a mass range of 300-1700 m/z and a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z. The maximum accumulation time for a target value of 3e6 was set to 120 ms. Up to 12 data dependent MS/MS were recorded using quadrupole isolation with a window of 2 Da and HCD fragmentation at 28% energy. A target value of 1e6 was set for MS/MS using a maximum injection time of 250 ms and a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z. Precursor signals were selected with charge states from +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 1e5. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Total proteome quantification Label‑free precursor (MS1) intensity based quantitation was performed. Progenesis QI for Proteomics (version 2.0, www.nonlinear.com) was used to get peptide level quantitation. Briefly, for each individual fraction, automatic alignment was reviewed and manually adjusted before normalization. From each Progenesis peptide ion (default sensitivity in peak picking) a maximum of the top five tandem mass spectra per peptide ion were exported as a Mascot generic file (mgf) using charge deconvolution and deisotoping option and a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS/MS. Searches were done in Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) against a decoyed (reversed) Arabidopsis thaliana protein database from TAIR (release TAIR10) concatenated with a collection of 261 known mass spectrometry contaminants. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The following search parameters were used: trypsin digestion (1 missed cleavage allowed), fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl modified cysteine and variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagines and glutamines, and acetylation of protein N terminal peptides. Mascot searches were imported into Scaffold 4.2.1 (Proteome Software). The following thresholds were applied: peptide FDR < 5, protein FDR < 10, 1 minimum peptide. Spectrum reports were imported again into Progenesis. After this, individual fraction analyses were combined into the full quantitative Progenesis experiment. From this, quantitative peptide values were exported for further processing. Only peptides that could be unambiguously assigned to a single protein (gene model annotation) were kept for quantitation. A Hi‑4 strategy (Grossmann et al. 2010) was applied to obtain protein quantitative values. Proteins with 2 or more peptides assigned were considered as quantifiable. Following this criteria, the final protein level FDR was estimated at 1.3%.  Phosphoproteome quantification Quantification of changes in identified phosphopeptides was performed using MaxQuant. Default settings for labeled quantification were used with the following modifications: fixed carbamidomethyl modified cysteine and variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and oxidation of methionine. FDR tolerances was set to ≤ 0.05 (protein) and ≤ 0.01 (peptide). MaxQuant outputs were subsequently filtered to keep only phosphopeptides with a phosphorylation site probability score ≥ 0.8 and present in at least 3 of 4 biological replicates and in all 3 time‑points for each light transition.  Data analysis Significant changes in abundance in protein and phosphopeptides were determined using an ANOVA analysis. Total proteome (P value ≤ 0.05 and FC ≥ 1.5) and phosphoproteome (P value ≤ 0.05). The significantly changing proteome was subjected to cluster analysis using GProX (Kumar & Futschik 2007, Rigbolt et al. 2011). Six clusters were generated in an unsupervised clustering manner based on the fuzzy c-means algorithm. For each protein cluster and the phosphoproteins changing at the L-D or D-L transition, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was done using SetRank (Simillion et al. 2017). Enrichment was calculated (SetRank corrected P value ≤ 0.01) for all the available databases included in the SetRank R package. Only terms with a size ≥ 2 were considered. To test for significantly non-changing proteins at the transitions of the light, (i.e., at dawn -ZT1 and ZT23- and dusk -ZT11 and ZT13), a Tost equivalence test (equivalence R package) was applied with an epsilon = 0.4. Significance threshold was P value ≤ 0.05. To compare protein and mRNA profiles, mRNA data generated by the Alison Smith lab (Smith et al. 2004) was obtained from the Diurnal database (diurnal.mocklerlab.org). Data was standardized to plot both proteins and mRNAs in the same graph. Predicted subcellular localization of all changing proteins and phosphoproteins was performed using the consensus subcellular localization predictor SUBAcon (suba3.plantenergy.uwa.edu.au). String DB network analyses were undertaken using both proteome and phosphoproteome data. String DB analyses were performed in Cytoscape using the String DB plugin stringApp. A minimum correlation coefficient of 0.5 was used along with a second layer of 5 additional nodes to infer network connectedness.

### Publication Abstract
Plant growth depends on the diurnal regulation of cellular processes, but it is not well understood if and how transcriptional regulation controls diurnal fluctuations at the protein level. Here, we report a high-resolution Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) leaf rosette proteome acquired over a 12&#x2009;hr light:12&#x2009;hr dark diurnal cycle and the phosphoproteome immediately before and after the light-to-dark and dark-to-light transitions. We quantified nearly 5,000 proteins and 800 phosphoproteins, of which 288 fluctuated in their abundance and 226 fluctuated in their phosphorylation status. Of the phosphoproteins, 60% were quantified for changes in protein abundance. This revealed six proteins involved in nitrogen and hormone metabolism that had concurrent changes in both protein abundance and phosphorylation status. The diurnal proteome and phosphoproteome changes involve proteins in key cellular processes, including protein translation, light perception, photosynthesis, metabolism and transport. The phosphoproteome at the light-dark transitions revealed the dynamics at phosphorylation sites in either anticipation of or response to a change in light regime. Phosphorylation site motif analyses implicate casein kinase II and calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinases among the primary light-dark transition kinases. The comparative analysis of the diurnal proteome and diurnal and circadian transcriptome established how mRNA and protein accumulation intersect in leaves during the diurnal cycle of the plant.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Diurnal

### Affiliations
Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Sira Echevarria-Zomeno

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Wilhelm Gruissem
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich


