### Accession
PXD025302

### Title
Quantitative proteome analysis reveals changes of membrane proteins in Sedum plumbizincicola under cadmium stress

### Description
Sedum plumbizincicola is an herbaceous species tolerant of excessive cadmium accumulation in above-ground tissues. The implications of membrane proteins, especially integrative membrane proteins such as transporters, in Cd detoxification in plants have received attention in recent years, but a comprehensive profiling of Cd-responsive membrane proteins from Cd hyperaccumulator plants is lacking. In this study, the membrane proteins of root, stem, and leaf tissues of S. plumbizincicola seedlings treated with Cd solution for 0, 1 or 3 days were analyzed by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling-based proteome quantification. Total 3353 proteins with predicted transmembrane helices were identified and quantified in at least one tissue group

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and cadmium treatment S. plumbizincicola plants were collected from an abandoned Pb/Zn mine in Quzhou, Zhejiang Province, China. Seedlings of similar growth were grown hydroponically for three weeks in half-strength Hoagland solution at 26 ℃ with 16 h light/8 h dark cycle. Then seedlings were treated with 400 uM CdCl2 solution for 1 d and 4 d while taking 0 d as a control. Each experimental group has three biological replicates. Root, stem, and leaf tissues of each seedings were harvested separately, briefly dried on the paper towel, frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately and stored at -80 ℃ until needed.   Membrane protein isolation and digestion Microsomal proteins were extracted using a Minute Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation Kit for Plants (Invent Biotechnologies, Beijing) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. MS-SAFE protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich) were added during membrane extraction to prevent protein degradation and dephosphorylation. The protein pellet obtained using the kit was dissolved in the buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 2 % SDS, 2 % mercaptoethanol, and precipitated at -20 ℃ overnight after mixed with 5 volumes of cold methanol with 0.1 M ammonium acetate. After centrifugation, proteins were dissolved in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and quantified with Bio-Rad Protein Assay kit using BSA as a standard.   Tryptic digestion and TMT labeling Total 50 μg proteins of each sample were reduced with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 30 °C for 60 min, then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with 6 volumes of cold acetone overnight, and then dissolved in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. Proteins were digested with trypsin at a 1:25 w/w protease: protein ratio overnight at 37 °C. Each sample containing 50 μg of peptide in 50 mM TEAB buffer was combined with its respective 9-plex of TMT10 reagent and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The three biological replicates from control (untreated) samples were labeled with 126, 127N and 127C reagents, the proteins from the Cd-treated-1d samples were labeled with 128N,128C and 129N channels, while the Cd-treated-4d samples were labeled with 129C, 130C and 131 of TMT10 reagents respectively. After testing the labeling efficiency, labeled samples were quenched by addition of 2 μl of 5 % hydroxylamine, incubated for 15 min, then combined and dried down before fractionation.  LC-MS/MS analysis To reduce peptide complexity, multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were separated by basic reversed-phase chromatography. After being vacuum dried, labeled samples were reconstituted in 2 % acetonitrile and 5 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 9-10), and separated on a Waters Acquity BEH C18 1.7 μm 2.1x 100 mm column using H class UPLC system (Waters) at a flow rate 300 μl/min. Peptides were separated by a gradient from 2 to 8 % buffer B (100 % acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium hydroxide) in 1.5 min, to 24 % buffer B in 15.5 min, to 32 % buffer B within 4 min, then from 32 % to 70 % buffer B in 1 min. The buffer A is 5 mM ammonium hydroxide in water. Total 33 fractions were collected, combined into 11 fractions and vacuum dried for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trapping column (100 μm×2 cm, 5 μm) and an analytical column (75 μm×50 cm, 2 μm) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). Each fraction of TMT-labeled peptides (1 μg) was separated by a binary buffer system of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile plus 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient from 5 to 8 % buffer B within 2 min, to 20 % buffer B within 65 min, to 40 % buffer B within 32 min, then from 40 % to 90 % buffer B within 4 min. The flow rate was at 300 nl/min. The column oven was set to 60 oC. The full scan was performed between 350–1,650 m/z at the resolution 120,000 at 200 m/z, the automatic gain control target at 3e6. The MS/MS scan was operated with HCD in Top 12 mode using the following settings: resolution 45,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target at 1e5; normalized collision energy at 32 %; isolation window of 1.2 Th; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, > 7; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Scientific). Raw files from the same 9-plex TMT experiments were combined and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with S. plumbizincicola proteome (total 31,523 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein N-termini, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Proteins, peptides and PSMs with quality q scores < 0.01 (1% FDR level) were accepted for identification.  and at least one unique peptide was required for matching a protein entry for its identification. Normalization was applied for the grand total reporter ion intensity for each channel within the 9-plex experiment, which corrects for small sample loading and labeling reaction efficiency differences. Statistical analyses were performed using the limma package from Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org/). Significant proteins were filtered for an average fold change >1.5 with p-values <0.05 adjusted for multiple testing correction by false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini–Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Sedum plumbizincicola is an herbaceous species tolerant of excessive cadmium accumulation in above-ground tissues. The implications of membrane proteins, especially integrative membrane proteins, in Cd detoxification of plants have received attention in recent years, but a comprehensive profiling of Cd-responsive membrane proteins from Cd hyperaccumulator plants is lacking. In this study, the membrane proteins of root, stem, and leaf tissues of S. plumbizincicola seedlings treated with Cd solution for 0, 1 or 4 days were analyzed by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling-based proteome quantification (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025302). Total 3353 proteins with predicted transmembrane helices were identified and quantified in at least one tissue group. 1667 proteins were defined as DAPs (differentially abundant proteins) using fold change &gt;1.5 with p-values &lt;0.05. The number of DAPs involved in metabolism, transport protein, and signal transduction was significantly increased after exposure to Cd, suggesting that the synthesis and decomposition of organic compounds and the transport of ions were actively involved in the Cd tolerance process. The number of up-regulated transport proteins increased significantly from 1-day exposure to 4-day exposure, from 5 to 112, 16 to 42, 18 to 44, in root, stem, and leaf, respectively. Total 352 Cd-regulated transport proteins were identified, including ABC transporters, ion transport proteins, aquaporins, proton pumps, and organic transport proteins. Heterologous expression of SpABCB28, SpMTP5, SpNRAMP5, and SpHMA2 in yeast and subcellular localization showed the Cd-specific transport activity. The results will enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanism of Cd hypertolerance and hyperaccumulation in S. plumbizincicola and will be benefit for future genetic engineering in phytoremediation.

### Keywords
Cadmium stress, Sedum plumbizincicola, Tmt labeling, Membrane proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,  P. R. China
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Zhiping Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiping Deng
Institute of Virology and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,  P. R. China


