### Accession
PXD038490

### Title
SPY mediates O-fucose modification of hundreds of proteins and sugar-dependent growth in Arabidopsis_(Part 1: HCD)

### Description
The recent discovery of SPY-catalyzed protein O-fucosylation reveals a novel mechanism for regulating nucleocytoplasmic protein functions in plants. Genetic evidence indicates important roles of SPY in diverse developmental and physiological processes, however, the upstream signal controlling SPY activity and the downstream substrate proteins O-fucosylated by SPY remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that SPY mediates sugar-dependent growth. We further identify hundreds of O-fucosylated proteins using lectin affinity chromatography followed by mass spectrometry. All the O-fucosylation events quantified in proteomic analyses are undetectable or decreased in the spy mutants and thus likely catalyzed by SPY. The O-fucosylome includes mostly nuclear and cytosolic proteins. Many O-fucosylated proteins function in essential cellular processes, hormone signaling, and developmental programs, consistent with the genetic functions of SPY. The O-fucosylome also includes many proteins modified by O-linked-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) and by phosphorylation downstream of the target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase, revealing the convergence of these nutrient signaling pathways on key regulatory functions such as post-transcriptional/translational regulation and hormonal responses. Our study identifies numerous targets of SPY/O-fucosylation and potential nodes of crosstalk among sugar/nutrient signaling pathways, enabling future dissection of the signaling network that mediates sugar regulation of plant growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative analysis using metabolic stable isotope labeling mass spectrometry (SIL-MS), the Col and spy seedlings were grown on 14N (½ strength MS nutrient without nitrogen (PhytoTechnology Laboratories), NH4NO3 [0.5 g/L, Sigma], KNO3 [0.5 g/L, Sigma], pH 5.7) or 15N media (½ strength MS nutrient without nitrogen, 15NH415NO3 [0.5 g/L, Cambridge Isotope Laboratory], K15NO3 [0.5 g/L, Cambridge Isotope Laboratory], pH 5.7) for 14 days under constant light at 22 °C. For the SIL-MS quantification experiments comparing WT and spy-4, equal amounts of plant tissue powder of the 14N and 15N samples were mixed before protein extraction, whereas the samples of WT and spy-23 were mixed after protein extraction. Flowers were harvested from 5-week-old Col plants grown in greenhouses with a 16-h light/8-h dark cycle at 22–24 °C. The tissues were then ground in liquid nitrogen.  Proteins were extracted as described in reference (Xu et al., 2017, PNAS). Protein concentrations were measured by Bio-Rad protein Assay (Bradford). For the 14N/15N quantification experiments comparing WT and spy-23, an equal amount of protein from the 14N and 15N-labeled samples were mixed. Modified trypsin (Trypsin, TPCK Treated) was added (1: 50 w/w) and the samples were incubated at 37 oC overnight. Modified trypsin was added once again (1:50 w/w) and incubated for a further 6 hours. Next, the protease activity was quenched by acidification of the reaction mixture with formic acid to a final concentration of 1% formic acid. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 mins to remove insoluble material. The supernatant was desalted using Sep-PAK C18 cartridges following manufacturer's instructions (Waters). The peptide samples were dried up using SpeedVac (Thermo) and stored in -80 oC before use.   A chromatography column (Tricorn 5/50 Column, Cytiva) was packed with 0.7 mL AAL-agarose (Vector laboratories) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 105 µL buffer A (PBS+5%) acetonitrile and 100 µL was loaded. Chromatography was performed with AKTA purifier (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 100 µL/min. Buffer B consisted of buffer A with 10 mM L-fucose (Cayman). After washing with seven volumes (4.9 mL) of buffer A, O-fucosylated peptides were eluted using buffer B. The eluted fractions were collected and combined for desalting using Sep-PAK C18 cartridges (Waters). The peptide samples were dried up using SpeedVac (Thermo) and stored in -80 oC before mass spectrometric analysis. For HCD experiments, peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher) connected to Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical Easy-Spray C18 columns (75 μm × 150 mm) (Thermo, ES803).  The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120 min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 (resolution 120,000; AGC 3.0E6) and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27. HCD/EThcD data were acquired on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were fractionated on an analytical Easy-Spray C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm) (Thermo, ES803) using the gradient same as HCD experiment. Precursor ions were scanned with either two consecutive HCD and EThcD or EThcD only. For both types of scans, the precursor ions were scanned from 375 to 1600 m/z (resolution 120,000; AGC 4.0E5) and the charge state 2+ to 6+ were filtered in the quadrupole with a selection window of 1.0 m/z and MIPS Peptide filter enabled. For consecutive HCD and EThcD, HCD was carried out at collision energy of 27% measured in orbitrap with 60 ms maximum injection time and 1 micro scan (resolution 15,000; AGC 1.0e4). The peptides were then subjected to EThcD fragmentation with maximum injection time of 100 ms, supplemental activation collision energy of 35% measured in the Orbitrap with 3 micro scans (resolution 15,000; AGC 5.0e4). The overall scan cycle was 3 s.  For EThcD only scan the precursors were subjected to EThcD fragmentation with 35% supplemental activation collision energy and 200 ms maximum injection time (resolution 15,000, AGC 15.0e4). The number of microscans and scan cycle were the same as with the sequential EThcD.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were converted to peaklist using a script PAVA (peaklist generator that provides centroid MS2 peaklist) (Guan et al., 2011; Shrestha et al., 2022), and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the TAIR database Arabidopsis thaliana from December 2010 (https://www.arabidopsis.org/), concatenated with sequence randomized versions of each protein (a total of 35386 entries). A precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and MS/MS2 tolerance was set to 20 ppm., Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a constant modification. Variable modifications include protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal Gln conversion to pyroglutamate, Met oxidation, as well as O-fucosylation of serine and threonine and single, double, and triple neutral loss of O-fucosylation. 15N-labeled searches were done the same as mentioned above, considering all 20 amino acids are constantly modified by 15N labeling. FDR 1% was set for both proteins and peptides. For Quantification, 15N labeling efficiency was manually checked. “15N labeling” was chosen as a quantitative method using Protein Prospector with automatic adjustment of L:H intensity ratios with labeling efficiency. The cleavage specificity was set to trypsin, allowing two missed cleavages and a maximum of three modifications. False discovery rate was less than 1% at the peptide level according to target:decoy database searching. Quantification data from 14N/15N reverse labeling experiment was manually checked to correct data points with wrong peak calling. The background signal intensity was set to 1000 and the Expect value cut-off was set to 0.00001. Peptides that showed median WT/spy ratios with greater than 100-fold difference in the forward and reverse labeling experiments were removed as inconsistent measurements. The consistently quantified median WT/spy ratios of O-fucosylated and non-O-fucosylated peptides were shown in scatter plots. The O-fucosylated peptide list was filtered sequentially to reduce false positives: 1. From proteins with more than one unique mass peptides. 2. From proteins with one unique mass peptide but identified by both HCD and EThcD. 3. From proteins with one unique mass peptide, which had expectation value <= 1.0E-6. 4. From O-GlcNAc modified proteins and spectrum quality was manually inspected. Peptides that passed these filters were combined into the final list of O-fucosylated peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The recent discovery of SPINDLY (SPY)-catalyzed protein O-fucosylation revealed a novel mechanism for regulating nucleocytoplasmic protein functions in plants. Genetic evidence indicates the important roles of SPY in diverse developmental and physiological processes. However, the upstream signal controlling SPY activity and the downstream substrate proteins O-fucosylated by SPY remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrated that SPY mediates sugar-dependent growth in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). We further identified hundreds of O-fucosylated proteins using lectin affinity chromatography followed by mass spectrometry. All the O-fucosylation events quantified in our proteomic analyses were undetectable or dramatically decreased in the spy mutants, and thus likely catalyzed by SPY. The O-fucosylome includes mostly nuclear and cytosolic proteins. Many O-fucosylated proteins function in essential cellular processes, phytohormone signaling, and developmental programs, consistent with the genetic functions of SPY. The O-fucosylome also includes many proteins modified by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) and by phosphorylation downstream of the target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase, revealing the convergence of these nutrient signaling pathways on key regulatory functions such as post-transcriptional/translational regulation and phytohormone responses. Our study identified numerous targets of SPY/O-fucosylation and potential nodes of crosstalk among sugar/nutrient signaling pathways, enabling future dissection of the signaling network that mediates sugar regulation of plant growth and development.

### Keywords
Proteomics., O-fucosylation, O-glycosylation, Aal, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility


