### Accession
PXD011374

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomic Analysis Reveals Significant Metabolic Reprogramming in the Termination of Liver Regeneration in Mice

### Description
Phosphorylation is well-known in regulating various biological processes. However, comprehensively phosphoproteomic profiling in the termination of liver regeneration (LR) is still missing. Here, we used TMT labeling coupled with phosphopeptides enrichment and 2D LC-MS/MS analysis to establish a global phosphoproteomic map in mice liver at day 5 after partial hepatectomy. Altogether, 619 phosphorylation sites in 437 proteins were significantly up-regulated and 503 phosphorylation sites in 358 proteins were down-regulated. The differentially phosphorylated proteins were further classified according to their biological process, cellular components, molecular function and subcellular localization. KEGG pathway analysis showed that they mainly participate in metabolic pathways, DNA replication, tight junction and focal adhesion. Motif analysis of the identified phosphorylation sites has revealed a diverse array of consensus sequences, suggesting multiple kinase families such as MAPK, PKA/PKC, CaMK-II, CKII and CDK, may be involved in the termination of LR. Finally, several differentially phosphorylated proteins were validated by Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot. Taken together, our data unravels the first comprehensive phosphoproteomic map in the termination of liver regeneration in mice, which greatly expands our knowledge in the complicate regulation of this process and provides new directions on the treatment of liver cancer using liver resection and donor liver transplantation. Biological significance: The novelty of this study is that we have established for the first time a global phosphoproteomic map in mice liver at day 5 after partial hepatectomy, which represents the termination of liver regeneration. Altogether, 9,775 phosphorylation sites in 3,458 proteins were identified, among which 7,738 phosphorylation site in 2,971 proteins were quantified. KEGG pathway analysis demonstrates markedly metabolic reprograming in termination of LR, which is further validated by selected validation of several differentially phosphorylated metabolic enzymes such as PDHA, ACACA and FASN. The consistent high phosphorylation of PDHA in the first 4 days and its rapidly decreased phosphorylation at day 5 after PH might be a key signal in controlling the switch between glycolysis and oxidative

### Sample Protocol
2.2. Protein extraction The mice liver samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.3. Trypsin digestion and TMT Labeling For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to make urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 2.4. HPLC fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 2.5. Affinity enrichment of phospho-peptides Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Mus musculus (83，099 sequences, release Dec. 2017) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for first search, 5 ppm for main search and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is crucial in regulating various biological processes. However, comprehensive phosphoproteomic profiling in the termination of liver regeneration (LR) is still missing. Here, we used Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling coupled with phosphopeptide enrichment and two-dimensional (2D) liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)/MS analysis to establish a global phosphoproteomic map in the liver of mice at day 5 after partial hepatectomy (PH). Altogether, 9731 phosphosites from 3443 proteins were identified and 7802 phosphosites from 2980 proteins were quantified. Motif analysis of the identified phosphosites revealed a diverse array of consensus sequences, suggesting that multiple kinase families including ERK/MAPK, PKA/PKC, CaMK-II, CKII, and CDK may be involved in the termination of LR. Functional clustering analysis of proteins with dysregulated phosphosites showed that they mainly participate in metabolic pathways, DNA replication, and tight junction. More importantly, the deletion of PP2Ac&#x3b1; in the liver remarkably changes the overall phosphorylation profile, indicating its critical role in regulating the termination of LR. Finally, several differentially phosphorylated sites were validated by co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot. Taken together, our data unravel the first comprehensive phosphoproteomic map in the termination of LR in mice, which greatly expands our knowledge in the complicated regulation of this process and provides new directions for the treatment of liver cancer using liver resection.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation; partial hepatectomy; liver regeneration; metabolic reprogramming

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology，Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Fang
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology，Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China


