### Accession
PXD014917

### Title
Personalized Human Milk Profiling

### Description
Human milk is the truest form of personalized nutrition, supporting dynamic needs of the infant with important nutritional and bioactive constituents that change throughout lactation. Additionally, human milk is individual specific and is unique for each mother-infant dyad. Proteins and endogenous peptides are 2 key classes of major human milk components making up the proteome, each with unique and synergistic functionality, working to provide protection for the healthy development of infants. Our objective was to comprehensively characterize and quantify the human milk proteome for varying early life challenges. We assessed in-depth individual variations of the human milk proteome across lactation, by mass spectrometry. Finding that the human milk proteome showed continuous and gradual changes over lactation, and that inflammatory events correlated with a strong and rapid change in the composition of human milk proteins and peptides. Personalized human milk profiling resulted in the systematic annotation of the milk proteome, and elucidated how early onset inflammatory events can lead to infant immune training from human milk.

### Sample Protocol
The observational protein and endogenous peptide profiling of human milk was done on longitudinal samples collected from two healthy volunteers. Samples were collected according to standardized conditions to avoid variation in milk composition and degradation of proteins by proteases. Written informed consent was obtained prior to the collection of any samples. Proteins were assessed by tryptic digestion, endognous peptides were assessed by an acid protein percipitation method. All peptides, from tryptic digested proteins and nondigested endogenous peptides, were separated and analyzed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC system coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw shotgun LC-MS/MS data were searched with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2)using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5). Processing nodes included spectrum file reader, Minora feature detector (for LFQ), spectrum selector, Mascot and Percolator. Mascot searches were preformed against a UniProt Swiss-Prot database: Homo sapiens (canonical and isoform) (Sep 2018, 20,417 entries). For the tryptic digested peptides, searches were preformed with fixed Cys carbamidomethylation and variable Met oxidation of peptides. Trypsin was chosen for cleavage specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da (HCD), followed by data filtering using Percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only ranked 1 PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted. For the nondigested endogenous peptides, no fixed modifications were selected as samples were not reduced and alkylated. Variable modifications included, Met oxidation, phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and N-terminal acetylation. A semi tryptic digest was choosen for cleavage specificity, with a maximum of 12 missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide length of 150. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, standard search setting for raw data acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS. Finally, data filtering was done using Percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only ranked 1 PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted. The statistical analysis and all figures were generated with R version 3.4.2, using ggplot2 (version 2.2.1). Statistical tests included Pearson correlations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Human milk, Personalized nutrition, Immunity, Endogenous peptides

### Affiliations
Utrecht University 
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht   Netherlands Proteomics Center

### Submitter
Kelly Dingess

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht   Netherlands Proteomics Center


