### Accession
PXD021922

### Title
BoxCarmax: a novel high-selectivity data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry method for the analysis of protein turnover and complex samples

### Description
The data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode performed in the latest high-resolution, high-speed mass spectrometers offers a powerful analytical tool for biological investigations. The DIA mass spectrometry (MS) combined with the isotopic labeling approach holds a particular promise for increasing the multiplexity of DIA-MS analysis, which could assist the relative protein quantification and the proteome-wide turnover profiling. However, the wide isolation windows employed in conventional DIA methods lead to a limited efficiency in identifying and quantifying isotope-labelled peptide pairs. Here, we optimized a high-selectivity DIA-MS named BoxCarmax that supports the analysis of complex samples, such as those generated from Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and pulse SILAC (pSILAC) experiments. BoxCarmax enables multiplexed acquisition at both MS1- and MS2- levels, through the integration of BoxCar and MSX features, as well as a gas-phase separation strategy. We found BoxCarmax modestly increased the identification rate for label-free and labeled samples but significantly improved the quantitative accuracy in SILAC and pSILAC samples. We further applied BoxCarmax in studying the protein degradation regulation during serum starvation stress in cultured cells, revealing valuable biological insights. Our study offered a new and accurate approach for the MS analysis of protein turnover and complex samples.

### Sample Protocol
A2780 cells (the SILAC sample). Ovarian cancer cell A2780 was purchased from Sigma. The SILAC RPMI 1640 media lacking arginine and lysine was supplemented with either light or heavy isotopically labeled lysine and arginine and 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher, #26400044). The cell line was cultured for at least eight passages in SILAC media to reach > 99% labeling efficiency (checked by MS). Heavy and light SILAC cells were snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C for proteomic analysis. PC12 cells (pSILAC and serum starvation). PC12 cells (ATCC, #CRL-1721) were cultured in T75 flasks at 37 ℃, humidified 5% CO2 in complete RPMI-1640 medium containing L-glutamine, supplemented with 10% horse serum (Gibco, #16050122), 5% fetal bovine serum (Fisher Scientific, #10438026), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Quality Biological, INC. #116-079-721EA),10 mM HEPES (Gibco, #15630080) and penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, #P0781). Cells were seeded on 100 mm Corning BioCoat collagen Ι coated dishes (Corning, #354450) in a complete growth medium at a density of 2 × 106 cells per dish and were grown for 48 h at 37 ℃ in humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. To synchronize the cell cycle as a routine priming step in signaling transduction studies, cells were initially kept 16 hrs in the serum-free light RPMI-1640 medium containing all supplements as above. Then, the RPMI-1640 medium was replaced by heavy SILAC version. After switching to SILAC medium, cells were harvested at 30min, 1h, 4h, 12h, 24h, 48h, and 72h with two dish replicates at each time point. To harvest the cells, the SILAC medium was removed immediately, and the whole cell dishes were placed on liquid nitrogen for 2 minutes. After snap-freezing, cell lysis buffer containing 10 M urea and the cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, #11697498001) was added. Cells were scraped from the dish into a 2 mL Eppendorf tube, vortexed for 30s, stored firstly in liquid nitrogen and then in -80 ℃ for proteomic analysis.   Protein extraction and digestion. All cell pellets in or added with 10 M urea lysis buffer and cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail were sonicated at 4 ℃ for 2 min using the VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) 26 and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 1 hour to remove insoluble material. The protein mixtures were reduced by 10 mM TCEP for 1 hour at 37 ℃ and alkylated by 20 mM IAA in dark for 45 min at room temperature.  The in-solution digestion of A2780 cells was performed as previously described 15. The purified peptide concentration was determined by Nanodrop One (Thermo Scientific). The A2780 light and heavy peptides were mixed at a nominal ratio of 1:1, according to the Nanodrop readout. Similarly, the human plasma protein mixture was suspended in the same lysis buffer and directly digested in the same way. The PC12 cell lysates, after reduction and alkylation, were subjected to a precipitation-based digestion. The peptide mixture was desalted with a C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC) and measured by Nanodrop One. The Hela standard peptide was directly resolved in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) as 1 µg/uL, sonicated for 2 min at 4 ℃, and transferred to MS vials for injection.   The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was coupled with a NanoFlex ion source keeping the spray voltage at 2000 V and heating capillary at 275 °C. The DIA-MS method for 4hr-DIA consisted of a MS1 survey scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable windows. In the prototype BoxCarmax presented in this work, the MS1 isolation windows and MS2 scanning m/z ranges are matched in each of the four injections (Injection 1st, 2nd 3rd, and 4th) as described in the publication.

### Data Protocol
All DIA analyses including library generation, targeted data extraction, and data reporting were performed based on Spectronaut v14. For the label-free analysis of HeLa, PC12, and human plasma proteomes, comprehensive sample-specific libraries were generated based on previous publications and new datasets (as described in the publication), using default settings in Spectronaut. For DIA identification and quantification in label-free samples, Spectronaut settings were kept as Default (both peptide and protein FDR were controlled at 1%).  For both A2780 and PC12 cells, comprehensive sample-specific hybrid assay libraries were generated including the DIA and DDA, label-free, SILAC, and pSILAC raw files. To perform SILAC and pSILAC targeted data extraction, the Inverted Spike-In workflow was used.  The PECA pS model in the PECAplus Perseus plugin was used to estimate the degradation rate parameters from pulsed proteomics data per gene per measurement interval. To perform quantitative analysis for protein abundance, sum of light or heavy peptide precursors intensities of the TOP3 most intensive precursors was used to calculate light and heavy protein intensities.

### Publication Abstract
The data-independent acquisition (DIA) performed in the latest high-resolution, high-speed mass spectrometers offers a powerful analytical tool for biological investigations. The DIA mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) combined with the isotopic labeling approach holds a particular promise for increasing the multiplexity of DIA-MS analysis, which could assist the relative protein quantification and the proteome-wide turnover profiling. However, the wide MS1 isolation windows employed in conventional DIA methods lead to a limited efficiency in identifying and quantifying isotope-labeled peptide pairs through peptide fragment ions. Here, we optimized a high-selectivity DIA-MS named BoxCarmax that supports the analysis of complex samples, such as those generated from Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and pulse SILAC (pSILAC) experiments. BoxCarmax enables multiplexed acquisition at both MS1 and MS2 levels, through the integration of BoxCar and MSX features, as well as a gas-phase separation strategy. We found BoxCarmax significantly improved the quantitative accuracy in SILAC and pSILAC samples by mitigating the ratio suppression of isotope-peptide pairs. We further applied BoxCarmax to measure protein degradation regulation during serum starvation stress in cultured cells, revealing valuable biological insights. Our study offered an alternative and accurate approach for the MS analysis of protein turnover and complex samples.

### Keywords
Hela cells, Human plasma, Serum starvation, Pc12 cells, Dia

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University School of Medicine


