### Accession
PXD011672

### Title
Activin A and NK cell function

### Description
Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes that play a major role in immunosurveillance against tumor initiation and metastasis spread. Signals and checkpoints that regulate NK cell fitness and function in the tumor microenvironment are not well defined. Transforming grow factor (TGF)- is a recognized suppressor of NK cells that inhibits IL-15 dependent signaling events and induces cellular transdifferentiation, however the role of other SMAD signaling pathways in NK cells is unknown. We used a global, label-free proteomics approach to compare the protein expression profiles of NK cells in the presence of TGF-b or activin-A.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (3 million) from each genotype and stimulation condition (n = 4/group) were washed three times with ice cold PBS prior to dry cell pellet storage at -80 °C. Cells were lysed in 5% SDS containing TCEP and chloracetamide for simultaneous reduction and alkylation. Cell lysates per prepared for mass spectrometry analysis via on-bead enzymatic digestion using the modified SP3 protocol. Samples were analysed on a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.8.3) against a Uniprot mus musculus database (October 2016). Statistically-relevant protein expression changes were identified using a custom in-house designed pipeline where quantitation was performed at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes that play a major role in immunosurveillance against tumor initiation and metastatic spread. The signals and checkpoints that regulate NK cell fitness and function in the tumor microenvironment are not well defined. Transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) is a suppressor of NK cells that inhibits interleukin-15 (IL-15)-dependent signaling events and increases the abundance of receptors that promote tissue residency. Here, we showed that NK cells express the type I activin receptor ALK4, which, upon binding to its ligand activin-A, phosphorylated SMAD2/3 to suppress IL-15-mediated NK cell metabolism. Activin-A impaired human and mouse NK cell proliferation and reduced the production of granzyme B to impair tumor killing. Similar to TGF-&#x3b2;, activin-A also induced SMAD2/3 phosphorylation and stimulated NK cells to increase their cell surface expression of several markers of ILC1 cells. Activin-A also induced these changes in TGF-&#x3b2; receptor-deficient NK cells, suggesting that activin-A and TGF-&#x3b2; stimulate independent pathways that drive SMAD2/3-mediated NK cell suppression. Last, inhibition of activin-A by follistatin substantially slowed orthotopic melanoma growth in mice. These data highlight the relevance of examining TGF-&#x3b2;-independent SMAD2/3 signaling mechanisms as a therapeutic axis to relieve NK cell suppression and promote antitumor immunity.

### Keywords
Activin signaling, Qtof, Label-free proteomics, Tgf-b signaling

### Affiliations
WEHI
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, Huntington Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Souza-Fonseca-Guimaraes
Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, Huntington Laboratory, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia


