### Accession
PXD004889

### Title
Nascent Proteome Remodeling following Homeostatic Scaling at Hippocampal Synapses.

### Description
Neuronal networks are subject to fluctuations in both the magnitude and frequency of inputs, requiring plasticity mechanisms to stabilize network activity. Homeostatic synaptic scaling is a form of synaptic plasticity that adjusts the strength of neuronal connections up or down in response to large changes in input. Although homeostatic plasticity requires changes in gene expression, there is only limited data describing the molecular changes associated with homeostatic scaling, focusing mostly on the expression mechanisms involving glutamate receptors. The fact that neuronal networks can be scaled up (in response to reduced activity) or down (in response to enhanced activity) provides a unique opportunity to examine the molecular and proteomic response to opposite ends of the phenotypic spectrum of synaptic plasticity. Here we first demonstrate that homeostatic scaling required protein synthesis. We then examined the plasticity-induced changes in the newly-synthesized neuronal proteome of neurons to identify the landscape of proteomic changes that contribute to opposing forms of homeostatic plasticity. Cultured rat hippocampal neurons (21 DIV) underwent homeostatic upscaling or downscaling (treatments with TTX and Bicucculine, respectively). We used BONCAT (BioOrthogonal Non-Canonical Amino acid Tagging) to metabolically label, capture and identify newly-synthesized proteins, detecting and analysing 5940 newly-synthesized proteins using liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry and label-free quantitation. Neither up- or down-scaling produced changes in the number of different proteins translated. Rather, our findings indicate that synaptic up- and down-scaling elicit opposing translational regulation of several molecular pathways, producing targeted adjustments in the neuronal proteome. We detected ~ 300 differentially regulated proteins involved in neurite outgrowth, reorganization of nerve terminals, axon guidance and targeting, neurotransmitter transport, filopodia assembly, excitatory synapses and glutamate receptor complexes. These proteins include well-characterized mediators of synaptic plasticity, e.g. the ionotropic glutamate receptor complex that is down-regulated during down-scaling and coordinately upregulated during upscaling. We also identified differentially regulated proteins that in addition to their regulation in homeostatic plasticity, are also associated with multiple diseases and disorders, including intellectual disability, schizophrenia, epilepsy, and Parkinson’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Labeling of newly synthesized proteome using bio-orthogonal amino acids, induction of treatment paradigms, cell lysis, click-chemistry to enrich newly-synthesized proteome, on-resin digest, nano-UPLC-MSn (DIonex RSLCnano coupled to Q Exactive Plus).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant-based LFQ analysis, UniprotKB rattus norvegicus database (and contaminant database), Perseus (ANOVA), Origin (Fisher LSD Post-Hoc), KEGG, GO, String-db.org, GeneAnalytics.

### Publication Abstract
Homeostatic scaling adjusts the strength of synaptic connections up or down in response to large changes in input. To identify the landscape of proteomic changes that contribute to opposing forms of homeostatic plasticity, we examined the plasticity-induced changes in the newly synthesized proteome.&#xa0;Cultured rat hippocampal neurons underwent homeostatic up-scaling or down-scaling. We used BONCAT (bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging) to metabolically label, capture, and identify newly synthesized proteins, detecting and analyzing 5,940 newly synthesized proteins using mass spectrometry and label-free quantitation. Neither up- nor down-scaling produced changes in the number of different proteins translated. Rather, up- and down-scaling elicited opposing translational regulation of&#xa0;several molecular pathways, producing targeted adjustments in the proteome. We discovered &#x223c;300 differentially regulated proteins involved in neurite outgrowth, axon guidance, filopodia assembly, excitatory synapses, and glutamate receptor complexes. We also identified differentially regulated proteins that are associated with multiple diseases, including schizophrenia, epilepsy, and Parkinson's disease.

### Keywords
Lfq, Synaptic plasticity, Homeostatic scaling, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysics MPI for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 Frankfurt am Main
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPI for Biophysics MPI for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 Frankfurt am Main


