### Accession
PXD005627

### Title
Serine ADP-ribosylation depends on HPF1

### Description
We report that serine ADPr is strictly dependent on HPF1 (histone PARylation factor 1. Quantitative proteomics revealed that serine ADPr does not occur in cells lacking HPF1. We identified three endogenous serine ADPr sites are located on the PARP-1 automodification domain. Further identification of serine ADPr on hundreds of other targets indicates that serine ADPr is a widespread modification.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous histones and PARP-1 purified from U2OS cells (wild type and knockout cell lines) treated with H2O2 were subjected to controlled partial tryptic digestion via partial FASP (pFASP). Recombinant proteins subjected to in vitro ADP-ribosylation assays were also digested using pFASP. Peptides were analysed by LC- MS/MS using HCD and ETD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant proteomics suite of algorithms (version 1.5.3.17). Data were searched against the human proteome database (downloaded 09.10.2015 from UniProt) with the following parameters. The maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions; the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 5 with the maximum charge state 7. Variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term and K), Amidation (C-term), ADP-ribosylation (DEKRSTCYNQHM) or phosphoribosylation (DEKRSTCYNQHM). The variable modification ADP-ribosylation allowed for neutral losses of adenine (m/z 136.0618); adenosine with loss of water (m/z 250.0935); AMP (m/z 348.0704); ADP (m/z 428.0367) and ADP-ribose (m/z 542.0684), with AMP listed first. FTMS top peaks per 100 Da were set to 20. For SILAC experiments, HCD data were collected and searched against a human histone database (generated from a human proteome database downloaded on 09.10.2015 from UniProt) with the parameters given above but with multiplicity changed to 2, with Lys8 as the Heavy Label.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) regulates important patho-physiological processes through its attachment to different amino acids in proteins. Recently, by precision mapping on all possible amino acid residues, we identified histone serine ADPr marks in the DNA damage response. However, the biochemical basis underlying this serine modification remained unknown. Here we report that serine ADPr is strictly dependent on histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1), a recently identified regulator of PARP-1. Quantitative proteomics revealed that serine ADPr does not occur in cells lacking HPF1. Moreover, adding HPF1 to in&#xa0;vitro PARP-1/PARP-2 reactions is necessary and sufficient for serine-specific ADPr of histones and PARP-1 itself. Three endogenous serine ADPr sites are located on the PARP-1 automodification domain. Further identification of serine ADPr on HMG proteins and hundreds of other targets indicates that serine ADPr is a widespread modification. We propose that O-linked protein ADPr is the key signal in PARP-1/PARP-2-dependent processes that govern genome stability.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation; hpf1; parp-1; parp-2; histones; proteomics

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Group Leader, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Jose Bonfiglio

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Matic
CECAD Research Group Leader, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany


