### Accession
PXD039223

### Title
p27-affinity-purified mass spectrometry anslysis

### Description
This project aims to identify p27 modification sites.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged p27 was transfected into HEK293T cells for anti-Flag immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitates were subjected into mass spectrometry analysis to identify p27 modification sites.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides mixtures were loaded by a capillary C18 trap column (3 cm × 100 μm, C18, 3 μm, 150 Å) and separated by a C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm, C18, 3 μm, 120Å) on an ChromXP Eksigent system (ABSciex). The flow rate was 300 nl min−1 and linear gradient was 70 min (0–0.5min, 95–92% A; 0.5–48 min, 92–74% A; 48–61 min, 74–62%A; 61–61.1 min, 62–15% A; 61.1–67 min, 15% A; 67–67.1, 15–95% A; 67.1–70 min, 95% A. Mobile phase A=2% ACN/0.1% FA and B=95% ACN/0.1% FA). Full MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300–1600 m/z with a mass resolution of 70000 and the AGC target value was set at 1e6. The ten most intense peaks in MS were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation with collision energy of 30. MS/MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 200000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. The QE dynamic exclusion was set for 15.0 s and run under positive mode. The data was analyzed by the ProteomeDiscover 2.1 software based on the database uniprot-Human.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, P27, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Xinxiang Medical University

### Submitter
Xinxing Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xinxing Zhu
Xinxiang Medical University


