### Accession
PXD006232

### Title
Egg proteome changes during fertilization in sterlet Acipenser ruthenus

### Description
Sturgeons, producers of black caviar, are one of the most valuable wildlife commodities on earth (Pikitch et al., 2005). They appeared approximately 200 million years ago, and are known as living fossils (Bemis et al., 1997). Sturgeon populations dramatically declined as a result of overfishing, poaching and habitat destruction (Birstein, 1993; Billard and Lecointre, 2001; Vidotto et al., 2013). International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) classified over 85% of sturgeon species as at risk of extinction, more than any other group of species. Therefore, artificial reproduction techniques have been developed for sturgeons to meet the demands of aquaculture and restocking programs.  Basic knowledge regarding biology of reproduction such as egg activation and fertilization can help improving the efficiency of artificial reproduction. Fertilization happens when gametes, spermatozoon and egg, are fused together. Egg activation refers to a series of morphological and molecular changes that occur in the egg during and after fertilization. Egg activation is believed to prevent polyspermy, and may also establish a micro-environment to support embryo development (Wong and Wessel, 2006; Niksirat et al., 2015a). Although, earlier researchers have illustrated egg structure and its morphological changes during egg fertilization and activation in sturgeons (Cherr and Clark, 1982, 1985a; Linhart and Kudo, 1997; Debus et al., 2008; Zelazowska, 2010), there is still a lack of molecular knowledge to improve our understanding of this stage of reproduction in these animals.  Eggs of sturgeon are released to aqueous environment, where they are fertilized, activated and develop an adhesive layer after contact with freshwater (Cherr and Clark, 1984; Vorobeva and Markov, 1999). Although, egg stickiness is necessary for eggs in nature to help them find a stable position by attaching to substrates such as gravel and stone and increase chance of survival until hatching (Riehl and Patzner, 1998), but can cause high rate of mortality during artificial incubation as a result of attachment of eggs together and subsequent suffocation in limited space of incubators. Using clay suspension in water as an activation medium has been proven to be effective to block egg stickiness in sturgeon eggs (Dettlaff et al., 1993). In recent years, label-free protein quantification techniques have been developed based on the presumption of linear proportionality between peptide mass peak signal intensity and concentration of a given peptide. This approach avoids the limitations and multiple preparation steps of methods such as those based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (Niksirat et al., 2015b). The aim of present study was to identify and quantify proteome changes of sterlet eggs during activation in different activation media, water and clay suspension, using label-free protein quantification technique.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and measurement  Samples (n=15) were pulverized using 1 mm Zirconia Beads in a Mini-Beadbeater™ (BioSpec Products, Inc) and mixed with 1% SDS on ice. The supernatant was separated by centrifugation at 16 100 rcf, for 30 min, and protein concentrations were determined using Micro-Lowry Assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich).   In-gel trypsin digestion and label-free experimental design  One hundred µg of protein from each sample was individually mixed with sample buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 25% glycerol, 0.01% bromophenol blue, 5% mercaptoethanol) and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. The samples were run approximately 2 cm into 12% SDS-PAGE (Criterion Precast TGX Gels, BioRad). The gel was stained using Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent (Pierce). Each of the lanes was cut into smaller fragments, destained in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 25 mM NH4HCO3, and dried using Speed-Vac (SAVANT, SPD131DDA, Thermo Scientific). The gel slices were reduced with 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 56 °C for 1 h. Alkylation was performed by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and incubating for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Gels were washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 followed by ACN, washing was repeated, and gels were dried with Speed-Vac. Trypsin (12.5 ng µl-1 modified Trypsin V5111, Promega Biotech AB) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gels. The samples were left for 30 min at 4 °C prior to incubation at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were extracted from the gels by adding 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 75% ACN and incubating for 30 min at room temperature. This was repeated twice to obtain three extractions, and a fourth extraction was obtained using ACN only with 10 min incubation. The extracts were combined and the volume reduced using Speed-Vac, and the samples were dissolved in 10µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA). The samples were separated and analyzed on an Eksigent 2D NanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Instrument stability was monitored by repeated injections of standard samples (6 Bovine Tryptic Digest Equal Molar Mix, Thermo-Scientific). Peptides were loaded with a constant flow of 10 µl min-1 onto a pre-column (PepMap 100, C18, 5um, 5 mm x 0.3 mm, LC Packings, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and subsequently separated on an  RP-LC analytical column (10 um) fused silica emitter, 75 um x 16 cm (PicoTipTM Emitter, New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA, USA), packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 um, Dr. Maisch Gmbh, Ammerbuch-Enteringen, Germany) with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The peptides were eluted with a 60 min linear gradient of 3-35% ACN (0.1% FA) followed by a 10 min linear gradient from 35 to 90% ACN (0.1% FA). The four most intense ions were selected for fragmentation with the dynamic exclusion duration of 2 min.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification by Mascot search and Progenesis LC-MS software  Raw data files were imported in profile mode into Progenesis LC-MS version 3.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). For alignment, a reference run was selected and retention times of all other runs were aligned with the reference by five to seven manual landmark vectors followed by automatic alignment of all retention times to achieve maximum overlay of all runs. The normalization is performed automatically by Progenesis LC-MS. Briefly, the software selects one replicate as a reference; after calculating the raw intensities for each peptide on each replicate, it determines the ratio between the replicate being normalized and the reference replicate. Then, a distribution of log (ratios) is calculated and a global scaling factor (the anti-log of the average of the log (ratios)) is determined. The raw intensities for each peptide among different replicates were multiplied by the global scaling factor (Finamore et al., 2015). Searches were done against Acipenseriformes (1569 sequences) sections of the Uniprot database (2017-03-02), using Mascot version 2.3. The mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions with one missed protease cleavage allowed. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and Met oxidation as variable. False discovery rate (FDR) was set as <1%. Three experimental groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA with subsequent Tukey’s post-hoc test. The significance threshold for protein quantification and threshold for the minimum required fold change in Progenesis LC-MS were p<0.05 and ≥2, respectively.  Name of each raw file and its related treatment 140528_Hamid_1S_C18_dil5_02  Unfertilized 140528_Hamid_2S_C18_dil5_01  Unfertilized 140528_Hamid_3S_C18_dil5_01  Unfertilized 140528_Hamid_4S_C18_dil5_01  Unfertilized 140528_Hamid_5S_C18_dil5_01  Unfertilized 140528_Hamid_6S_C18_dil5_01  Water 140528_Hamid_7S_C18_dil5_01  Water 140528_Hamid_8S_C18_dil5_01  Water 140528_Hamid_9S_C18_dil5_01  Water 140528_Hamid_10S_C18_dil5_01  Water 140528_Hamid_11S_C18_dil5_01  Clay 140528_Hamid_12S_C18_dil5_01  Clay 140528_Hamid_13S_C18_dil5_01  Clay 140528_Hamid_14S_C18_dil5_01  Clay 140528_Hamid_15S_C18_dil5_01  Clay

### Publication Abstract
Eggs of sterlet are discharged outside into ambient aquatic environment where egg activation and fertilization occur. Effects of different activation media including freshwater and clay suspension on protein abundances of egg were quantified in sterlet Acipenser ruthenus. In-gel digestion and high resolution mass spectrometry were used for label-free protein quantification in the eggs of five females. No significant (p&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;0.05) difference was found between protein abundances in eggs activated with different media. However, results showed significant (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05, fold change &#x2265;2) reduction in the abundances of nine proteins including six glycoproteins, enolase and heat shock protein in activated groups compared to freshly ovulated eggs as control. The fact that abundance of proteasome subunit alpha significantly reduced only in eggs which were activated by clay suspension suggests that activation medium can somehow intervene with protein regulation during fertilization. In conclusion, external fertilization in sturgeon egg is accompanied by huge release of proteins into the external environment that may participate in the construction of a transient microenvironment around egg for attraction and protection of spermatozoa to ensure ensuing fertilization. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006232.

### Keywords
Fertilzation, Egg, Quantification, Protein

### Affiliations
Professor of Protein Technology Lund University, Sweden Finnish Distinguished Professor Åbo Academy University, Finland
University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice

### Submitter
Hamid Niksirat

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Professor of Protein Technology Lund University, Sweden Finnish Distinguished Professor Åbo Academy University, Finland


