### Accession
PXD042660

### Title
Exploring extracellular vesicles of probiotic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 as carriers of biologically active molecules transferred to human intestinal cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanoparticles containing various bioactive cargos, e.g., proteins, RNAs, and lipids, that are released into the environment by all cell types. They are involved in, amongst others, intercellular communication. This article presents studies on EVs produced by the probiotic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745. The size distribution and concentration of EVs in the liquid culture of yeast were estimated. Moreover, the vesicles of S. boulardii were tested for their cytotoxicity against three model human intestinal cell lines. This study did not show any significant negative effect of yeast EVs on these cells under tested conditions. In addition, EVs of S. boulardii were verified for their ability to internalize in vitro with human cells and transfer their cargo. The yeast vesicles were loaded with doxorubicin, an anticancer agent, and added to the cellular cultures. Subsequently, microscopic observations revealed that these EVs transferred the chemotherapeutic to human intestinal cell lines. A cytotoxicity test confirmed the activity of the transferred doxorubicin. Detailed information about the proteins present in EVs might be important in terms of exploring yeast EVs as carriers of active molecules. Thus, proteomic analysis of the EV content was also conducted within the present study, and it allowed to identify 541 proteins after matching to the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD). Altogether, this study provides strong evidence that the EVs of the probiotic CNCM I-745 strain could be considered a drug delivery system. 

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins from three independent EVs` samples were resuspended in 50 uL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The cysteines were reduced by 1 h incubation with 20 mM TCEP at 37 °C followed by 10 min incubation at room temperature with 50 mM MMTS. Digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight with 3 µg of trypsin (Promega). After that, peptides were acidified with 0.1% formic acid. Next, samples were analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via Flex nanoESI ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto disposable Evotips C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturer protocol with minor modifications.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were pre-processed with the Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.4.2.0; Matrix Science), then obtained peptide masses and fragmentation spectra were matched to the - Saccharomyces Genome Database. The following parameters were adopted for database searches: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, peptide mass tolerance to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.01 Da. The protein mass was left as unrestricted, and mass values as monoisotopic with two missed cleavages being allowed. Methylation of cysteine was set as fixed and an oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The mass calibration and data filtering were carried out with MScan software, developed in-house (the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory at the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of Polish Academy of Sciences , http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioactive molecules, Drug carriers, Saccharomyces boulardii, Evs, Probiotic yeasts, Extracellular vesicles, Doxorubicin

### Affiliations
Chair of Drug and Cosmetics Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ewa Sitkiewicz

### Lab Head
Dr Jolanta Mierzejewska
Chair of Drug and Cosmetics Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry Warsaw University of Technology, Poland


