### Accession
PXD036996

### Title
Lung Cancer Drug resistance LC-MS/MS

### Description
In depth label free quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics for identification of potential biomarkers of drug resistance in lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
In order to obtain samples for mass spectrometry analysis, cells were removed by trypsinisation and pelleted via centrifugation. Pellets were washed three times with PBS to remove any cell culture medium residues, snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C prior to Mass Spectrometry (MS) sample preparation. Three pellets were obtained from three independent subcultures of each cell line for whole-cell proteome analysis (3 x 5 cell lines; in total, 15 cell pellets are collected, compared and analysed). The sample preparation for MS was carried out using the PreOmics iST 96x kit by following the manufacturer’s instructions (PreOmics GmbH, Germany). The nano LC-MS/MS analysis and profiling of digested protein samples was carried out using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Reversed-phase Capillary high-pressure Liquid Chromatography (RSCLC) nano system coupled to a hybrid linear Iontrap/Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) throughout the study. PepMap100 (C18, 300 µm × 5 mm) and Acclaim PepMap 100 (5 µm × 50 cm, 3 µm bead diameter) columns were used as trapping and analytical column, respectively. One microgram from each sample was loaded onto the trapping column at a flow rate of 25 µL/min with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 3 min. Samples were resolved in the analytical column using a binary gradient of formic acid solution (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water) and ACN/formic acid solution (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.08% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water). A flow rate of 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides. Peptide ionization was carried out at 320 °C and 2.0 kV. The data-dependent acquisition was carried out using a full scan range of 380–1500 m/z and each sample was run for 2 hours. MS/MS scan conditions were set as follows: a targeted AGC value of 2 × 104 and a maximum fill time of 35 ms. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined using a top-speed acquisition algorithm and ions were isolated in the quadrupole using an isolation width of 1.6 Da. Dynamic exclusion was applied to analysed peptides after 60 s and peptides with a charge state between 2+ and 7+ were analysed. Fragmentation of precursor ions was carried out using higher energy collision-induced dissociation and the resulting MS/MS ions were detected via a linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS files were transferred and analysed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and Progenesis QI for Proteomics (NonLinear Dynamics, Waters).  Proteome Discoverer software allowed the identification of proteins/peptides by using the SEQUEST HT algorithm and searched the identified peptides against the Uniprot human database (fasta database downloaded in January 2021). 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance were used in all searches in Proteome Discoverer. Oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed during the search. A false discovery rate was set to be less than 5% using Percolator. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme for all samples.

### Publication Abstract
The development of drug resistance in lung cancer is a major clinical challenge, leading to a 5-year survival rate of only 18%. Therefore, unravelling the mechanisms of drug resistance and developing novel therapeutic strategies is of crucial importance. This study systematically explores the novel biomarkers of drug resistance using a lung cancer model (DLKP) with a series of drug-resistant variants. In-depth label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and gene ontology analysis shows that parental DLKP cells significantly differ from drug-resistant variants, and the cellular proteome changes even among the drug-resistant subpopulations. Overall, ABC transporter proteins and lipid metabolism were determined to play a significant role in the formation of drug resistance in DKLP cells. A series of membrane-related proteins such as HMOX1, TMB1, EPHX2 and NEU1 were identified to be correlated with levels of drug resistance in the DLKP subpopulations. The study also showed enrichment in biological processes and molecular functions such as drug metabolism, cellular response to the drug and drug binding. In gene ontology analysis, 18 proteins were determined to be positively or negatively correlated with resistance levels. Overall, 34 proteins which potentially have a therapeutic and diagnostic value were identified.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Lung cancer, Drug resistance, Dlkp

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Ireland Associate Director of National Institute for Cellular Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Ireland
Postdoctoral Researcher

### Submitter
Esen Efeoglu

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Meleady
Assistant Professor, School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Ireland Associate Director of National Institute for Cellular Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Ireland


