### Accession
PXD010477

### Title
Proteome response of biofilm forming Pseudomonas fluorescens ITEM 17298 to pepsin-digested bovine lactoferrin under two incubation temperatures

### Description
Pseudomonas fluorescens is implicated in food spoilage especially under cold storage, causing the increase of food waste and the reduction of environmental (and nutritional) sustainability. In food industry, Pseudomonas biofilm on pipe surfaces and facilities creates a persistent source of contamination and increases resistance to common disinfection strategies. Even though gene expression and protein pattern changes under environmental stimuli have been suggested, cellular mechanisms involved in biofilm production are poorly investigated for this species.  In the present work, the cheese blue pigmenting P. fluorescens ITEM 17298 produced increased biofilm biomass and motility at 15 °C in comparison to 30 °C. Proteomic analysis revealed major differences of proteins involved in biofilm formation. In particular, at 15 °C we found increased amount of the c-di-GMP regulator PleD involved in motility as well as AlgB and the carbon storage regulator directly involved biofilm formation. Carbon metabolism, protein and fatty acid synthesis were also stimulated under cold incubation. Moreover, for the first time, enzymes correlated to indigoidine synthesis (blue pigment) were identified in the same condition. The differences in expression of regulatory proteins could therefore be the major determinant of the biofilm formation ability of P. fluorescens under refrigerated condition. Genomic and proteomic results also revealed virulence factors mostly detected at 30 °C. In order to counteract P. fluorescens persistence, this study also proposed a control strategy for biofilm development. Thus, a sub-lethal concentration of bovine lactoferrin hydrolysate (HLF) was assayed at both temperatures. Treatment caused a significant reduction in biofilm biomass, also confirmed by changes in proteome pattern. At each condition proteins involved regulatory functions and transcription factors were downregulated after HLF-treatment. Among these, at 15 °C we found that PleD was absent in treated samples, whilst negative regulators of alginate biosynthesis were detected; likewise, indigoidine related proteins were repressed. The cyclic-di-GMP-binding biofilm dispersal mediator was instead detected in all treated samples.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome changes were determined in planktonic cells grown in LB (5 mL) in the presence or absence of HLF-MBIC at 15 and 30 °C for 48 h. Three biological replicates for each sample were performed. After incubation planktonic cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8500 x rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Cell pellets were washed twice with 1 mL of TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0), and re-suspended with 700 µL of TE buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 (v/v; Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy). Cell suspension was then transferred in a 2 mL screw cap micro tube containing 500 μL of glass beads with a diameter of 0.1 mm (Sigma-Aldrich). Mechanical disruption of the cells was achieved using a FastPrep®-24 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals Life Sciences) for 30 sec at 6.5 m/s (3 cycles). Cell debris and glass beads were separated from the proteins by two centrifugation-steps (15.000 rpm x 5  min at 4 °C) to remove insoluble and aggregated proteins (30 min, 4 °C, 15,000 rpm). Soluble proteins were then precipitated overnight at -20 °C, by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone, and re-suspended in 8M urea/ 2M thiourea buffer. After measuring protein concentration by Roti-Nanoquant (Carl Roth, GmbH, Germany), 25 µg of proteins from each sample were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE using Criterion TGX Precast Gels (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) for 1 h at 150 V. Lanes were cut in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin in-gel digestion as described by Grube et al. (2015). The peptide mixture were desalted by Zip-Tip µC18 pipette tips (Millipore, USA). LC-MS/MS analyses were done using an EASY-nLC coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapVelos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptide mixtures were separated by RP chromatography with a non-linear 75 min gradient from 5 to 75 % buffer (0.1 % acetic acid in acetonitrile) and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All samples were measured in parallel mode. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 in a m/z range from 300-2000. The 20 most intense peaks were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the LTQ, excluding ions with unknown charge state and singly-charged ions. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was enabled after 20 sec. Internal calibration was used (lock-mass 445,120025).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification spectra were searched against theannotated protein sequences from the respective P. fluorescens ITEM 17298genome , including reverse sequences and common laboratory contaminants (11,526 entries). Database searches were performed using Sorcerer SEQUEST (Lundgren et al., 2009; Version v. 27 rev. 11, Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.0.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) as described earlier (Lopez-Mondejar et al., 2016). Protein quantification was based on the normalized spectrum abundance factor (NSAF) (Zybailov et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas fluorescens is implicated in food spoilage especially under cold storage. Due to its ability to form biofilm P. fluorescens resists to common disinfection strategies increasing its persistance especially across fresh food chain. Biofilm formation is promoted by several environmental stimuli, but gene expression and protein changes involved in this lifestyle are poorly investigated in this species. In this work a comparative proteomic analysis was performed to investigate metabolic pathways of underlying biofilm formation of the blue cheese pigmenting P. fluorescens ITEM 17298 after incubation at 15 and 30&#x202f;&#xb0;C; the same methodology was also applied to reveal the effects of the bovine lactoferrin hydrolysate (HLF) used as antibiofilm agent. At 15&#x202f;&#xb0;C biofilm biomass and motility increased, putatively sustained by the induction of regulators (PleD, AlgB, CsrA/RsmA) involved in these phenotypic traits. In addition, for the first time, TycC and GbrS, correlated to indigoidine synthesis (blue pigment), were detected and identified. An increase of virulence factors amounts (leukotoxin and PROKKA_04561) were instead found at 30&#x202f;&#xb0;C. HLF caused a significant reduction in biofilm biomass; indeed, at 15&#x202f;&#xb0;C HLF repressed PleD, TycC and GbrS and induced the negative regulators of alginate biosynthesis; at both temperatures induced the cyclic-di-GMP-binding biofilm dispersal mediator (PROKKA_02061). In conclusion, in this work protein determinats of biofilm formation were revelead in ITEM 17298 under the low temperature; the synthesis of these latter were inhibited by HLF confirming its possible exploitation as antibiofilm agent for biotechnological applications in cold stored foods.

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Motility, Food spoilers, Genomics, Antimicrobial peptides, Pigments, Biofilm, Pseudomonads

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Riedel
Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany


