### Accession
PXD023674

### Title
Targeted therapy for LIMD1-deficient non-small cell lung cancer subtypes:  a Proof-of-Concept synthetic lethal study

### Description
An early event in lung oncogenesis is loss of the tumour suppressor gene LIMD1 (LIM domains containing 1); this encodes a scaffold protein, which binds multiple binding partners to suppress tumourigenesis via a number of different mechanisms. Approximately 45% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are deficient in LIMD11, yet this subtype of NSCLC has been overlooked in preclinical and clinical investigations. Defining therapeutic targets in these LIMD1 loss-of-function patients  is difficult due to a lack of ‘druggable’ targets, thus alternative approaches are required. To this end, we performed the first drug repurposing screen to identify synthetic lethal compounds with LIMD1 loss in lung cancer cells. PF-477736 was shown to selectively target LIMD1 deficient cells in vitro through inhibition of multiple kinases, inducing cell death via apoptosis.  Furthermore, PF-477736 is effective in treating LIMD1-/- tumors in subcutaneous xenograft models, with no significant effect in LIMD1+/+ cells. We have identified a novel drug tool with significant preclinical characterization that serves as an excellent candidate to explore and define LIMD1-deficient cancers as a new therapeutic subgroup of critical unmet need.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa LIMD1+/+ and LIMD1-/- were seeded into 10 cm dishes at 7 x 105 cells/dish. 48 hours post-seeding dishes were treated with either 1 μM PF477736 or DMSO vehicle control for 1 hour. Cells were washed 3x in ice-cold PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM NaF and 1 mM Na3VO4). Dishes were lysed in 200 μl of lysis buffer (8M Urea in 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) supplemented with , 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate and 2.5 mM Na2H2P2O7).) and cells scraped and transferred into Protein Lo-bind tubes (Eppendorf). Samples were sonicated for 10 cycles (30s on & 40s off) in a Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 xg for 10 minutes, 4oC and supernatant transferred to 1.5 ml Protein Lo-bind tubes. BCA assay was conducted to quantify protein concentration.  Protein suspensions of 400 µg of protein in a volume of 200 µL were subjected to cysteine reduction and alkylation using sequential incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) and 16.6 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 1 h and 30 min, respectively, at 25°C with agitation. The urea concentration in the protein suspensions was reduced to 2 M by the addition of 600 µL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and 100 μL of equilibrated trypsin beads were added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin) were equilibrated with 3 washes with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). The following day, trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2,000 xg at 5°C for 5 min) and samples were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters).  Briefly, cartridges set in a vacuum manifold device, with a pressure adjusted to 5 mmHg, were conditioned with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 1.5 mL of wash solution (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% ACN). Then, peptide solutions were loaded into the cartridges and washed twice with 1 mL of wash solution. Peptides were eluted with 0.5 mL of glycolic acid buffer A (1 M glycolic acid, 5% TFA, 50% ACN).  For phosphopeptide enrichment, eluents were normalized to 1 mL with glycolic acid buffer B (1 M glycolic acid, 5% TFA, 80% ACN) and incubated with 25 µl of TiO2 solution (500 mg TiO2 beads in 500 µL of 1% TFA) for 5 min at room temperature. TiO2 beads were packed by centrifugation into empty spin columns previously washed with ACN. TiO2 bead pellets were sequentially washed by centrifugation (1500 xg for 3 min) with 100 µL of glycolic acid buffer B, ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and twice with neutral solution (10% ACN). Spin tips were transferred to fresh tubes and phosphopeptides were eluted by adding 50 µL of elution solution (5% NH4OH, 7.5% ACN) and centrifuging the spin-tips at 1500 xg for 3 min. This elution step was repeated  a total of 4 times. Finally, samples were frozen in dry ice for 15 min, dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and stored at −80°C.  Peptide pellets were reconstituted in 13 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5 µL were loaded twice onto an LC-MS/MS system consisted of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled to Q Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray source. Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed using the mobile phases A (3% ACN; 0.1% FA) and B (99.9% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded in a μ-pre-column and separated in an analytical column using a gradient running from 3% to 23% B over 60 min. The UPLC system delivered a flow of 2 µL/min (loading) and 250 nL/min (gradient elution). The Q Exactive Plus operated a duty cycle of 2.1s. Thus, it acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200–2000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A dynamic exclusion period of 30s was enabled with m/z window of ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was automated using Mascot Daemon 2.6.0. Thus, Mascot Distiller v2.6.1.0 generated peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data and Mascot search engine (v2.6) matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database (SwissProt_2016Oct.fasta). Searches had a FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications.  A label free procedure based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) quantified all Identified peptides. Missing data points were minimized by constructing XICs across all LC-MS/MS runs for all the peptides identified in at least one of the LC-MS/MS runs {Cutillas, 2017 #1026}. XIC mass and retention time windows were ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively. Quantification of peptides was achieved by measuring the area under the peak of the XICs. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Data points not quantified for a particular peptide were given a peptide intensity value equal to the minimum intensity value quantified in the sample divided by 10. Significant differences in phosphopeptide intensities were assessed by student’s t test with Benjamini Hochberg multiple testing correction (false discovery rate)

### Publication Abstract
An early event in lung oncogenesis is loss of the tumour suppressor gene LIMD1 (LIM domains containing 1); this encodes a scaffold protein, which suppresses tumorigenesis via a number of different mechanisms. Approximately 45% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are deficient in LIMD1, yet this subtype of NSCLC has been overlooked in preclinical and clinical investigations. Defining therapeutic targets in these LIMD1 loss-of-function patients is difficult due to a lack of 'druggable' targets, thus alternative approaches are required. To this end, we performed the first drug repurposing screen to identify compounds that confer synthetic lethality with LIMD1 loss in NSCLC cells. PF-477736 was shown to selectively target LIMD1-deficient cells in vitro through inhibition of multiple kinases, inducing cell death via apoptosis. Furthermore, PF-477736 was effective in treating LIMD1<sup>-/-</sup> tumours in subcutaneous xenograft models, with no significant effect in LIMD1<sup>+/+</sup> cells. We have identified a novel drug tool with significant preclinical characterisation that serves as an excellent candidate to explore and define LIMD1-deficient cancers as a new therapeutic subgroup of critical unmet need.

### Keywords
Nsclc, Targeted therapy, Lung cancer, Tumour suppressor, Synthetic lethality, Limd1

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology. Barts Cancer Institute / Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology. Barts Cancer Institute / Queen Mary University of London


