### Accession
PXD014617

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Arabidopsis thaliana, light and dark

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from 4 separate mixed-bed ion exchange column separations of Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 seedling native extract.  Two fractionations used extract from seedlings grown in light and two fractionations used extract from etiolated seedlings (grown in the dark).  All fractions were processed similarly for LC-MS/MS but one light-grown fractionation was analyzed on a different mass spectrometer than the other three sets of ion exchange fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were either grown for 5 days in the light (16 hours light and 8 hours dark per day) or for 3 days in the dark before harvesting and grinding in liquid nitrogen.  Powdered tissue was suspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP-40, and phosphatase and protease inhibitors at 4C.  Clarified supernatant was diluted to 100 mM NaCl, and ultrafiltered to reconcentrate protein before fractionation on a PolyCATWAX A (PolyLC Inc.) mixed-bed ion exchange column using a NaCl elution gradient.  Fractions were concentrateed and subjected to buffer exchange using ultrafiltration in an AcroPrep Advane 96-well plate 3k MWCO (Pall).  After reduction and alkylation fractions were digested with trypsin overnight at 37C , and then an additional 2 hours with fresh trypsin. Peptides were desalted using a Lab-in-a-Plate C18 unit (Glygen Corp.), dried, and resuspended for LC-MS/MS.  All samples from dark grown seedlings as well as leaf fractions from the 2015 fractionation were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap using a data dependent 120 minute top 12 CID .  The remaining fractionation (leaf fractionation done 2014) was analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos using a data dependent 70' top 14 CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins indentified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana col 0, Dark, Light, Etiolated, Ion exchange, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


