### Accession
PXD025257

### Title
Proteomics analysis with the WDR5 PROTACs

### Description
Active gene transcription requires accessible chromatin. Post-translational modifications of histone proteins modulate accessibility to target genes, a process that is controlled by multiple chromatin modifying enzymes, remodelers and epigenetic reader proteins. Histone H3K4 methylation serves as hallmark of actively transcribed genes and is introduced by histone methyltransferases (HMTs). For proper function of HMT activity, several adaptor proteins are required. One of these proteins is the WD-repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5) that acts as scaffolding component in HMT complexes and that has been associated with controlling transcription factors including MYC and long non-coding RNAs. The wide influence of dysfunctional HMTs complexes and the typically upregulated MYC levels in diverse tumor types has made WDR5 an attractive cancer drug target. Indeed, protein-protein interface inhibitors for two protein interaction interfaces on WDR5 have been developed. While such compounds only inhibit a subset of WDR5 interactions, chemically induced proteasomal degradation of WDR5 might be an elegant way to target all oncogenic function. In this study, we present the design, synthesis and evaluation of two diverse WDR5 degrader series based on two WIN site binding scaffolds. We show that linker nature and length are essential for successful degradation and strongly influences the degradation rate.  In the presented datasets, we determined the intracellular degradation specificity of the WDR5 PROTACs (8g, 6, 17b, 14). We therefore treated MV4-11 cells with 8g and 17b, the corresponding ligands 6 and 14, or DMSO and quantified the induced degradation using a label free approach.

### Sample Protocol
4 million MV4-11 cells (in 10 ml) were seeded at least in triplicates for each treatment evening before the treatment. Cells were treated with either 1 µM 6, 1 µM 8g, 5 µM 17b, 5 µM 14 or DMSO as control for 9 hours. After treatment, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor and lysed in SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). In order to reduce viscosity, the sample was sonicated using a sonication water bath (10 cycles, 15 sec sonication, 15 sec pause on ice), boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1 %. To neutralize the sample (final pH 7.6-8.0), 300 mM N-methylmorpholin was added to a final concentration of 2 %. The protein concentration in cell lysate was determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoScientific) according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The beads suspension for sp3 sample workup was prepared by mixing magnetic SeraMag-A and SeraMag-B beads (10 µl per sample of each type; Cytiva) in a ratio of 1:1, washing them three times with ddH2O and resuspending them in 10 µl ddH2O per sample. A total of 200 µg per sample was mixed with 10 µl beads suspension. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70 % and incubated at room temperature, 18 min, 800 rpm. After discarding the supernatant, beads were washed twice using 200 µl 80% ethanol. For reduction and alkylation, beads were resuspended in 70 µl of 2 mM CaCl2 in 40 mM Tris pH 7.6. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 37 °C and 800 rpm, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were digested (1:50 trypsin/substrate weight) overnight at 37 °C and 1000 rpm. Samples were centrifuged (5 min, 20000 rcf), sonicated 3 times for 30 sec and supernatant was collected. Beads were washed once with 100 µl ddH2O, sonicated 3 times for 30 sec, and supernatants were combined with previous supernatants. Samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1 %. Peptides were desalted using tC18 RP solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corp.; wash solvent: 0.1% FA; elution solvent: 0.1% FA in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were frozen at −80 °C freezer, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 0.1 % FA and peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS2 analysis. A micro-flow LC-MSMS setup with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as described in detail in previous publications [PMID: 31919466, PMID: 33596053] 50 µg peptides dissolved in 0.1 % FA were directly injected onto the microflow LC system. Online chromatography was performed using a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 µm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm; catalog number 164711). Column temperature was maintained at 55 °C using the integrated column oven. Peptides were delivered at a flow rate of 50 µl/min and separated using a two-step linear gradient (120 min) ranging from 1-24 % (105 min) and 24 35 % (15 min) of LC solvent B (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO [PMID 23975139]. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated as follows: positive polarity; spray voltage 4 kV, capillary temperature 320 °C; vaporizer temperature 200 °C. The flow rates of sheath gas, aux gas and sweep gas were set to 40, 3, and 0, respectively. TopN was set to 50. Full MS was readout in the orbitrap, resolution was set to 120,000 and the mass range was set to 360–1300. Full MS AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum IT of 100 ms and RF lens value was set to 40. Peptide match was set to preferred and default charge state was set to 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s and exclude isotopes was switched on. For readout of MS2 spectra, orbitrap resolution was set to 15,000 and the mass range was set to 200–2000. The isolation width was set to 1.3 m/z, the first mass was fixed at 100 m/z, NCE was 28. The AGC target value was set to 1E5 at a maximum IT of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant [PMID 19029910] (version 1.6.12.0) by searching the MS2 data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (human proteins only, downloaded 24.08.2020) using the search engine Andromeda [PMID 21254760]. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) and 1 % protein false discovery rate (FDR). LFQ based quantification was enabled including the match between runs option and without normalization. Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite [PMID 27348712] (version 1.6.14.0) and Microsoft Excel on identified and quantified protein groups as provided in the proteinGroups.txt file. Proteingroups.txt was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits, and median centric normalization and log2 transformation were performed. The 14 replicate 1 showed high differences to the other conditions and was not considered for further analysis. Entries were filtered for at least three valid values in one condition. Two-sample t-test were performed (S0:0.1, permutation-based FDR: 5%, number of randomizations: 250). For principal component analysis (PCA) remaining missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift: 1.8).

### Publication Abstract
Histone H3K4 methylation serves as a post-translational hallmark of actively transcribed genes and is introduced by histone methyltransferase (HMT) and its regulatory scaffolding proteins. One of these is the WD-repeat-containing protein 5 (WDR5) that has also been associated with controlling long noncoding RNAs and transcription factors including MYC. The wide influence of dysfunctional HMT complexes and the typically upregulated MYC levels in diverse tumor types suggested WDR5 as an attractive drug target. Indeed, protein-protein interface inhibitors for two protein interaction interfaces on WDR5 have been developed. While such compounds only inhibit a subset of WDR5 interactions, chemically induced proteasomal degradation of WDR5 might represent an elegant way to target all oncogenic functions. This study presents the design, synthesis, and evaluation of two diverse WDR5 degrader series based on two WIN site binding scaffolds and shows that linker nature and length strongly influence degradation efficacy.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Protac, Wdr5, Protein degrader

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Nicola Berner

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany


