### Accession
PXD039634

### Title
An Msp1-containing complex removes orphaned proteins in the mitochondrial outer membrane of trypanosomes (RNAi knockdown data)

### Description
The AAA-ATPase Msp1 extracts mislocalized outer membrane proteins and thus contributes to mitochondrial proteostasis. Using pull down experiments, we show that trypanosomal Msp1 localizes to both the glycosome and the mitochondrial outer membrane, where it forms a stable complex with four outer membrane proteins. The trypanosome-specific pATOM36 mediates complex assembly of α-helically anchored mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, such as protein translocase subunits. Inhibition of complex assembly triggers a pathway that results in the proteasomal digestion of unassembled substrates. Using inducible single, double and triple RNAi cell lines combined with proteomic analyses, we demonstrate that both TbMsp1 and the trypanosomal homolog of a cytosolic AAA-ATPase, VCP, are implicated in this quality control pathway. Moreover, in the absence of TbVCP, three out of the four TbMsp1-interacting mitochondrial proteins are required for efficient proteasomal digestion of pATOM36 substrates, suggesting they act in concert with TbMsp1. pATOM36 is a functional analogue of the yeast MIM complex, and possibly of human MTCH2, suggesting that similar mitochondrial quality control pathways linked to Msp1 might also exist in yeast and humans.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide stable isotope dimethyl labeling and LC-MS sample preparation: Trypanosoma brucei transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of pATOM36, pATOM36/subunit ß1 (double RNAi knockdown) or pATOM36/TbVCP/TbMsp1 (triple RNAi knockdown) were grown in triplicate in SDM-79 for three days, in the presence or absence of tetracycline. 1x 10E8 cells were centrifuged (8 min, 1,258 g, RT) and washed with PBS. The pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently processed for tryptic in-solution digestion as described before (Peikert et al., 2017, Nat. Commun. 8). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, followed by differential labelling with "light" or "heavy" formaldehyde (CH2O/13CD2O; Sigma-Aldrich) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN; Sigma-Aldrich) (Morgenstern et al., Cell Metabolism 33, 2021). Labelling efficiencies (> 99% for all individual experiments) were determined by LC-MS analysis. Equal amounts of differentially "light" and "heavy" labelled peptides derived from the respective control and induced RNAi cells were mixed, purified and fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using StageTips essentially as described previously (von Känel et al., eLife, 2020). In brief, peptides, reconstituted in 10 mM NH4OH, were loaded onto StageTips and eluted stepwise with 0%, 2.7%, 5.4%, 9.0%, 11.7%, 14.4%, 36% and 65% (v/v each) ACN/10 mM NH4OH. Fractions 1 and 7 (0% and 36% ACN eluates) and fractions 2 and 8 (2.7% and 65% ACN eluates) were combined for LC-MS analysis.       LC-MS analysis: Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were desalted using StateTips, vacuum-dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. LC-MS analyses were performed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (all instruments from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were loaded and concentrated on PepMap C18 precolumns (length, 5 mm; inner diameter, 0.3 mm; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min and separated using an Acclaim PepMap C18 reversed-phase nano-LC column (length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 μm; particle size, 2 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.25 µl/min. The solvent system used for peptide elution consisted of 4% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 48% (v/v) methanol/30% (v/v) ACN/4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). A gradient ranging from 3%- 65% solvent B in 65 min, 65%- 80% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 80% B was applied. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode. The Orbitrap Elite was operated with the following settings: mass range, m/z 370 to 1,700; resolution, 120,000 (at m/z 400); target value, 10E6; and maximum injection time(max. IT), 200 ms for survey scans. A TOP15 (pATOM36/subunit ß1 double and pATOM36/TbVCP/TbMsp1 triple RNAi experiments) or TOP25 (pATOM36 RNAi experiments) method was applied for fragmentation of multiply charged precursor ions by low energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 10 ms; target value, 5,000; max. IT, 150 ms; dynamic exclusion time, 45 s).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.6.0.1). Mass spectrometric raw data were searched against a TriTryp database specific for T. brucei TREU927 (release version 36; downloaded from https://tritrypdb.org). For protein identification, MaxQuant default settings were applied, with the exception that only one unique peptide was required. For relative quantification, the appropriate settings for stable isotope dimethyl labeling (light, dimethylLys0/dimethylNterLys0; heavy, dimethylLys6/dimethylNterLys6) were chosen. Quantification was based on at least one ratio count. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled. Only proteins quantified in at least two independent replicates per dataset were considered for further analysis. The mean log2 of protein abundance ratios was determined and a two-sided Student's t-test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Trypanosoma brucei, Mitochondrial quality control, Peptide stable isotope dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
University of Wuerzburg
Chair of Biochemistry II
Am Hubland
97074 Würzburg
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, University of Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Bender

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, University of Würzburg, Germany


