### Accession
PXD040163

### Title
Chemoproteomics of microbiota-derived indole metabolites in mammalian cells

### Description
The microbiota generates diverse metabolites to modulate host physiology and disease, but their protein targets and mechanisms of action have not been fully elucidated. To address this challenge, we focused on microbiota-derived indole metabolites and develop photoaffinity chemical probes for proteomic studies. We identified many potential indoleinteracting proteins, including metabolic enzymes, transporters, immune sensors, and Gprotein coupled receptors. Notably, we discovered aromatic monoamines can activate - arrestin recruitment by the orphan receptor GPRC5A. Metabolomic and functional profiling of microbiota species revealed specific aromatic amino acid decarboxylaseexpressing bacteria producing monoamine agonists for GPRC5A. Structure-activity relationship studies of synthetic aromatic monoamines identified 7-fluorotryptamine as a more potent activator of -arrestin recruitment by GPRC5A. Our results highlight the utility of chemoproteomics to identify novel microbiota metabolite-interacting proteins and discover potential microbiota-derived small molecule agonists for orphan receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 10-cm dish to above 90% confluence. Cells were changed to OMEM medium containing 0.1% DMSO, 100 μM alk-IAA or 100 μM x-alk-IAA, and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Cells were treated with or without UV-irradiation, lysed and labeled with azido-PEG3-biotin as shown above. The proteins enriched by neutravidin beads were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Promega). The on-beads digested peptides were collected and desalted by the in-house prepared reversed phase C18 Stage-tip, dried by Speed-vac, redissolved in 0.1% TFA/H2O. Tryptic peptides form each of the 4 replicates were separated by the reversed phase C18 column on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) system at a flow rate of 200 nL/min using a 70 min gradient from 5% B to 45% B (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) followed by a washing step at 100% B. Mass spectra were collected on an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 300).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Parameters were used as default settings for label-free quantification (LFQ). For protein identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01, the minimum peptide length allowed was seven amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides allowed was set to one. Further data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. The data were filtered to remove reverse contaminants, only identified by sites. Proteins were filtered to be detected in at least 3 valid values out of 8 experiments. The replicates were grouped together, and empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8). Significantly enriched proteins were identified as having a p-value below 0.05 and at least two folds change when comparing LFQ intensities of chemical reporter-treated group with DMSO vehicle group. The data was visualized in a volcano plot of log2 ratio change versus the negative logarithmic p values.

### Publication Abstract
The microbiota generates diverse metabolites to modulate host physiology and disease, but their protein targets and mechanisms of action have not been fully elucidated. To address this challenge, we explored microbiota-derived indole metabolites and developed photoaffinity chemical reporters for proteomic studies. We identified many potential indole metabolite-interacting proteins, including metabolic enzymes, transporters, immune sensors and G protein-coupled receptors. Notably, we discovered that aromatic monoamines can bind the orphan receptor GPRC5A and stimulate &#x3b2;-arrestin recruitment. Metabolomic and functional profiling also revealed specific amino acid decarboxylase-expressing microbiota species that produce aromatic monoamine agonists for GPRC5A-&#x3b2;-arrestin recruitment. Our analysis of synthetic aromatic monoamine derivatives identified 7-fluorotryptamine as a more potent agonist of GPRC5A. These results highlight the utility of chemoproteomics to identify microbiota metabolite-interacting proteins and the development of small-molecule agonists for orphan receptors.

### Keywords
Bacterial metabolites, Photoaffinity probes, Chemical proteomics, Mammalian cells

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Scripps Research, USA
Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Xiaohui Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C. Hang
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Scripps Research, USA


