### Accession
PXD010838

### Title
Characterizing the molecular architecture of mitochondrial energy metabolism

### Description
The electron transfer chain is organized into inner mitochondrial membrane supercomplexes that promote substrate channeling and catalytic efficiency. This study shows that fatty acid oxidation enzymes physically interact with electron transfer chain supercomplexes at two points. The fatty acid oxidation trifunctional protein interacts with the NADH-binding domain of complex I of the electron transfer chain, while electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase interacts with electron transfer chain complex III. These findings provide first view of an integrated molecular architecture for the major energy generating pathways in mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
To examine Fatty Acid Oxidation and Electron Transfer Chain (FAO-ETC) protein interactions, digitonin-solubilized mitochondria from rat heart mitochondria were separated by blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) and gel pieces were analysed by a nanoLC-MS/MS  label-free proteomics approach. Each gel piece was subjected to in-gel trypsin treatment. Nano-LC-MS/MS was performed on an EASY nanoLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide samples were separated on a C-18 reverse phase column (PepMap from Thermo Scientific with 25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, and 2 μm particle size) and eluted in a 110 minutes linear gradient of acetonitrile (4–40%) containing 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer (MS) was operated in data dependent mode, with mass resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, for MS scans and MS/MS  scans,  respectively.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 was applied for protein identification and label-free quantification by means of peptide peak areas. The MS raw files were searched against a mouse database consisting of 16,658 Mus musculus sequences downloaded in 2014 from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was assessed by searching against a reverse decoy database, and FDR of protein and peptide identification were both set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Three mitochondrial metabolic pathways are required for efficient energy production in eukaryotic cells: the electron transfer chain (ETC), fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation (FAO), and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The ETC is organized into inner mitochondrial membrane supercomplexes that promote substrate channeling and catalytic efficiency. Although previous studies have suggested functional interaction between FAO and the ETC, their physical interaction has never been demonstrated. In this study, using blue native gel and two-dimensional electrophoreses, nano-LC-MS/MS, immunogold EM, and stimulated emission depletion microscopy, we show that FAO enzymes physically interact with ETC supercomplexes at two points. We found that the FAO trifunctional protein (TFP) interacts with the NADH-binding domain of complex I of the ETC, whereas the electron transfer enzyme flavoprotein dehydrogenase interacts with ETC complex III. Moreover, the FAO enzyme very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase physically interacted with TFP, thereby creating a multifunctional energy protein complex. These findings provide a first view of an integrated molecular architecture for the major energy-generating pathways in mitochondria that ensures the safe transfer of unstable reducing equivalents from FAO to the ETC. They also offer insight into clinical ramifications for individuals with genetic defects in these pathways.

### Keywords
Supercomplexes, Mitochondria, Metabolism, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Aarhus University, Denmark


