### Accession
PXD025398

### Title
Identification of CARP3-interacting proteins in Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream forms and procyclic forms

### Description
How flagellar signaling regulates the host interaction of parasites remains a challenge due to poor conservation of signaling systems with those in cilia of higher organisms. The trypanosome-specific cAMP response protein 3 (CARP3) shows developmentally regulated localization at the flagellar tip membrane, where it is essential for parasite swarming and colonization of the tsetse fly insect vector. This project describes identification of CARP3-YFP interacting proteins by GFP trap pull down followed by mass spectrometry in the bloodstream stage as well as in the procyclic stage of Trypanosoma brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of CARP3-YFP was performed using a GFP nanobody covalently coupled to magnetic agarose beads (GFP-trap) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Chromotek, Martinsried, Germany). Briefly, 2 × 108 T. brucei AnTat 1.1E wild type or CARP3-YFP cells, bloodstream forms or procyclic forms (n = 2 replicates each), were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with serum-free culture medium and lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.5% NP-40; Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor) for 30 min on ice. Soluble proteins were separated by centrifugation (10 min, 20,000 × g, 4°C) and incubated with GFP-trap beads (25 µL beads slurry) for 1h at 4°C on an overhead rotator. Beads were washed 4x with lysis buffer, followed by three washes with 50 mM Tris/Cl pH 8. Beads with bound proteins were subjected to on-bead digest for mass spectrometry analysis. After on-bead digestion with trypsin, digested peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (ThermoFisher) with a gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 40 min at 300 nL/min in a 15-cm analytical (75 µm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch). The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF instrument operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 250–1600) were acquired with resolution R = 60000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification (iBAQ) was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the following parameters: Database, TriTrypDB-42_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.7.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with the following workflow: proteins only identified by site, reverse hits or potential contaminants were filtered out and only proteins identified in both CARP3-YFP pull-down replicates were considered for further analysis. The iBAQ values of the remaining proteins were log2 transformed and statistically evaluated with an FDR ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling from ciliary microdomains controls developmental processes in metazoans. Trypanosome transmission requires development and migration in the tsetse vector alimentary tract. Flagellar cAMP signaling has been linked to parasite social motility (SoMo) in vitro, yet uncovering control of directed migration in fly organs is challenging. Here we show that the composition of an adenylate cyclase (AC) complex in the flagellar tip microdomain is essential for tsetse salivary gland (SG) colonization and SoMo. Cyclic AMP response protein 3 (CARP3) binds and regulates multiple AC isoforms. CARP3 tip localization depends on the cytoskeletal protein FLAM8. Re-localization of CARP3 away from the tip microdomain is sufficient to abolish SoMo and fly SG colonization. Since intrinsic development is normal in carp3 and flam8 knock-out parasites, AC complex-mediated tip signaling specifically controls parasite migration and thereby transmission. Participation of several developmentally regulated receptor-type AC isoforms may indicate the complexity of the in vivo signals perceived.

### Keywords
Adenylate cyclase, Camp response protein, Carp3, Cyclase-interacting protein, Gfp trap

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)  82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Boshart, Michael
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)  82152 Martinsried, Germany


