### Accession
PXD014803

### Title
Up regulated Variant Surface Glycoproteins under TDP1 overexpression

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei parasites successfully evade the host immune system by periodically switching the dense coat of Variant Surface Glycoproteins (VSG) at the cell surface. Each parasite expresses VSGs in a monoallelic fashion that is tightly regulated. The consequences of exposing multiple VSGs during an infection in terms of antibody response and disease severity remain unknown. In this study, we overexpressed a high mobility group box protein, TDP1, which was sufficient to open the chromatin of silent VSG expression sites, to disrupt VSG monoallelic expression and to generate viable and healthy parasites with a mixed VSG coat. Mice infected with these parasites mounted a multi-VSG antibody response, which rapidly reduced parasitemia. Consequently, we observed a prolonged mice survival in which nearly 90% of the mice survived a 30-day period infection with undetectable parasitemia. Immunodeficient RAG2 knock-out mice were unable to control the infection with TDP1-overexpressing parasites, showing that the adaptive immune response is critical to reduce disease severity. This study shows that simultaneous exposure of multiple VSGs is highly detrimental for the parasite even at the very early stages of infection, suggesting that drugs that disrupt VSG monoallelic expression could be used to treat trypanosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream form parasites from culture medium conditions (PL1S-1-3 (Parental cell line) and FAB1-3 (POT cell line)) were supplied as 20ug cell pellets on dry ice. TDP1 was overexpressed for 48 hr in POT1 before isolation of soluble-form VSG (sVSG). Parental PL1S cell line was used as control. Isolation of sVSG was performed according to (70), except the eluate that was concentrated in Amicon Ultra-2 Ultracel-10 Membrane 10 kDa (Merck Millipore). sVSG samples at a concentration of 0.2 mg/ml in MilliQ water. 5ug of each Sample was solubilised in 1% rapigest and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced and alkylated using 10mm DTT and alkylated with 50Mm IAA.Samples were then digested with trypsin twice first at 30oC overnight then at 37oC for 6 hours. The rapigest detergent was precipitated by addition of 10% formic acid and the samples spun. The supernatant was then cleaned up using Hippr columns (Thermo Fisher) prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed and analysed using the Mascot search Engine (Version 2.4.1) using the following parameters: Enzyme : Trypsin/P, Max 2 miss-cleavages, Peptide mass tolerance: 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.6Da, fixed modification (Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications (Acetyl (N-term),Deamidated (NQ),Dioxidation (M),Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q),Oxidation (M)), Databases used:  Tb427BESMES.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> parasites successfully evade the host immune system by periodically switching the dense coat of variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) at the cell surface. Each parasite expresses <i>VSGs</i> in a monoallelic fashion that is tightly regulated. The consequences of exposing multiple VSGs during an infection, in terms of antibody response and disease severity, remain unknown. In this study, we overexpressed a high-mobility group box protein, TDP1, which was sufficient to open the chromatin of silent <i>VSG</i> expression sites, to disrupt <i>VSG</i> monoallelic expression, and to generate viable and healthy parasites with a mixed VSG coat. Mice infected with these parasites mounted a multi-VSG antibody response, which rapidly reduced parasitemia. Consequently, we observed prolonged survival in which nearly 90% of the mice survived a 30-d period of infection with undetectable parasitemia. Immunodeficient RAG2 knock-out mice were unable to control infection with TDP1-overexpressing parasites, showing that the adaptive immune response is critical to reducing disease severity. This study shows that simultaneous exposure of multiple VSGs is highly detrimental to the parasite, even at the very early stages of infection, suggesting that drugs that disrupt VSG monoallelic expression could be used to treat trypanosomiasis.

### Keywords
Tdp1, Vsg, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Division of Immune Diversity, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany & Division of Structural Biology of Infection and Immunity, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Aresta Branco
Division of Immune Diversity, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany & Division of Structural Biology of Infection and Immunity, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany


