### Accession
PXD006359

### Title
Identification of Siglec ligands in human B cell

### Description
Siglecs are a family of receptor-type glycan recognition proteins (lectins) involved in self - nonself discrimination by the immune system. Identification of Siglec ligand(s) is necessary to understand how Siglec-ligand interaction translates to biological outcomes, but is challenging because the interaction is weak. To facilitate identification of Siglec ligands, we adopted proximity labeling method based on tyramide radicalization principle.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (BJAB B cell) that express Siglec ligand were labeled with Siglec-peroxidase complex and incubated with biotin tyramide and hydrogen peroxide, to generate short-lived tyramide radical that covalently label the proteins near the Siglec-peroxidase complex. After purifying the biotinylated complex and eluting by photocleavage, the eluted proteins were separated by short SDS-PAGE and performed by in-gel tryptic digestion, C18 ziptip desalting, and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All data files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and peptide identification was performed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.2) and SEQUEST search engine against the Swiss-Prot database from Human with a percolator (strict false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.05). For label-free quantitation, the peak area (i.e. area under the curve) of each precursor ion was calculated from extracted ion chromatogram during data processing by using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node with mass precision 2 ppm. The abundance of identified protein was calculated from top 3 of all unique and razor peptides in Peptide and Protein Quantifier node. The relative quantitation was further compared with the protein abundance from control and experimental samples.

### Publication Abstract
Siglecs are a family of receptor-type glycan recognition proteins (lectins) involved in self-nonself discrimination by the immune system. Identification of Siglec ligands is necessary to understand how Siglec-ligand interaction translates into biological outcomes. However, this is challenging because the interaction is weak. To facilitate identification of Siglec ligands, we adopted a proximity labeling method based on the tyramide radicalization principle. Cells that express Siglec ligands were labeled with Siglec-peroxidase complexes and incubated with biotin tyramide and hydrogen peroxide to generate short-lived tyramide radicals that covalently label the proteins near the Siglec-peroxidase complex. A proof-of-principle experiment using CD22 (Siglec-2) probe identified its known ligands on B cells, including CD22 itself, CD45, and IgM, among others, demonstrating the validity of this method. The specificity of labeling was confirmed by sialidase treatment of target cells and using glycan recognition-deficient mutant CD22 probes. Moreover, possible interactions between biotin-labeled proteins were revealed by literature-based protein-protein interaction network analysis, implying the presence of a molecular cluster comprising CD22 ligands. Further application of this method identified CD44 as a hitherto unknown Siglec-15 ligand on RAW264.7-derived osteoclasts. These results demonstrated the utility of proximity labeling for the identification of Siglec ligands, which may extend to other lectins.

### Keywords
Sialic acid, Siglec, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Angata
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


