### Accession
PXD026822

### Title
Extracellular vesicle-mediated communication between hepatocytes and natural killer cells promotes hepatocellular tumorigenesis

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is frequently characterized by metabolic and immune remodeling in the tumor microenvironment. We previously discovered that liver-specific deletion of fructose-1, 6-bisphphotase 1 (FBP1), a gluconeogenic enzyme ubiquitously suppressed in HCC tissues, promotes liver tumorigenesis, and induces metabolic and immune perturbations closely resembling human HCC. However, the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Here we reported that FBP1-deficient livers exhibit diminished amounts of natural killer (NK) cells and accelerated tumorigenesis. Using the diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC mouse model, we analyzed potential changes in the immune cell populations purified from control and FBP1-depleted livers and found that NK cells were strongly suppressed. Mechanistically, FBP1 attenuation in hepatocytes derepresses an EZH2-dependent transcriptional program to inhibit PKLR expression. This leads to reduced levels of PKLR cargo proteins sorted into hepatocyte-derived EVs, dampened activity of EV-targeted NK cells, and accelerated liver tumorigenesis. Our study demonstrated that hepatic FBP1 depletion promotes HCC-associated immune remodeling, partly through the transfer of hepatocyte-secreted, PKLR-attenuated EVs to NK cells.

### Sample Protocol
To purify EVs, HHL5 cells were grown to 70% confluency, washed with PBS 3 times, and cultured with serum-free RPMI for 48 h. Next, the collected medium was centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min, followed by 2000 g for 10 min to deplete cell debris. The supernatants were filtered with a 0.22 m filter membrane (SLGP033RB, Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA), then centrifuged at 100, 000 g for 2 h at 4℃ using an ultracentrifuge (Optima XE-100; Beckman Coulter, CA, USA) equipped with a SW 32 Ti rotor (369694; Beckman Coulter). Pelleted EVs were washed with PBS, resuspended, and quantified by a BCA Protein Assay Kit (P0011, Beyotime, Shanghai, China).

### Data Protocol
After the data quality assessment was passed, the screening conditions of differentially expressed proteins were set according to the experimental design, and significantly differentially expressed proteins were screened out.Next, the functional characteristics of differentially expressed proteins were analyzed.The first step is to annotate the functions of all identified proteins at different levels.Step 2: Analyse the proportion of differentially expressed proteins in different functions. Step 3: Find out the functions with significantly enriched differential expressions through enrichment analysis. Step 4: Identify the similarities and differences in functions of differentially expressed proteins obtained under different experimental treatment conditions through functional enrichment cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is frequently characterized by metabolic and immune remodeling in the tumor microenvironment. We previously discovered that liver-specific deletion of fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1), a gluconeogenic enzyme ubiquitously suppressed in HCC tissues, promotes liver tumorigenesis and induces metabolic and immune perturbations closely resembling human HCC. However, the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Here, we reported that FBP1-deficient livers exhibit diminished amounts of natural killer (NK) cells and accelerated tumorigenesis. Using the diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC mouse model, we analyzed potential changes in the immune cell populations purified from control and FBP1-depleted livers and found that NK cells were strongly suppressed. Mechanistically, FBP1 attenuation in hepatocytes derepresses an zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)-dependent transcriptional program to inhibit PKLR expression. This leads to reduced levels of PKLR cargo proteins sorted into hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs), dampened activity of EV-targeted NK cells, and accelerated liver tumorigenesis. Our study demonstrated that hepatic FBP1 depletion promotes HCC-associated immune remodeling, partly through the transfer of hepatocyte-secreted, PKLR-attenuated EVs to NK cells.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
 Sun Yat-sen University
Zhongshan School of Medicine Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
zhijun liu

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Li
Zhongshan School of Medicine Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China


