### Accession
PXD027350

### Title
PLCG2 regulates endocannabinoid and eicosanoid networks in innate immune cells

### Description
Human genetic studies have pointed to a prominent role for innate immunity and lipid pathways in human immunological and neurodegenerative disorders. Our understanding of the composition and function of immunomodulatory lipid networks in innate immune cells, however, remains incomplete. Here, we show that phospholipase C gamma 2 (PLCγ2 or PLCG2) – mutations in which are associated with autoinflammatory disorders and Alzheimer’s disease – serves as a principal source of diacylglycerol (DAG) pools that are converted into a cascade of bioactive endocannabinoid (eCB) and eicosanoid lipids by DAG lipase (DAGL) and monoacylglycerol lipase (MGLL) enzymes in innate immune cells. We show that this lipid network is tonically stimulated by disease-relevant human mutations in PLCγ2, as well as Fc receptor activation in primary human and mouse macrophages. Genetic disruption of PLCγ2 in mouse microglia suppressed DAGL/MGLL-mediated eCB-eicosanoid crosstalk and also caused widespread transcriptional and proteomic changes, including the reorganization of immune-relevant lipid pathways reflected in reductions in DAGLB and elevations in PLA2G4A. Despite these changes, Plcg2-/- mice showed generally normal pro-inflammatory cytokine responses to lipopolysaccharide treatment, instead displaying a more restricted deficit in microglial activation that included impairments in prostaglandin production and CD68 expression. Our findings enhance the understanding of PLCγ2 function in innate immune cells, delineating a role in crosstalk with endocannabinoid/eicosanoid pathways and modulation of subsets of cellular responses to inflammatory stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
MS-based activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) analysis Cells were treated with indicated inhibitors for 4 h in situ, washed twice with cold DPBS, pelleted by centrifugation (500 g, 5 min 4 ̊C). Cells were lysed in DPBS by probe sonication. Protein concentrations were determined by DC assay (#5000111, Bio-Rad) following manufacturer’s instruction, and then adjusted to desired concentration with DPBS. Proteome (2 mg/mL, 500 µL) in DPBS was labeled with FP-biotin (5 µM) for 45 min at ambient temperature. After labeling, the proteomes were precipitated by adding cold 2.5 mL 1:4 CHCl3/MeOH (v/v) and 1 mL DPBS. The resulting mixture was vortexed and then centrifuged (5,000 g, 10 min, 4 ̊C). The organic and aqueous layers were aspirated leaving a protein disc which had formed between phases. The protein disc was washed three times with cold 1 mL 1:1 CHCl3/MeOH while intact and then probe sonicated in cold 2.5 mL 1:4 CHCl3/MeOH. Proteins were pelleted via centrifugation (5000 g, 10 min, 4 ̊C) and the supernatant was removed. The remaining pellet was resuspended in 500 mL of 6 M urea in DPBS containing 0.2% SDS, followed by addition of 50 µL DPBS containing 100 mM Tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 300 mM K2CO3. The resulting mixture was probe sonicated, and then incubated at 37 ℃ for 30 min with constant shaking, and then alkylated using iodoacetamide (40 mM) at ambient temperature for 30 min in dark. Then 130 µL 10% SDS was added, followed by 5.5 mL of DPBS and 100 µL of DPBS pre-washed streptavidin agarose beads. The biotinylated proteins were enriched by rotating the above mixture at ambient temperature for 1.5 h. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (2000 g, 2 min) and sequentially washed with 0.2% SDS in DPBS, (1 × 10 mL), DPBS (3 × 10 mL) and 200 mM EPPS (pH = 8, 2 × 5 mL). The beads were transferred to a Protein LoBind tube (#0030108442, Eppendorf) and on-bead digestion was performed using sequence-grade trypsin (2 µg) in 200 µL buffer containing 200 mM EPPS, 2 M urea and 10 mM CaCl2 for 12-14 h at 37 ̊C with constant shaking.  The peptides were separated from the beads and transferred to a clean LoBind tube. Anhydrous acetonitrile was added to the peptide solution to 30% of final volume. Peptides were labeled with 6 µL (20 µg/µL) of respective TMT10plex isobaric reagent at ambient temperature for 1 h with occasional vortex. Th labeling reaction was quenched with 6 µL of 5% hydroxylamine (0.1% final concentration) at ambient temperature for 15 min, and then acidified with 4 µL of formic acid. Ten obtained peptide samples were combined and dried in SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Peptides were further fractionated into 9 fractions using the Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Every third fraction was combined into a clean LoBind tube and the solvent was removed using SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. The resulting 3 combined fractions were resuspended in 15 µL Buffer A (95% H2O, 5% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid) for subsequent MS analysis (5 µL injection volume) on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the method described previously.    Quantitative proteomics characterization of Plcg2+/+ and Plcg2-/- microglia Cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed by probe sonication in cold DPBS containing cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, 100 g of proteome (100 L) from each sample was subjected to proteomics sample preparation. As described previously, proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated and precipitated. The resulting proteome was subjected to LysC and subsequent overnight trypsin digestion. Peptide concentration was measured by BCA assay (#23225, Thermo Scientific) and 25 g of peptides for each sample was labeled with the 6 µL (20 µg/µL) corresponding TMT10plex tags in EPPS buffer (200 mM, pH 8) containing 30% acetonitrile for 1 h at ambient temperature. Labeling was quenched with hydroxylamine (0.6% final concentration) and acidified with formic acid (5% final concentration). A ratio check using small aliquots of each TMT channel (2 L) was performed as previously described and the amount of peptides for each channel was normalized based on the average MS3 peak intensities. Equal amount of peptides for each channel (approximately 20 μL/channel, final volumes adjusted based on the determined ratios) was combined, dried using SpeedVac and subjected to desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (55-105 μm, #WAT054955, Waters) and fractionation by HPLC (Agilent). The sample was fractioned into a 96 deep-well plate and 12 fractions were obtained by combining eluted peptide sample from every 12th well. The resulting fractions were dried and re-suspended in 20 L Buffer A for subsequent MS analysis (5 µL injection volume) on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer using the method described previously.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data processing The acquired MS2 and MS3 spectral data were extracted and analyzed using IP2 Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (http://ip2.scripps.edu/ip2/login.jsp). MS2 spectra were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm (http://fields.scripps.edu/downloads.php) against human or mouse reverse concatenated nonredundant Uniprot database, with static modifications for cysteine residues to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide (+57.0215 m/z) and N-termini lysine residues corresponding to the TMT tag (+229.1629 m/z). Peptides were required to be at least 6 amino acid long, unique and to have at least one tryptic end. Data was assembled using DTASelect version 2.0 with peptide false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. MS3-based peptide quantification was performed with reporter ion mass tolerance set to 20 ppm with IP2. For each TMT10plex experiment, the following quality filters were applied to remove low-quality peptides: removal of half-tryptic peptides, removal of peptides with more than one internal missed cleavage sites, and removal of peptides with low sum reporter ion intensities for control channel (< average of 5,000/channel). Proteins were required to have at least two unique quantified peptides in each experiment. Relative abundance for each peptide entry was calculated by normalizing to the the average reporter ion intensities of control channels. Then the relative abundance of all quantified peptides for a protein were averaged to obtain the final protein relative abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endocannabinoid, Eicosanoid, Plcg2, Innate immune cell

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute
The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Hui Jing

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute


