### Accession
PXD004537

### Title
Homer1a drives Homeostatic Scaling-down of Excitatory Synapses During Sleep

### Description
Homeostatic scaling is a global form of synaptic plasticity used by neurons to adjust overall synaptic weight and maintain neuronal firing rates while protecting information coding. While homeostatic scaling has been demonstrated in vitro, a clear physiological function of this plasticity type has not been defined. Sleep is an essential process that modifies synapses to support cognitive functions such as learning and memory. Evidence suggests that information coding during wake drives synapse strengthening which is offset by weakening of synapses during sleep .Here we use biochemical fractionation, proteomics and in vivo two-photon imaging to characterize wide-spread changes in synapse composition in mice through the wake/sleep cycle. We find that during the sleep phase, synapses are weakened through dephosphorylation and removal of synaptic AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) driven by the immediate early gene Homer1a and signaling from group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1/5), consistent with known mechanisms of homeostatic scaling-down in vitro. Further, we find that these changes are important in the consolidation of contextual memories. While Homer1a gene expression is driven by neuronal activity during wake, Homer1a protein targeting to synapses serves as an integrator of arousal and sleep need through signaling by the wake-promoting neuromodulator noradrenaline (NA) and sleep-promoting modulator adenosine. During sleep or periods of increased sleep need Homer1a enters synapses where it remodels mGluR1/5 signaling complexes to promote AMPAR removal. Thus, we have characterized widespread changes occurring at synapses through the wake/sleep cycle and demonstrated that known mechanisms of homeostatic scaling-down previously demonstrated only in vitro are active in the brain during sleep to remodel synapses, contributing to memory consolidation.

### Sample Protocol
PSD preps from five mice from each 10pm and 10am condition were pooled, homogenized in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50mM TEABC) and sonicated for 30 seconds. Protein estimation was carried out using BCA assay and 1mg from each 10pm and 10am condition was subjected for proteomic sample preparation. Protein was reduced with 10mM DTT and incubated at 560C for 20min followed by alkylation with 20mM IAA for 30min at room temperature in the dark. Filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) was used to clear the SDS by buffer exchange with 9M Urea buffer using 30kDa cut-off filters (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15min. Three of rounds of such cycles were repeated followed by two rounds of buffer exchange with 50mM TEABC. The final retenate was collected in 50mM TEABC buffer and subjected to trypsin digestion. Trypsin was added at 1:50 (enzyme to substrate) ratio and was incubated overnight at 370C. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding 1% TFA and the tryptic digest from both the conditions desalted using C18 cartridges. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried and stored in -800C deep freezer until further analysis. Tandem mass tags labeling was carried out as per manufacturer instructions and subjected to bRPLC fractionation.  After aliquot for global proteomic analysis the reminder of the sample was subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion/Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 suite using Sequest and Mascot search algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Sleep is an essential process that supports learning and memory by acting on synapses through poorly understood molecular mechanisms. Using biochemistry, proteomics, and imaging in mice, we find that during sleep, synapses undergo widespread alterations in composition and signaling, including weakening of synapses through removal and dephosphorylation of synaptic AMPA-type glutamate receptors. These changes are driven by the immediate early gene Homer1a and signaling from group I metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR1/5. Homer1a serves as a molecular integrator of arousal and sleep need via the wake- and sleep-promoting neuromodulators, noradrenaline and adenosine, respectively. Our data suggest that homeostatic scaling-down, a global form of synaptic plasticity, is active during sleep to remodel synapses and participates in the consolidation of contextual memory.

### Keywords
Sleep, Phosphoproteomics, Homer1a

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

### Submitter
Richard Huganir

### Lab Head
Dr Richard L. Huganir
Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA


