### Accession
PXD040223

### Title
Adaptive β-lactam resistance from an inducible efflux pump that is post-translationally regulated by the DjlA co-chaperone

### Description
Interaction between a co chaperone and efflux pump component during induction by antibiotics

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Samples were purified by 1D gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE; stacking gel method) using an home-made 4% bis-acrylamide stacking gel and a 12% bis-acrylamide resolving gel. Briefly, samples were loaded and migration was performed at 70 V until the proteins enter the resolving gel from around 5 mm. Bands of interest were cut and in-gel digestion was performed as follow: gel pieces were incubated in 100 μl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were reduced by incubation of gel pieces for 30 min. at 50°C in 80 μl of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM AB. DTT solution was then replaced by 100 μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AB and protein were alkylated by incubation of the gel pieces for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Gel pieces were then washed for 15 min with 100 μl of 50mM AB and for 15 min with 100 μl of 100% AcN. Gel pieces were then air dried for 15 min at room temperature. Dried pieces of gel were rehydrated for 45 min at 4°C in 30 μl of a solution of 50 mM AB containing trypsin at 10 ng/μl and 0.01% of Protease Max (PM) Surfactant trypsin enhancer (Promega). Subsequently, 10 μl of 0.01% of PM was added before incubating the samples for 1 hours at 50°C. Supernatant was transferred to a new polypropylene tube and an additional peptide extraction was performed with 40 μl of 20% FA (formic acid) for 15 min at room temperature with occasional shaking. Extractions were pooled and completely dried under speed vacuum. ESI-LC-MSMS: Samples were dissolved in 20 μl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 4 μl were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 2μm, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, and 5 % A and 95 % B for 20 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Full scan resolution was set to 60’000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Mass range was set to 400-2000 m/z. For data dependant analysis, up to twenty precursor ions were isolated and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 27% NCE. Resolution for MS2 scans was set to 15’000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Isolation width was set at 1.6 m/z. Full MS scans were acquired in profile mode whereas MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the Caulobacter crescentus NA1000 database (Uniprot, 3859 entries) combined with the bait protein sequence (provided by user ) and an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deaminated (NQ). Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 5.1.1 (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 74.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1 % by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation (Käll, L et al, Bioinformatics, 24(16):i42-i48, Aug 2008). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caulobacter crescentus chaperone efflux pump

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine/Centre Médical Universitaire, University of Geneva, 1211 Genève Switzerland

### Submitter
Jordan Costafrolaz

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick H.
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine/Centre Médical Universitaire, University of Geneva, 1211 Genève Switzerland


