### Accession
PXD034240

### Title
A Legionella toxin mimics tRNA and glycosylates the translation machinery to trigger a ribosome-associated stress response

### Description
Pathogenic microorganisms often secrete proteins or nucleic acids that mimic the structure and/or function of molecules expressed within their host counterparts. This molecular mimicry empowers pathogens to target and subvert critical host processes and helps establish their infectious paradigm. We report here that the intracellular bacterium Legionella pneumophila (L.p.) secretes a toxin named SidI (substrate of icm/dot transporter I) which possesses a transfer RNA (tRNA) like fold and functions as a mannosyl transferase enzyme. The 3.1 Å cryo-EM structure of SidI reveals an N-terminal domain that exhibits a characteristic ‘inverted L-shape’ and charge conservation that is present in two known protein mimics of tRNAs, the bacterial elongation factor EF-G and the mammalian release factor eRF1. In addition, SidI’s C-terminal domain adopts a glycosyl transferase B fold and shares considerable homology to a known mannosyl transferase. This molecular coupling of fold and enzymatic function allows SidI to bind to and enzymatically modify components of the host translational apparatus, including the ribosome, resulting in a robust block of protein synthesis that is comparable to the potency exhibited by the toxin ricin. Additionally, we uncovered that the translational pausing activated by SidI elicits a stress response signature that is highly similar to one activated by elongation inhibitors that target the ribosome and induce ribosome collisions. SidI-mediated perturbations to the ribosome activate the stress kinases ZAKα and p38, that in turn drive the accumulation of the protein activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3). Intriguingly, ATF3 escapes the translation block imposed by SidI, translocates to the nucleus, and subsequently orchestrates the transcription of stress-inducible genes that culminates in the activation of a cell death program. Thus, using Legionella and its effectors as tools, we have unravelled the role of a ribosome to nuclear signaling pathway that regulates cell fate.

### Sample Protocol
SidI interactome analyses:  Affinity-precipitation of interactors with glutathione sepharose coupled beads. HEK293T lysates were prepared using IP lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 25mM Tris-HCl pH=7.5, 1% Triton-X and protease cocktail inhibitor from Roche). Rabbit reticulocyte lysates were obtained from Promega. For each experimental replicate, the protein concentrations were quantified and 1mg of total protein lysate was incubated with 1µg/mL of purified GST or GST-SidI overnight at 4°C in a rotary mixer. 25µL of pre-washed glutathione sepahrose beads  were added to the samples and the mixtures were incubated for a further 1 hour at 4°C in a rotary mixer. The beads were then washed 5x times with IP lysis buffer to remove any unspecific interactors. The bound interactors were eluted by boiling the beads in Laemmeli buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and the eluates were run on a 4 – 15 % SDS-PAGE gel. The gels were silver stained (Pierce Silver Stain kit; Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the gel pieces containing prominent protein bands were excised and stored at -80°C for mass spectrometry. Sample preparation. 25mM NH4HCO3/50%Acetonitrile was added to the sample gel pieces after excisions and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Some samples were reduced by the addition of 15mM TCEP in 25mM NH4HCO3, the supernatant removed, and then gel slices were alkylated by the addition of 50mM of chloroacetamide. Other samples were reduced by the addition of 10mM DTT in 25mM NH4HCO3, the supernatant was removed, and then alkylation proceeded by the addition of 55mM iodoacetamide in 25mM NH4HCO3. Gel slices were washed in 25mM NH4HCO3 and then dehydrated in 25mM NH4HCO3/50% Acetonitrile. They were then dried by vacuum centrifugation. A solution of 25mM NH4HCO3 containing 4ug/mL trypsin was then added to the gel slices and digested overnight at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides in solution were transferred to a new tube and desalted on C18 spin columns.  The eluting peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis. Samples were injected onto a column (360 µm O.D. x 75 µm I.D., New Objective) packed with 25cm of 1.8 µm Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated by a reversed-phase gradient using an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) with mobile phase A consisting of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisting of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Eluting peptides were directly injected into either an Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) or an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex source and operating in positive ion mode.  System for both instruments was monitored with QCloud2.On the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, the total acquisition time was 60 min, MS1 detection was performed in profile mode in the Orbitrap  with 70,000 resolution, 300-1500 m/z scan range, 250 ms maximum injection, and an AGC target of 1e6. MS2 fragmentation was performed on charge states greater than 2, with automatic dynamic exclusion, an expected 15s peak width, data collection was in the Oribtrap in centroid mode with 17,500 resolution, 60ms maximum injection time, 5e4 AGC target, 200-2000 m/z scan range, and a 2.0 m/z isolation window and a 26% normalized HCD collision energy. On the Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, the total acquisition time was 60 min, MS1 detection was performed in profile mode in the Orbitrap  with 120,000 resolution, 350-1250 m/z scan range, maximum injection time was set to “auto”, and a normalized AGC target of 100%. MS2 fragmentation was performed on charge states 2-6, with 30s dynamic exclusion after 2 occurrences and a +/- 10 ppm window, data collection was in the Oribtrap in profile mode with 15,000 resolution, maximum injection time set to “auto”, 200% normalized AGC target, and a 1.3 m/z isolation window and a 30% normalized HCD collision energy. All raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) against the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded June 21, 2021) or against the rabbit proteome (Oryctolagus cuniculus, downloaded April 6, 2022).  Peptides were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant.  MaxQuant default parameters were used with the exception that label-free quantification was turned on with match between runs set to 0.7 min. iBAQ intensity values were used for estimating the relative enrichment of GST-SidI interacting proteins compared to GST-only control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Legionella

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
UCSF


