### Accession
PXD027328

### Title
Deubiquitinating enzymes and the proteasome regulate unique sets of ubiquitin substrates.

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Using UbiSite technology and inhibitors, we have compared the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the ubiquitinome. We uncovered large differential dynamic Ub signalling networks with substrates and sites uniquely regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitin signalling. DUBs regulate substrates via nearly 40,000 unique sites. Moreover, we found that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a unidirectional proteasomal degradation signal with strikingly rapid kinetics compared to ubiquitin polymers only. We found that PARP1, is hyper ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, increasing its enzymatic activity. Our findings highlight the key regulatory roles of DUBs on ubiquitin dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were treated with either DMSO, 1µM TAK-243, 10µM MG132 or 20µM PR619 for 3h then washed twice with ice-cold PBS, scraped and lysed. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8M guanidine-HCL, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.5), sonicated and centrifuged for 30min at 15,000rcf. 50mg of protein per sample (measured by BCA) was reduced with 2mM DTT for 30min at RT and alkylated with 11mM CAA for 30min at RT. Samples were diluted with 25mM ABC to 2M guanidine-HCL and cleared through a 0.45µm PVDF filter (Millipore, Cat: SLHV033RS). Lys-C was added at a 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated o/n at RT. Digested peptides were purified by C18 cartridges (Waters, Cat: WAT051910) and lyophilized. Peptides were then dissolved in IP buffer (50mM MOPS pH 7.5, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl) with 0.1% Triton X-100. UbiSite antibody conjugated and crosslinked to Protein G beads were added to dissolved peptides and incubated for 5h at 4°C (~100µg UbiSite antibody for every 10mg starting material). Beads were washed three times with IP buffer without detergent and subsequently three times with 150mM NaCl. Purified peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA three times 5min incubations. Peptides were neutralized with 1M ABC, then diluted to 25mM ABC and subjected to trypsin digestion o/n at 37°C. Each sample was subjected to high pH fractionation by dissolving peptides in Solvent A (10mM ammonium hydroxide pH10) and loaded onto home-made stage-tips (two discs of C18 material supplemented with 0.5cm layer of 1.9µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Cat: r119.aq). Stage-tips were activated with methanol, washed with Solvent B (5mM ammonium hydroxide pH 10 and 50% ACN) equilibrated twice with Solvent A. Samples were fractionated by stepwise elution of 10mM ammonium hydroxide with increasing concentration of ACN: 1.75%, 2.75%, 3.5%, 4%, 5%, 5.5%, 6%, 7%, 8%, 9%, 10.5%, 12%, 14%, 17.5%, 25%, 50% and 80%. Ubisite samples were separated on a 24-cm fused silica column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Cat: r119.aq) by reverse-phase chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). the silica column was heated to 50 °C with a homemade device. Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) and eluted by applying a step gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) from 7% to 10% solvent B over 8min, from 10% to 33% over 90min, followed by increasing solvent B to 45% for 10min and finished by a run with 98% for 6min at 250nl/min. The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with a capillary temperature of 275 °C. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent method switching between full scan events and the top 12 MS/MS scans. An automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 3 × 106 and resolution was set to 60,000 for full MS scan events with a scan range of 300–1,700m/z and a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 15ms. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 28. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, maximum IT of 110ms, 1.2m/z isolation window. Repeat sequencing of peptides was prevented by setting the dynamic exclusion window to 20s.

### Data Protocol
MS data generated from UbiSite samples were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) matching to the Human Proteome (Uniprot, reviewed H. sapiens proteome downloaded June 22, 2020) with default settings of FDR and andromeda score filtering, matching to a decoy database and common contaminants. Digestion was set to allow 4 missed cleavages with Trypsin digestion. Normalization was done by LFQ set to one minimum unique peptide, with matching between runs enabled. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and diGly modification on lysine were included as variable modifications. Additional searches included variable modifications of diGly on lysines, protein N-term and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine. Quantification of peptide intensities were set to include diGly modifications on lysine but not to discard unmodified counterparts. The dependent peptide search included the variable modifications diGly on lysines and LeuArgGlyGly (Ub tryptic fragment with one missed cleavage) on lysines.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Here, we compare the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the global ubiquitinome, using UbiSite technology, inhibitors and mass spectrometry. We uncover large dynamic ubiquitin signalling networks with substrates and sites preferentially regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitination. DUBs regulate substrates via at least 40,000 unique sites. Regulated networks of ubiquitin substrates are involved in autophagy, apoptosis, genome integrity, telomere integrity, cell cycle progression, mitochondrial function, vesicle transport, signal transduction, transcription, pre-mRNA splicing and many other cellular processes. Moreover, we show that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a strong proteasomal degradation signal. Interestingly, PARP1 is hyper-ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, which increases its enzymatic activity. Our study uncovers key regulatory roles of DUBs and provides a resource of endogenous ubiquitination sites to aid the analysis of substrate specific ubiquitin signalling.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitin, U2os, Pr619, Ubisite, Mg132, Tak243

### Affiliations
LUMC
Leiden Univeristy Medical Center

### Submitter
Fredrik Trulsson

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Leiden Univeristy Medical Center


