### Accession
PXD010746

### Title
Capsicum fruit development -  Integrative transcriptome and proteome analysis identifies major metabolic pathways involved in pepper fruit development

### Description
Pepper(Capsicum annuum L.) fruit development is a complex and genetically programmed process, a comparative study of transcriptome and proteome changes during two varieties of pepper development（IMG, MG, Br and MR） has been carried out by using RNA-Seq and Lable-free quantitation technology.

### Sample Protocol
Two hot pepper(Capsicum annuum L.) varieties ‘SJ11-3’ and ‘06g19-1-1-1’ were provided by Hunan vegetable research institute(Changsha, China) and grown in greenhouse under normal farming conditions(16 h of light at 28 ℃ and 8 h of darkness at 20 ℃). To collect the fruits, flowers were marked at anthesis, and harvested at four stages after careful selection: immature green(20 DAA, IMG); mature green(30 DAA, MG); breaking(40 DAA, Br); and mature red(50 DAA, MR). Physiological, Transcriptome and proteomic analyses were performed on the same material; 9 fruit pericarp(the seeds and placenta were removed) at each developmental stage were collected and pooled from three individual plants, three biological replicates in each time point were considered. Then fruits pericarp tissue was collected and divided into three parts, two parts frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at -80°C until Transcriptome and proteomic use, the other one parts were used to physiological measurement.The amount samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a pestle and mortar. 5 times volume of TCA/acetone (1:9) was added to the powder and mixed by vortex. The mixture was placed at -20℃ for 4h, and centrifuged at 6000g for 40 min at 4℃. The supernatant was discarded. The pre-cooling acetone was added and washed for three times. The precipitation was air dried. 30 times volume of SDT buffer was added to 20-30 mg powder, mixed and boiled for 5 min. The lysate was   sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was stored at -80 °C.20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer)was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25mMNH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were  collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. 2 hours gradient：0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. Proteins were identified with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, trypsin enzyme with the number of missed cleavages up to 2, carbamidomethyl as fixed modification,  oxidation and Acetyl as variable modification.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany). The search was performed using the following settings based on the pepper transcriptome database (P17492_zijian_35336_20171106.fasta). Hierarchical clustering analysis has been performed using pvclust R package. Proteins identified in at least two of the three injections were only considered for expression analysis. For label-free quantification(LFQ), a fold change fo ≥1 or ≤0.5 were regarded as significantly up- or down-regulated, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Pepper ( Capsicum annuum L.) fruit development is a complex and genetically programmed process. In this study, we conducted integrative analysis of transcriptome and proteome profiles during pepper fruit development. A total of 23&#x202f;349 transcripts and 5455 protein groups were identified in four fruit developmental stages of two pepper varieties. The numbers of transcripts and proteins identified were decreased gradually across fruit development, and the most significant changes in transcript and protein levels happened from the mature green (MG) to breaker (Br) stages. Poor correlation between differentially expressed transcript and differentially expressed protein profiles was observed during pepper fruit development. We then analyzed expression profiles of transcripts and proteins involved in cell wall metabolism, and capsanthin, tocopherol, and ascorbate biosynthetic pathways during fruit development, and identified key regulatory proteins in these pathways. We presented a dynamic picture of pepper fruit development via comprehensive analysis of transcriptome and proteome profiles at different fruit developmental stages and in different varieties, revealing the temporal specificity of key protein expression. Our report provides insight into the transcription and translation dynamics of pepper fruit development and a reference for other nonclimacteric species.

### Keywords
Pepper; fruit development; transcriptome; proteome; cell wall; capsanthin; ascorbate; tocopherol;

### Affiliations
Shanghai Applied Protein Technology
No.892, Yuanda 2 Road, furong district, changsha，Hunan province

### Submitter
Ling Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Zhoubin Liu
No.892, Yuanda 2 Road, furong district, changsha，Hunan province


