### Accession
PXD019311

### Title
Improved Monoisotopic Mass Estimation for Deeper Proteome Coverage

### Description
Accurate assignment of monoisotopic peaks is essential for the identification of peptides in bottom-up proteomics. Misassignment or inaccurate attribution of peptidic ions leads to lower sensitivity and fewer total peptide identifications. In the present work we present a performant, open-source, cross-platform algorithm, Monocle, for the rapid reassignment of instrument assigned precursor peaks to monoisotopic peptide assignments. We demonstrate that the present algorithm can be integrated into many common proteomics pipelines and provides rapid conversion from multiple data source types. Finally, we show that our monoisotopic peak assignment results in up to a two-fold increase in total peptide identifications compared to analyses lacking monoisotopic correction and a 44% improvement over previous monoisotopic peak correction algorithms.

### Sample Protocol
Human (HeLa) and yeast (BY4742) cell pellets were lysed (8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, Roche protease inhibitor tablet) by syringe lysis and bead beating, respectively. Lysates were cleared via centrifugation, and the protein component was isolated by chloroform-methanol precipitation. Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako) overnight at room temperature followed by a 6-hour digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37oC. An aliquot of digested HeLa peptides was subsequently labelled with TMT reagents at a 1:1 ratio across 11 channels. Labelled and label-free peptides were desalted using a C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples ready for analysis were stored at -80oC.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mzXML via either Monocle, RawConverter, or an in-house, RawFileReader mzXML converter. Spectra were searched against Uniprot databases for yeast (Uniprot, 03-24-2020) or human (Uniprot, 02-25-2020) using the Comet search algorithm with default parameters except for: precursor mass tolerance of 50ppm, protease used was Trypsin/P. For TMT-labelled samples searches were performed with the following modifications accounted for: variable Met oxidation (+15.99491), static Cys carboxyamido-methylation (+57.02146), and static TMT on Lys and peptide N-termini (+229.16293). Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a peptide and protein FDR less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate assignment of monoisotopic peaks is essential for the identification of peptides in bottom-up proteomics. Misassignment or inaccurate attribution of peptidic ions leads to lower sensitivity and fewer total peptide identifications. In the present work, we present a performant, open-source, cross-platform algorithm, Monocle, for the rapid reassignment of instrument-assigned precursor peaks to monoisotopic peptide assignments. We demonstrate that the present algorithm can be integrated into many common proteomic pipelines and provides rapid conversion from multiple data source types. Finally, we show that our monoisotopic peak assignment results in up to a twofold increase in total peptide identifications compared to analyses lacking monoisotopic correction and a 44% improvement over previous monoisotopic peak correction algorithms.

### Keywords
Apd, Tmt, Monoisotopic peak, Faims, Bottom-up proteomics, Multiplex proteomics

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


