### Accession
PXD009258

### Title
Absolute proteome quantification of highly purified reticulocytes and erythrocytes

### Description
Erythrocytes are the most numerous cells of the human body (Sender 2016). Their lifespan in the blood stream is around 120 days. The turnover implies the production of 2 million new reticulocytes each second. Circulating reticulocytes achieve their maturation in 2 to 3 days. During this short time, important modifications occur such as membrane remodeling, removing of remaining organelles and specific elimination of useless proteins such as the transferrin receptor. This remodeling will ensure the optimization of the erythrocyte ability to fulfil its transport functions. We performed a deep label-free quantitative proteome analysis of purified erythrocytes and reticulocytes to better understand the physiology of the erythrocytes and the last steps of their maturation.

### Sample Protocol
We used the label-free quantitative proteomic approach. Peptides were prepared from whole-cell lysates or from solubilized membranes (ghosts) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides from each sample were fractionated in 5 fractions by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips. Each fraction was analyzed by nLC-MS-MS using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (from Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief : Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 µm particle size, 100 Angström pore size, 75 µm internal diameter, 25 cm length) with a 3h binary gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 55% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid). The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme (top speed mode in 3 seconds) with full MS scans acquired with the orbitrap detector, followed by HCD fragmentation and Ion trap fragment detection of the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. Mass spectrometer settings for full scan MS were: 1.0E6 AGC, 60,000 target resolution, 350-1500 m/z range, 60 ms ion injection time. HCD MS/MS fragmentation was permitted for 2-7+ precursor ions reaching more than 5.0E4 minimum intensity. Quadrupole-filtered precursors within 1.6 m/z isolation window were fragmented with a 30 Normalised Collision Energy setting. 1.0E5 AGC Target and 60 ms maximum injection time were the limiting ions accumulation values. The Ion-trap detector was used for its fast and sensitive detection capabilities. A 30 seconds dynamic exclusion time was set.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using Maxquant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al, 2014 ). The database used was a concatenation of Human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2017-05) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant that was incremented in our laboratory for frequently observed contaminant proteins. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. The minimum peptide length allowed was 7 amino acids and the maximum mass was 6000 Da. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” options were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 peptide ratio required for LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Reticulocytes produced in the bone marrow undergo maturation in the bloodstream to give rise to erythrocytes. Although the proteome of circulating red cells has been the subject of several reports, the cellular populations used for these studies were never completely devoid of reticulocytes. In our current study, we used highly purified erythrocyte and reticulocyte populations to quantify the absolute expression levels of the proteins in each cell population. Erythrocytes and reticulocytes were purified in a multistep process involving cellulose chromatography, Percoll gradient centrifugation, and fluorescence cell sorting after thiazole orange labeling. Proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry from whole cells and erythrocyte plasma membrane (ghosts), leading to the identification and quantification of 2077 proteins, including 654 that were reticulocyte-specific. Absolute quantifications of these proteins were made using the mean corpuscular hemoglobin content of the cells as a standard. For each protein, we calculated the percentage loss during the terminal stages of reticulocyte maturation and the percentage of association with the plasma membrane. In addition, we used modified adenosine triphosphate and adenosine diphosphate molecules that enable the transfer of a biotin molecule to the catalytic sites of kinases to isolate active kinases in the erythrocytes and determined the absolute expression of 75 protein kinases and the modification of their expression during reticulocyte maturation. Our findings represent the first absolute quantification of proteins that are specifically expressed in normal erythrocytes with no detectable contamination by reticulocytes. Our findings thus represent a reference database for the future proteomic analysis of pathological erythrocytes.

### Keywords
Red blood cells, Label free quantification, Human primary cells, Erythrocytes, Reticulocytes

### Affiliations
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de Proteomique 3P5, GR-Ex, Paris Descartes University
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Mayeux
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de Proteomique 3P5, GR-Ex, Paris Descartes University


