### Accession
PXD015141

### Title
Marizomib eradicates primary and metastatic triple-negative breast cancer via proteasome and oxidative phosphorylation inhibition

### Description
Lacking effective targeted therapies, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBCs) is highly aggressive, metastatic, and clinically challenging breast cancer subtype with worst prognosis. Despite survival dependency on the proteasome pathway genes, the FDA-approved proteasome inhibitors induced minimal clinical response in TNBC patients due to weaker proteasome inhibition. Here, we show that a novel proteasome inhibitor Marizomib (Mzb), inhibited multiple proteasome catalytic activities and induced better anti-tumor response in TNBC cell line and patient-derived xenografts alone and in combination with a standard-of-care chemotherapy, doxorubicin.  Mechanistically, Mzb inhibits oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) via PGC-1α suppression in conjunction with proteasome inhibition in TNBC cells. Development of metastatic disease, especially brain metastasis, remains a reason for a greater mortality rate amongst TNBC patients. Mzb reduces lung and brain metastasis in vivo by reducing circulating tumor cells and the expression of multiple epithelial-to-mesenchymal genes. We also demonstrate that Mzb-induced OXPHOS inhibition upregulates glycolysis to fulfill the metabolic demand of TNBC cells and hence, combined inhibition of glycolysis with Mzb leads to a synergistic anti-cancer activity in vivo. Collectively, our data provide a strong rationale for the clinical evaluation of Mzb in primary and metastatic TNBC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted using 2%SDS protein lysis buffer. Sample protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer, USA), following the kit instructions. 30 µg of each protein sample was subjected to reduction, alkylation and trypsin-protein precipitation, prior to in-solution digestion. Briefly, the native disulfide bonds in the protein samples were sequentially reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (60°C,30 min), and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (dark, RT, 30 min) respectively. Following this, 10 volumes of chilled 100% methanol was added to the sample to facilitate protein co-precipitation along with trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein; sequencing grade porcine, Promega, USA). After incubating at -20°C for 24 h, samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to collect the protein pellet. The pellet was washed multiple times with chilled methanol to remove residual detergent from the lysis buffer. Trypsin (1:100, enzyme: protein) is added to the protein pellet and then the tube was incubated at 37°C for 18 h. After acidification to a final concentration of 1% v/v formic acid (FA); samples were desalted on the Strata X-33 µm reverse phase solid phase extraction resin (Phenomenex, USA), dried down and resuspended in 12 µl of 0.1 % v/v triflouoroacetic acid (TFA). Prior to LC-MS/MS, the digested peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce µBCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer, USA), following the kit instructions.  2. Tandem liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and database search.  One µg digested peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific VelosPro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled to a Shimadzu Prominence Nano HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). 5 µl of injected samples were separated on a ProteCol C18 analytical column [(150 mm x 150 µm, 3 µm; connected to a ProteCol guard column, 10 mm x 300 µm, 3 µm), Trajan Bioscience, Australia] over a gradient of 120 min at a flow rate of 1 µl / min. The peptides were eluted using Buffer A (0.1% v/v FA in water) and Buffer B (80% v/v acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v FA), over the specified gradient for 120 min (5.5% B to 40% B at 100 min). The column was maintained at 45 °C. Data acquisition on the mass spectrometer was done using the Data Dependent Top 15 method. The MS spectra were acquired in the mass range = m/z 380 — 1700 (Orbitrap resolution = 60000). Fragmentation for the MS/MS spectra were acquired using collision induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap mode (dynamic exclusion was set at 90.00 sec).

### Data Protocol
The extracted raw data was searched for protein IDs against the reviewed human proteome database (49,070 Swissprot entries; database accessed on 01/07/2018) using MaxQuant1 software, v. 1.5.8.3. MaxQuant parameters were set as follows: digestion = trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl; variable modifications = none; LFQ= enabled with minimum ratio count set to 2; match between runs = true; unique and razor peptides were used for protein identification, with minimum unique peptide = 1. The generated protein list was manually filtered to remove contaminants and reverse identified protein IDs; a cut-off score of 2 for minimum peptide counts per protein was applied. Summed intensity-based normalization was carried out. A fold change (FC) cut-off of 1.5 was used to identify differentially regulated proteins (Overexpressed = log2FC≥0.6; Downregulated = log2FC≤–0.6). Functional annotation and pathway enrichment analysis of differentially regulated proteins was performed using default parameters of DAVID.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose</b>: Lacking effective targeted therapies, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBCs) is highly aggressive and metastatic disease, and remains clinically challenging breast cancer subtype to treat. Despite the survival dependency on the proteasome pathway genes, FDA-approved proteasome inhibitors induced minimal clinical response in breast cancer patients due to weak proteasome inhibition. Hence, developing effective targeted therapy using potent proteasome inhibitor is required. <b>Methods</b>: We evaluated anti-cancer activity of a potent proteasome inhibitor, marizomib, <i>in vitro</i> using breast cancer lines and <i>in vivo</i> using 4T1.2 murine syngeneic model, MDA-MB-231 xenografts, and patient-derived tumor xenografts. Global proteome profiling, western blots, and RT-qPCR were used to investigate the mechanism of action for marizomib. Effect of marizomib on lung and brain metastasis was evaluated using syngeneic 4T1BR4 murine TNBC model <i>in vivo</i>. <b>Results</b>: We show that marizomib inhibits multiple proteasome catalytic activities and induces a better anti-tumor response in TNBC cell lines and patient-derived xenografts alone and in combination with the standard-of-care chemotherapy. Mechanistically, we show that marizomib is a dual inhibitor of proteasome and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in TNBCs. Marizomib reduces lung and brain metastases by reducing the number of circulating tumor cells and the expression of genes involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We demonstrate that marizomib-induced OXPHOS inhibition upregulates glycolysis to meet the energetic demands of TNBC cells and combined inhibition of glycolysis with marizomib leads to a synergistic anti-cancer activity. <b>Conclusions</b>: Our data provide a strong rationale for a clinical evaluation of marizomib in primary and metastatic TNBC patients.

### Keywords
Marizomib, Proteomics, Oxphos, Tnbc

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
300 Herston Road, Herston, Brisbane QLD 4006
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia

### Submitter
Prahlad Raninga

### Lab Head
Dr Kum Kum Khanna
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia


