### Accession
PXD014469

### Title
C. elegans wild type compared to vhl-1(ok161) RBPome and Proteome

### Description
We performed RNA interactome capture in wild type compared to vhl-1(ok161) loss-of-function worms. These data are combined with the proteome to distinguish changes in RBP abundance from differential binding events.

### Sample Protocol
RIC was performed as previously described (Ignarski et al., 2019) and adapted to C. elegans. Briefly, worm lysates were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C rotating with oligo(dT) magnetic beads. The beads were separated from the lysate by using a magnet and the supernatants were saved for repeating the depletion additional two times. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, three times with washing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 140 mM LiCl, 2 mM EDTA pH 8, 0.5% NP40) and once with washing buffer without NP40. After the last wash the beads were resuspended in elution buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5) and incubated at 80°C for 2 minutes. The depletion steps were repeated three times in total and the eluted fractions were combined. Aliquots were taken and RNA concentration was measured using a Qubit™ RNA HS Assay Kit. To remove RNA before MS and silver gels, the combined fractions were incubated at 37°C for 3 hours (10 U/ml RNAse I, 125 U/ml Benzonase, 1 M MgCl2). Two percent of the precipitates were loaded used for SDS-PAGE and analysed by silver staining (Pierce™ Silver Stain Kit). Afterwards, the samples were submitted to mass spectrometry. Protein digestion was performed according to a published protocol using carboxylate modified paramagnetic beads (Hughes et al., 2014). Briefly, samples were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Samples were incubated at 55°C for 30 min and reduced cysteine residues were alkylated by adding choroacetamide (CAA) to 40 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 x g and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic Sera-Mag carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (GE Healthcare) were combined 1:1, washed two times with 10 volumes of water and resuspended at 10 µg/µl. 2 µl of the bead mix were added to the samples and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final percentage of 50%. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 8 min and placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 70 % Ethanol (EtOH) and once with 100 % ACN. The beads were air dried and reconstituted in 5 µl 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 0.5 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg LysC. Proteins were digested for 16 h at 37°C. The beads were resuspended by pipetting up and down and ACN was added to 95 % final. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 8 min and placed on a magnetic rack for 3 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 100% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the beads by the addition 9 µl 4 % dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and sonication for 5 min. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. This step was repeated once to ensure complete removal of magnetic beads. Peptides were acidified by the addition of 1ul 10 % formic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC  LC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) that was operated at a constant flowrate of 250 nl/min at 50°C. Depending on the experiment type, one of three different chromatographic gradients was used. 240 min: 4-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-28% solvent B within 200.0 min, 28-50% solvent B within 28.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, 150 min: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 119.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 19.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min 90 min: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 65.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 13.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min. All gradients included final wash and column equilibration steps. Depending on gradient length, peptide precursors were dynamically excluded for 40.0 s, 25 s or 15 sec.  MS1 survey scans were acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing maximum injection times of 60 ms (240 min and 150 min gradients) or 100 ms (90 min gradient). Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Data were analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.2.2

### Publication Abstract
The cellular response to hypoxia is crucial to organismal survival, and hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) are the key mediators of this response. HIF-signaling is central to many human diseases and mediates longevity in the nematode. Despite the rapidly increasing knowledge on RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), little is known about their contribution to hypoxia-induced cellular adaptation. We used RNA interactome capture (RIC) in wild-type Caenorhabditis elegans and vhl-1 loss-of-function mutants to fill this gap. This approach identifies more than 1,300 nematode RBPs, 270 of which can be considered novel RBPs. Interestingly, loss of vhl-1 modulates the RBPome. This difference is not primarily explained by protein abundance suggesting differential RNA-binding. Taken together, our study provides a global view on the nematode RBPome and proteome as well as their modulation by HIF-signaling. The resulting RBP atlas is also provided as an interactive online data mining tool (http://shiny.cecad.uni-koeln.de:3838/celegans_rbpome).

### Keywords
Rbp, Vhl-1, C. elegans, Hif, Hypoxia, Rna-binding protein, Hif-1

### Affiliations
Uniklinik Köln
Nephrolab Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Francesca Fabretti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
Nephrolab Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne


