### Accession
PXD042023

### Title
Betacoronavirus Internal protein as a determinant of pathogenicity

### Description
Human betacoronaviruses encode an Internal (I) protein via an alternative reading frame within the nucleocapsid (N) gene, namely ORF8b for Middle-East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and ORF9b for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and SARS-CoV-2. Previous reports suggested that ORF8b and ORF9b are involved in evading innate immune responses, but their roles in mediating pathogenesis in infected animals has not been determined. In this study, we abrogated the expression of ORF8b in MERS-CoV (rMERS-Δ8b) and ORF9b in SARS-CoV-2 (rSARS2-Δ9b) and found that rMERS-Δ8b was more virulent while rSARS2-Δ9b was attenuated compared to their respective wild-type (WT) viruses in mice. Upon further analysis, we detected high levels of IFN-I expression and enhanced infiltration of immune cells to the lungs of rMERS-Δ8b-infected mice. In addition, mutations identified in previously circulating SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern (VOC) that were proposed to enhance ORF9b expression did not lead to significant changes in virulence. These data suggest the disparate and virus-specific functions of ORF8b and ORF9b which potentially explain the different changes in virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was digested in an S-Trap micro spin column (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Calu-3 cell pellets were lysed with 25 ml 5% SDS in 50mM TEAB buffer containing protease inhibitors (Pierce). The protein concentration of each sample was measured using a BCA assay (Pierce) 50 mg total protein were used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced by adding 4.5mM (final concentration) dithiothreitol and incubated for 15 min at 55°C. Proteins were then alkylated by the addition of 10mM (final concentration) iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. Each sample was then acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a 2.5% final concentration. The samples were mixed with 6x volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100mM TEAB) and loaded onto the S-trap filter and centrifuged at 4,000xg for 30 s. The samples were washed three times with wash solution (90% methanol; 100mM TEAB) before digestion with 5 mg trypsin (Promega) (1/10, w/w) overnight at 37°C.   The S-trap filters containing digested peptides were then rehydrated for 30 min at room temperature with 40 ml of elution buffer 1 (50mM TEAB in water). Subsequent elution steps of 40 ml of elution buffer 2 (0.2% TFA in water) followed by 40 ml elution buffer 2 (50% ACN in water) completed the peptide elution. The peptide eluates were pooled and de-salted with reverse-phase C18 OMIX tips (Pierce), all according to the manufacturer’s specifications before proceeding to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF Pro2 Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Samples were loaded on a capillary C18 column (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.6 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size; IonOpticks). The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water, and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were separated on a 54.5 min analytical gradient from 2% to 35% of Solvent B for a total of 60 min run time. The timsTOF Pro2 was operated in the PASEF mode. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired from 100-1700 m/z. The inverse reduced ion mobility 1/K0 was set to 0.60−1.60 V·s/cm2 over a ramp time of 100 ms. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle with a near 100% duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Fragpipe (version 18.0) using the MSFragger (version 3.6) search engine configured with Philosopher (version 4.6.0) and IonQuant (version 1.8.9) with default search settings for LFQ-MBR workflow including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were compared against Homo sapiens (Uniprot ID UP000005640) protein database containing 81,837 human sequences as well as proteins from SARS-CoV-2 protein data base (Uniprot ID UP000464024) containing 17 viral protein sequences. For both searches, a mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at a range of -20ppm to 20ppm with a mass tolerance for fragment ions at 20 ppm. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was set for the shotgun searches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification while variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained in the shotgun search. One replicate from rSARS2MA30-infected samples was excluded as being an outlier in intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Timstof pro, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Iowa 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA

### Submitter
Emma Luhmann 

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Lilliana
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA


