### Accession
PXD027609

### Title
Low temperature exposure has immediate and lasting effects on the stress tolerance, chemotaxis and proteome of entomopathogenic nematodes

### Description
Entomopathogenic nematodes (EPN) such as Steinernema spp. and Heterorhabditis spp. are obligate parasites of insects and effective biocontrol agents. Infective juveniles (IJs) of Steinernema carpocapsae and Heterorhabditis megidis are distantly related and exhibit different foraging behaviours but utilise similar volatiles to find hosts. These IJs live in the soil year-round and are exposed to a range of temperatures and associated stressors. Here we attempt to understand how exposure to low temperatures, and the duration of this exposure, affects the behaviour and stress resistance of these IJs. S. carpocapsae and H. megidis have similar responses to many odorants upon emergence from their natal host. The chemotaxis of H. megidis at 20°C is generally enhanced after exposure to lower temperatures, whereas the chemotaxis of S. carpocapsae at 20°C tends to be inverted by exposure low temperatures. Exposure to temperatures below culture temperature affects the chemotaxis of H. megidis gradually, whereas S. carpocapsae behave in a binary manner. Brief exposure to 9°C causes the behaviour of S. carpocapsae IJs to be altered and increased their resistance to freezing and desiccation for weeks afterwards. Label free quantitative proteomics confirms that exposure to 9°C for 1 week elicits dramatic increases in chaperone proteins in S. carpocapsae IJs, which are retained at high levels for 2 weeks after their transfer to 20°C. The proteome of S. carpocapsae IJs exposed to 9°C for 1 week and subsequently transferred to 20°C for 2 weeks conforms closely to that of IJs kept at 9°C for 3 weeks. Thus, S. carpocapsae IJs display a high degree of plasticity, and their behaviour and stress resistance may be manipulated by brief controlled exposure to low temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Sterile tap water (50µl) containing approximately 50 IJs was pipetted onto Whatman filter paper (1cm diameter) in a 3cm petri dish. Plates (without lids) were transferred to either -10°C for 6 hours or 75% RH for 5 days. These conditions were chosen to give approximately 50% survival in unconditioned IJs. Desiccation chambers were maintained at 75% relative humidity using supersaturated sodium chloride solutions (Winston and Bates, 1960). After the assay time, 20mls of sterile tap water was added to the IJs and their survival was assessed after 24 hours. There were six culture batches of nematodes and 5 plates were tested per batch of nematodes, to give 30 technical replicates per conditioning treatment.  The contents of a tub of IJs were sedimented in a 50 ml Falcon tube in their conditioning temperature. The pelleted IJs (150µl) were transferred to a 1.5ml Eppendorf tube and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Each sample was homogenised in lysis buffer, containing 6M urea, 2M thiourea, and a Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (cOmplete, Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Merck), centrifuged at 10000 x g for 1 minute, and snap frozen. This step was repeated 3 times to ensure complete homogenisation. Protein content was then quantified using Qubit (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Protein (100 µg) was purified using a 2D Clean Up Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting pellets were stored in the kit’s wash solution at -20°C until the last samples were collected, then all were centrifuged at 13000 x g for 5 minutes and the resulting pellets were resuspended in 50 µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M TrisHCl, pH8). A 20 µl aliquot was removed from each sample for reduction, alkylation and digestion. One hundred and five µls of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and 1 µl of dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to the samples and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes. Once cooled, samples were alkylated with 2.7 µl of iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark conditions. One µl of a 1% (w/v) solution of ProteaseMax (Promega) and 0.5µg/µl trypsin (Promega) were added to the samples and incubated at 37°C for a minimum of 16 hours. Samples were removed from 37°C, centrifuged briefly and acidified with 1µl of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 5 minutes at room temperature (20-25°C). Samples were centrifuged at 13000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was purified using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions and then lyophilised in a Speedyvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120). Samples were then resuspended in a loading buffer, (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v TFA) and µg was loaded from 4 biological replicates per samples were run on the QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated over a 2% to 40% gradient of acetonitrile on a Thermo Fisher EASY-Spray, PepMap RSLC C18 column (500mm length, 75mm ID), using a reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 250nL min-1 over 125 minutes.  All data were acquired over 105 minutes with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 140,000 resolution and range of 300–1700 m/z was followed by an MS/MS scan, resolution 17,500 and range of 200–2000 m/z, selecting the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was performed using Max-Quant v1.6.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in Hubner et al., (2010). The Andromeda search algorithm (Cox et al., 2011) incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data for S. carpocapsae against the predicted protein data sets derived from the S. carpocapsae (Serra et al., 2019).  Normalised LFQ intensities were used as measurements of protein abundance, and the data was filtered to remove contaminants. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, and each replicate was renamed to their respective groups (3wks9°C for proteins from IJs stored at 9°C for 3 weeks). Only proteins found in 3 replicates of at least 1 group were retained. A data imputation step replaced missing values with values of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (SD) and a width of 0.3 times the standard deviation.  A principal component analysis (PCA) was initially performed on the normalised intensity values of all replicates. However, a number of outliers were identified, resulting in 3 replicates in each sample in the final datasets for analysis. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on all groups using a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% to select proteins for z score normalisation. These ANOVA significant proteins were used for hierarchical clustering of samples using Euclidean distance and average linkage pre-processed with K means. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p values of the y axis and log2fold transformed differences on the x axis for each comparison. Pairwise t-tests were performed between the S. carpocapsae IJs conditioned in 9°C for 1 week and transferred to 20°C for 2 weeks and the IJs stored at 9°C and 20°C for 3 weeks to visualise the effect of temperature swapping on the IJs proteome (Table 2). Statically significant (SS; p< 0.05) and differentially abundant (DA; fold change of 1.5) were identified as SSDAs and selected for further analysis.  The genome of S. carpocapsae has been recently sequenced (Serra et al., 2019), and the protein file was downloaded from Wormbase Parasite (https://parasite.wormbase.org/Steinernema_carpocapsae_prjna202318/Info/Index) and used for detection of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temperature, Proteomics, Biological pest control, Conditioning, Chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Biology
Maynooth University, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Maynooth University, Ireland


