### Accession
PXD005167

### Title
Streptococcus pyogenes (GAS) membrane vesicles (MVs) and membranes LC-MSMS

### Description
Proteomics characterisation of membrane vesicles (MV) and corresponding membranes derived from Streptococcus pyogenes M1 (clinical isolate ISS3348) grown to late-logarithmic phase in THB media.

### Sample Protocol
GAS MVs and Membranes (Mem) were washed  twice with PBS, equal amounts of proteins (50µg) were delipidated and precipitated by aceton, re-solubilized in 8M Urea containing ProteaseMax (promega), reduced and alkylated and further trypsin digested for 3h/37°C. After acidification, peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 material (3M Empore), eluted and reconstituted in 0.5% TFA. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a C18 cartridge trap-column (Dionex) in backflush configuration and an in-house packed (3μm C18 particles) analytical 50 cm x 75 μm emitter-column (New Objective). Peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher) tandem mass spectrometer operating with a top-10 strategy and a cycle time of 1.2 s. Single 350 - 1,400 m/z MS scans at a resolution of R=70,000 were followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 27) of up to 10 most intense ions (charge states +2 to +6) at R=17,500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were set to 3e6 and5e4, respectively, and fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 50s.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometric raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. First and main search MS mass tolerances were ≤20 and ≤4.5 ppm, respectively. MS/MS tolerance was ≤20 ppm. Criteria for identification were specified as following: 1 peptide, minimum length of 7 residues and false discovery rate (FDR) <1% using a target decoy approach. Match between runs was enabled, and all other parameters were default. Only proteins that were found in all three biological replicates were considered for further analysis. MaxQuant label free quantification (LFQ)algorithm normalized protein intensities were used to calculate an enrichment factor of individual proteins present in EVs and membranes. Proteins showing an enrichment factor of 2 (LFQ-intensity ratio EV/membranes equal or greater than 2) were considered for further bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membranes, Lc-msms, Streptococcus pyogenes, Membrane vesicles, Serotype m1, Iss3348

### Affiliations
Director Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology Department of Regulation in Infection Biology, Berlin Professor Alexander von Humboldt, Germany Professor, Hannover Medical School, Germany Visiting Professor, Umea University, Sweden
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility

### Submitter
Sergo Kasvandik

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Emmanuelle Charpentier
Director Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology Department of Regulation in Infection Biology, Berlin Professor Alexander von Humboldt, Germany Professor, Hannover Medical School, Germany Visiting Professor, Umea University, Sweden


