### Accession
PXD038822

### Title
Combinatorial treatment with PARP and MAPK inhibitors to overcome phenotype switch-driven drug resistance in advanced melanoma

### Description
Metastatic melanoma is either intrinsically resistant or rapidly acquires resistance to targeted drugs such as MAPK inhibitors (MAPKi). Here, using a drug screen targeting chromatin regulators in patient-derived 3D melanoma cell cultures, we discovered that PARP inhibitors are capable of restoring MAPKi sensitivity. This synergy was found to be independent of DNA damage repair pathways and was effective both in vitro and in vivo in patients-derived xenografts.  Strikingly, through integrated transcriptomic, proteomic and epigenomic analysis, we discovered that PARPi induces lysosomal autophagy which was accompanied by enhanced mitochondrial lipid metabolism that, ultimately, increased antigen presentation and sensitivity to T-cell cytotoxicity. Moreover, we also found that PARP inhibitors regulated EMT-like phenotype switching by dampening the mesenchymal phenotype via transcriptomic and epigenetic rearrangements. This, in turn, redirected melanoma cells towards a proliferative and, thus, MAPKi-sensitive state. Our study provides a scientific rational for treating patients with PARPi in combination with MAPKi to annihilate acquired therapy resistance.

### Sample Protocol
3D spheroid culturing For human melanoma cell lines, a round bottom Corning Ultra-Low Attachment Surface 96-well plate (CLS4515, corning) was seeded with 0.5-3x104 cells/well in a final volume of 100uL for 3 to 6 days to allow spheroid formation.  Spheroid lysate preparation and trypsin digestion Spheriods were lysed in lysis buffer (6M GndHCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0) and sonicated and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark at 95 °C for 10 min.  50 ug of proteins were prepared for digestion using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology (74) and digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (1:25; Promega) overnight at 37 °C.  The samples were then acidified with TFA and salts removed using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore Corp.).  The peptides were eluted with 15 uL of 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried to completion and then re-dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to a final peptide concentration of 0.5 µg/uL.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis Whole proteome LC-MS/MS analyses were performed either on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatographs (Waters).  Peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters).  Peptides were eluted over 110 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  An elution gradient protocol from 2% to 25% B, followed by two steps at 35% B for 5 min and at 95% B for 5 min, respectively, was used.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’800 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000.  Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy.  The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Only precursors with intensities above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s.  Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected.  Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm.  The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free protein quantification The acquired whole proteome raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (75).  Spectra were searched against a the Swissprot human reference proteome (taxonomy 9609, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used.  The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins.  Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied.  In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.  Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file.  A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService (76) was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance.  If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


