### Accession
PXD037698

### Title
Peroxiredoxin 2 is required for the exercise induced redox mediated adaptation to exercise

### Description
During exercise there is a site-specific increase in ROS within muscle required for the beneficial adaptive response by activation of specific signalling pathways. Peroxiredoxin 2 (Prdx2), an abundant cytoplasmic 2-Cys peroxidase, is required for the adaptive beneficial hormesis response to H2O2, myoblasts with knockdown of Prdx2 did not increase mitochondrial content and had disrupted myogenesis. Using a 5-day swimming protocol in C. elegans, previously been demonstrated to improve healthspan, we observed increased mitochondrial content, fitness, survival and longevity in wild type (N2) worms. However, prdx-2 mutant worms had decreased fitness, disrupted mitochondria, reduced survival and lifespan following exercise. Global proteomics following exercise revealed an increase in the abundance of proteins involved in fatty oxidation and ion transport, decrease in proteins involved in cuticle formation in N2 worms. In the prdx-2 mutants following exercise there was an increase in proteins related to the mTOR pathway and decrease in transsulfuration and microRNA biogenesis proteins.  Relative quantification of the reversible oxidation state of individual Cysteine (Cys) residues revealed an increased oxidation of specific Cys residues following exercise in prdx-2 mutant. A number of regulatory Cys residues of metabolic, cytoskeletal and calcium handling proteins are reduced in N2 worms. A redox signalling relay whereby the oxidative equivalents from ROS are transferred from evolutionary conserved Prdxs to target proteins, would confer specificity on redox signalling required for the beneficial adaptations to exercise.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were diluted to a final concentration of 2M Urea 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. In-solution digestion, using Lys-C (Wako) and trypsin (Trypzean, Sigma) was performed during 10h at 37°C (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50). Resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 plate. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to a Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then, peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo) (2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) operated at 45 °C and separated using a 60 min effective gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was, from 2% to 6% of buffer B in 2 min, from 6% to 33% B in 58 minutes, from 33% to 45% in 2 minutes, plus 10 additional minutes at 98% B. Peptides were sprayed at 1.5 kV into the mass spectrometer via the EASY-Spray source and the capillary temperature was set to 300 °C.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 18 method. (Intensity threshold ≥ 3.6e5, dynamic exclusion of 20 sec and excluding charges +1 and > +6). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (200 m/z). Ion peptides were isolated using a 1.0 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 29. MS/MS spectra resolution was set to 15,000 (200 m/z). The normalised AGC  ion target values were 300% for MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 100% for MS/MS (maximum IT of 22 msec).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against a C.elegans protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL, 27385 sequences). N-ethylmaleimide and D5 N-ethylmaleimide on cysteines, oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level).

### Publication Abstract
Exercise generates a site-specific increase in Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) within muscle that promotes changes in gene transcription and mitochondrial biogenesis, required for the beneficial adaptive response. We demonstrate that Peroxiredoxin 2 (Prdx2), an abundant cytoplasmic 2-Cys peroxiredoxin, is required for the adaptive hormesis response to physiological levels of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in myoblasts and following exercise in C. elegans. A short bolus addition of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> increases mitochondrial capacity and improves myogenesis of cultured myoblasts, this beneficial adaptive response was suppressed in myoblasts with decreased expression of cytoplasmic Prdxs. Moreover, a swimming exercise protocol in C. elegans increased mitochondrial content, fitness, survival and longevity in wild type (N2) worms. In contrast, prdx-2 mutant worms had decreased fitness, disrupted mitochondria, reduced survival and lifespan following exercise. Global proteomics following exercise identified distinct changes in the proteome of N2 and prdx-2 mutants. Furthermore, a redox proteomic approach to quantify reversible oxidation of specific Cysteine residues revealed a more reduced redox state in the non-exercised&#xa0;prdx-2&#xa0;mutant strain that become oxidized following exercise. In contrast, specific Cys residues from regulatory proteins become more reduced in the N2 strain following exercise, establishing the key regulatory role of PRDX-2 in a redox signalling cascade following endogenous ROS generation. Our results demonstrate that conserved cytoplasmic 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins are required for the beneficial adaptive response to a physiological redox stress.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans redox

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
CNIO


