### Accession
PXD025522

### Title
Patient-derived extracellular vesicles drive cancer stemness and tumorigenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma via polymeric immunoglobulin receptor

### Description
Background & Aims: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a pivotal role in connecting tumor cells and their local and distant microenvironment. Here, we aimed to understand the role and molecular basis of patient-derived EVs in modulating cancer stemness and tumorigenesis in the context of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Methods: EVs were isolated, quantified and characterized from patients’ sera. EVs were tested vigorously, both in vitro and in vivo, by various functional assays. Proteomic analysis was performed to identify the functional components of EVs. The expression level of polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) in circulating EVs, tumor and non-tumorous tissues of HCC patients was determined by ELISA, immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry and quantitative PCR. The functional role and underlying mechanism of EVs with an enhanced pIgR expression was elucidated. Blockage of EV-pIgR with neutralizing antibody was performed in nude mice implanted with patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX). Results: Circulating EVs of late-stage HCC (L-HCC) patient had significantly elevated pIgR expression when compared to the EVs released by control individuals. The augmenting effect of L-HCC patient in cancer stemness and tumorigenesis was hindered by anti-pIgR antibody. EVs enriched with pIgR consistently promoted cancer stemness and cancerous phenotypes in the recipient cells.  Mechanistically, EV-pIgR-induced cancer aggressiveness was abrogated by Akt and β-catenin inhibitors, ascertaining the role of EV-pIgR through the activation of PDK1/Akt/GSK3β/β-catenin signaling axis. Furthermore, anti-pIgR neutralizing antibody attenuated the tumor growth in mice implanted with PDTX.   Conclusion: The study illustrates an unrevealed role of EV-pIgR in regulating cancer stemness and aggressiveness, in which EV-pIgR activates PDK1/Akt/GSK3β/β-catenin signaling cascades. The blockage of intercellular communications mediated by EV-pIgR in the tumor microenvironment may provide a new therapeutic strategy for cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
EV protein extraction, in-solution digestion and mass spectrometry Extracted EVs from serum were suspended in 2M urea, 50 mM Tri-Ethyl ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer, and the proteins were extracted by bead beating using a Precellys homogenizer followed by centrifugation at 14000  g for 30 min. The supernatant fraction was collected for protein quantitation using a BCA assay. Briefly, 10 µg of protein was subjected to trypsin digestion following reduction and alkylation using 10 mM DTT and 40 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Protein digestion was performed by incubating with trypsin overnight at 37°C. The tryptic peptide speedVac dried. Peptides derived from EVs of healthy controls, patients with cirrhosis and HCC patients at early and late stages (Supplementary Table S1) were desalted using C18 ZipTips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Eluted peptides were analyzed using nanoLC system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribid Lumos (Thermo). Peptides were separated on commercial C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50cm length) with 1.9 μm particle size (Thermo). Separation was attained using a linear gradient of increasing buﬀer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and declining buﬀer (0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min. Buﬀer B was increased to 30% B in 150 min and ramped to 40% B in 10 min followed by a quick ramp to 95% B, where it was held for 5 min before a quick ramp back to 5% B, where it was held and the column was re-equilibrated. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 300°C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 2 × 106, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 50 ms, and for a scan range of 350-1500 m/z. A data-dependent top 10 method was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Spectra were obtained at 30000 MS2 resolution with AGC target of 1 × 105 and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 100 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation width, and normalized collisional energy of 30. Preceding precursor ions targeted for HCD were dynamically excluded of 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using Maxquant version 1.6.0.1, wherein the MS data analyzed in triplicate for each condition were searched using the Andromeda algorithm against the Human UniProt protein database containing 28, 250 entries using following settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications, with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The parameters were set appropriately to obtain the peptide and protein data using 0.1% FDR at both the peptide and protein level. The EV proteins identified from in serum of HCC patients at early and late stage were quantified using the peptide LFQ intensities, and the obtained ratios were compared against the healthy control ratios used for label-free quantitation to calculate the fold change (≥ 1.5-fold-cut off). Data visualization and statistical data analysis were performed using Perseus software version 1.5.4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a hypervascular malignancy by which its growth and dissemination are largely driven by the modulation of tumor-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs). Proteomic profiling of circulating sEVs of control individuals and HCC patients identifies von Willibrand factor (vWF) to be upregulated progressively along HCC stages. Elevated sEV-vWF levels are found in a larger cohort of HCC-sEV samples and metastatic HCC cell lines compared to their respective normal counterparts. Circulating sEVs of late-stage HCC patients markedly augment angiogenesis, tumor-endothelial adhesion, pulmonary vascular leakiness, and metastasis, which are significantly compromised by anti-vWF antibody. The role of vWF is further corroborated by the enhanced promoting effect of sEVs collected from vWF-overexpressing cells. sEV-vWF modulates endothelial cells through an elevated level of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2). Mechanistically, secreted FGF2 elicits a positive feedback response in HCC via the FGFR4/ERK1 signaling pathway. The co-administration of anti-vWF antibody or FGFR inhibitor significantly improves the treatment outcome of sorafenib in a patient-derived xenograft mouse model. This study reveals mutual stimulation between HCC and endothelial cells by tumor-derived sEVs and endothelial angiogenic factors, facilitating angiogenesis and metastasis. It also provides insights into a new therapeutic strategy involving blocking tumor-endothelial intercellular communication.

### Keywords
Evs, Hcc, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Associate Professor, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,  The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Sze Keong Tey

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Judy WP Yam
Associate Professor, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,  The University of Hong Kong


