### Accession
PXD036915

### Title
Alpha4 is critical for Adipocyte Maintenance and Mitochondrial Homeostasis through Regulation of Insulin Signaling

### Description
To investigate how α4 (IGBP1) regulates insulin signaling in adipocytes, we conducted analysis of proteins that interact with α4 by using brown preadipocyte cell lines (WT-1 cells) transfected with 3XFlag-tagged α4 protein, followed by immunoprecipitation of associated proteins using anti-Flag beads and mass spectroscopic proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To examine protein interactions, cells expressing Flag-tagged α4 were lysed in lysis buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1 mM Na3VO4, 1% NP-40, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail] and then centrifuged for 10 min at 21,200 g. 15 mg protein lysates were incubated with Flag Magnetic Beads (Sigma) in a total volume of 15 ml for 1 h at 4 °C with end-to-end rotation. The protein complex-bound beads were washed three times with Lysis buffer and eluted the bound Flag-tagged protein with Elution buffer [1XTBS buffer (pH 7.5), 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 150 ng/µl Flag peptide (Sigma)] by end-to-end rotation at 4 °C for 30 min. The samples were filtered by the Amicon Ultra. The eluted sample was added acetone (final acetone concentration 80% v/v) and incubated for 2 h at -20 °C. After removing the supernatant by centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was redissolved in 0.5% sodium dodecanoate and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 by using a water bath-type sonicator (Bioruptor UCD-200 SonicBio Corp., Kanagawa, Japan). The pretreatment of shotgun proteome analysis was performed. Peptides were directly injected onto a 75 μm × 20 cm, PicoFrit emitter packed in house with 2.7 μm core shell C18 particles at 45 °C and then separated with an 80 min gradient at a flow rate of 100 nl/min using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for overlapping window DIA-MS. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 495-785 m/z at 30,000 resolution to set an automatic gain control target of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 55. MS2 spectra were collected in the range of more than 200 m/z at 30,000 resolution to set an automatic gain control target of 3e6, maximum injection time of “auto.”, and stepped normalized collision energy of 22, 26, and 30%. An isolation width for MS2 was set to 4 m/z and overlapping window patterns in 500-780 m/z were used window placements optimized by Skyline v4.1.

### Data Protocol
MS files were searched against a mouse spectral library using Scaffold DIA (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR). The spectral library was generated from mouse protein sequence database (UniProt id UP000000589, reviewed, canonical) by Prosit 63. The Scaffold DIA search parameters were as follows: experimental data search enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites, 1; precursor mass tolerance, 8 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 10 ppm; static modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation. The protein identification threshold was set both peptide and protein false discovery rates of less than 1%. Peptide quantification was calculated by EncyclopeDIA algorithm in Scaffold DIA. For each peptide, the four highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation. Protein quantification was estimated from the summed peptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin signaling is mediated via a network of protein phosphorylation. Dysregulation of this network is central to obesity, type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Here we investigate the role of phosphatase binding protein Alpha4 (&#x3b1;4) that is essential for the serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) in insulin action/resistance in adipocytes. Unexpectedly, adipocyte-specific inactivation of &#x3b1;4 impairs insulin-induced Akt-mediated serine/threonine phosphorylation despite a decrease in the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) levels. Interestingly, loss of &#x3b1;4 also reduces insulin-induced insulin receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. This occurs through decreased association of &#x3b1;4 with Y-box protein 1, resulting in the enhancement of the tyrosine phosphatase protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) expression. Moreover, adipocyte-specific knockout of &#x3b1;4 in male mice results in impaired adipogenesis and altered mitochondrial oxidation leading to increased inflammation, systemic insulin resistance, hepatosteatosis, islet hyperplasia, and impaired thermogenesis. Thus, the &#x3b1;4 /Y-box protein 1(YBX1)-mediated pathway of insulin receptor signaling is involved in maintaining insulin sensitivity, normal adipose tissue homeostasis and systemic metabolism.

### Keywords
Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculuty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuoku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan
Kumamoto University 

### Submitter
Yuma Okubo

### Lab Head
Dr masaji sakaguchi
Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculuty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuoku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan


