### Accession
PXD034772

### Title
The immunopeptidome landscape associated with T cell infiltration, inflammation   and immune-editing in lung cancer

### Description
One key barrier to improving efficacy of personalized cancer immunotherapies that are dependent on the tumor antigenic landscape remains patient stratification. While patients with CD3+CD8+ T cell inflamed tumors typically show better response to immune checkpoint inhibitors, it is still unknown if the repertoire of HLA bound peptides presented in highly inflamed and non-inflamed tumors is substantially different. We surveyed 61 tumor regions and adjacent non-malignant lung tissues from eight lung cancer patients and performed deep antigen discovery combining immunopeptidomics, genomics, bulk and spatial transcriptomics and explored the heterogeneous expression and presentation of tumor (neo)antigens. Here we associated diverse immune cell populations with the immunopeptidome in CD3+CD8+ T cell excluded, infiltrated, highly- and lowly-inflamed tumors. We found evidence for lower immune-editing and higher presentation efficiency of tumor-associated antigens in lowly-inflamed and CD3+CD8+ T cell excluded tumors. This could have implications for the choice of combination therapies tailored to the patient’s mutanome and microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification of HLA peptides We performed HLA immunoaffinity purification according to our previously established protocols. W6/32 and HB145 monoclonal antibodies were purified from the supernatants of HB95 (ATCC® HB-95™) and HB145 cells (ATCC® HB-145™) using protein-A sepharose 4B (Pro-A) beads (Invitrogen), and antibodies were then cross-linked to Pro-A beads. Snap-frozen tissue samples were lysed in lysis buffer and homogenized on ice in 3–5 short intervals of 5 s each using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA), and were left for 1h at 4 °C. The lysis buffer contained PBS with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, a 1:200 protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma Aldrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche), and 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma Alrich). The lysates were then cleared by centrifugation at 75,600 x g in a high-speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter, Avanti JXN-26 Series, JA-25.50 rotor) at 4 °C for 50 min. For HLA immunopurification, we employed the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters) and 96-well single-use filter micro-plates with 3 µm glass fibers and 25 µm polyethylene membranes (Agilent, 204495-100). The lysates were passed sequentially through the first plate with wells containing Pro-A beads for endogenous antibody depletion, then a second plate with wells containing anti-pan HLA-I antibody-cross-linked beads, and lastly through the third plate containing anti-pan HLA-II antibody-cross-linked beads. The HLA-I and HLA-II crosslinked beads were then washed separately in their plates with varying concentrations of salts using the processor. Finally, the beads were washed twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plates (Waters, ref no: 186002321) were used for the purification and concentration of HLA-I and HLA-II peptides. The C18 sorbents were conditioned, and the HLA complexes and bound peptides were directly eluted from the filter plates with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma Aldrich). After washing the C18 sorbents with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA, HLA-I peptides were eluted with 28% acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma Aldrich) in 0.1% TFA, and HLA-II peptides were eluted with 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Recovered HLA-I and -II peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses The LC-MS/MS system consisted of an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 450 mm analytical column (8 µm tip, 75 µm inner diameter, PicoTipTMEmitter, New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 (1.9 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The separation was performed at a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 80% ACN (solvent B) in 0.1% FA in water (solvent A). HLAIp were analyzed by the following gradient: 0–5 min (5% B); 5–85 min (5–35% B); 85–100 min (35–60% B); 100–105 min (60–95% B); 105–110 min (95% B); 110–115 min (95–2% B) and 115–125 min (2% B). HLAIIp were analyzed by the following gradient: 0–5 min (2–5% B); 5–65 min (5–30% B); 65–70 min (30–60% B); 70–75 min (60–95% B); 75–80 min (95% B), 80–85 min (95–2% B) and 85–90 min (2% B). For data dependent acquisition, full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z = 300–1650 with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) and an ion accumulation time of 80 ms. The auto gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner on the 20 most abundant precursor ions (if present) with a resolution of 15,000 (m/z = 200), an ion accumulation time of 120 ms, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The AGC was set to 2e5 ions, the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 was used for fragmentation. No fragmentation was performed for HLAIp with assigned precursor ion charge states of four and above or for HLAIIp with an assigned precursor ion charge state of one, or six and above. The peptide match option was disabled. Data was acquired in an independent manner using the following parameters. The cycle of acquisition consisted of a full MS scan from 300-1650 m/z (R = 60,000 and ion accumulation time of 60 ms) and 21 DIA MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap. For each DIA MS/MS scan, a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 3e6 and a ramping normalized collision energy (NCE = 25.5, 27 and 30) were used. The maximum ion accumulation was set to auto and the overlap between consecutive MS/MS scans was 1 m/z. For some peptide samples, only DDA measurements were available.

### Data Protocol
MS-based searches First, for each region, we search the corresponding MS raw file against the a personalized proteome reference as described above using Comet with the following setup: precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, peptide length of 8–15 when searching only HLA-I peptides and 8–25 for both HLA-I and HLA-II peptides, no fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation and  phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine was included as a variable modification.  A group specific 3% FDR (smoothing value: 5) for protein-coding, non-canonical sources and transposable elements) was calculated by NewAnce v1.7.1 (smoothing value: 5) as previously described.  We next generated a single comprehensive reference database containing all the protein sequence sources of the detected personalized variant and non-canonical peptides from all patient tissue regions, and concatenate these to a generic GENCODE database. Then, Comet and NewAnce searches were run again against this database using the entire immunopeptidomics dataset, yet separately for HLA-I and HLA-II raw files with same parameters as above. The outputs of this search were used to create spectral libraries for targeted DIA analysis with Spectronaut.  The spectral libraries were generated using the results from the Comet and NewAnce search by parsing the PSMs into the BGS generic format recommended by Spectronaut (version 14.6.2, Biognosys). The default settings were used except the following parameters. For the mass tolerance, the calibration search was set to ‘dynamic’ and a correction factor of 1 was used for MS and MS/MS. For identification, a FDR threshold of 0.01 and unspecific digestion rule were used. For spectral library filtering, only peptides with longer than 3 a.a and with at least 3 best fragments (up to 6) were considered. A deep learning assisted iRT regression and a R-square of 0.8 were used for iRT reference strategy and correlation score, respectively. The selection of fragment ions based on intensity was used. For targeted DIA based identification of the peptides, the library was matched against the corresponding immunopeptidomics DIA raw files with q-value cut-off of 0.01 and 1 respectively for precursor and protein. MS and MS/MS data were extracted using maximum intensity strategy within the given mass tolerance. A dynamic mass tolerance and a correction factor of 1 were used for both MS and MS/MS. The quantification was done at MS/MS level, using at least 3 fragments. The global normalization per run based on the median was switched off to avoid cross run normalization. Results from Spectronaut were exported in peptide-centered file formats: peptide quantity and peptide score.  For more extended analysis of HLA-I peptides derived from non-canonical sources, we used the  high-confidence database of translated nuORFs across tissues (nuORFdb) (concatenated with the human reference proteome; 323,848 entries, PA_nuORFdb_v1.0.fasta) and a reduced version of the above mentioned  personalized references per patient, where the ORFs non-canonical sources were restricted to in silico methionine-to-stop translated transcript entries, resulting in fasta files with overall similar size per patient (ranging from 521,779 entries for patient 02672 to 599,300 entries for patient 02287). We then used the hybrid DIA approach with Spectronaut (version 16.3: The parameters are provided in Supplementary software 1). Peptide identification was performed by PulsarTM on DIA and DDA files (separately per patient) using unspecific digestion and with a peptide length from 8 – 15a.a. Acetylation at Protein N-term and Oxidation of methionine were considered as variable modifications. –b and y ions were used as main ion types. For non-canonical sources, we used the gencode annotation with priorities in the following order: lncRNAs, processed transcripts, pseudogenes, retained introns, noncanonical ORFs and ‘others’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoantigens, Immunopeptidomics, Proteogenomics, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Office B25A/04/94 Rue du Bugnon 25a, CH-1005 Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Office B25A/04/94 Rue du Bugnon 25a, CH-1005 Lausanne


