### Accession
PXD001052

### Title
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer patients undergoing radical radiotherapy

### Description
Currently there is no predictive marker with clinical utility to guide treatment decisions in NSCLC patients undergoing radiotherapy. Identification of such markers would allow treatment options to be considered for more effective therapy. To enable the identification of appropriate protein biomarkers, plasma samples were collected from patients with non-small cell lung cancer before and during radiotherapy for longitudinal comparison following a protocol that carries sufficient power for effective discovery proteomics. Plasma samples from patients pre- and during radiotherapy who had survived >18 months were compared to the same time points from patients who survived <14 months using an 8 channel isobaric tagging tandem mass spectrometry discovery proteomics platform.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was depleted of high abundant proteins using a MARS14. Protein was than digested with trypsin, labelled with 8 plex iTRAQ reagents and pooled. Peptides were fractionated offline with high pH reverse phase  chromatography and analysed by LC-MS with a triple TOF 5600 ABsciex.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were submitted to ProteinPilot software version 4.5 (ABSCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) for database searching and iTRAQ reporter ion quantification. Searches were performed against the Ensembl human core 63 data base (85285 entries, downloaded 2012) with the following settings; Cysteine alkylation with methanethiosulfate (MMTS), biological modifications allowed and trypsin as the digestion enzyme. The search was carried out with default settings and thus the cleavage specificity, number of missed cleavages and mass tolerances were preset.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the most frequent cause of cancer-related death world-wide. Radiotherapy alone or in conjunction with chemotherapy is the standard treatment for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Currently there is no predictive marker with clinical utility to guide treatment decisions in NSCLC patients undergoing radiotherapy. Identification of such markers would allow treatment options to be considered for more effective therapy. To enable the identification of appropriate protein biomarkers, plasma samples were collected from patients with non-small cell lung cancer before and during radiotherapy for longitudinal comparison following a protocol that carries sufficient power for effective discovery proteomics. Plasma samples from patients pre- and during radiotherapy who had survived &gt;&#xa0;18&#xa0;mo were compared to the same time points from patients who survived &lt;&#xa0;14&#xa0;mo using an 8 channel isobaric tagging tandem mass spectrometry discovery proteomics platform. Over 650 proteins were detected and relatively quantified. Proteins which showed a change during radiotherapy were selected for validation using an orthogonal antibody-based approach. Two of these proteins were verified in a separate patient cohort: values of CRP and LRG1 combined gave a highly significant indication of extended survival post one week of radiotherapy treatment.

### Keywords
Plasma lc-ms lung cancer itraq

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Institute of Cancer Sciences 1st floor, Wolfson Molecuar Imaging Centre 27 Palatine Road Withington Manchester M20 3LJ

### Submitter
Michael Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Whetton
Institute of Cancer Sciences 1st floor, Wolfson Molecuar Imaging Centre 27 Palatine Road Withington Manchester M20 3LJ


