### Accession
PXD028382

### Title
Late-stage modification of peptides and proteins at cysteine with diaryliodonium salts

### Description
The modification of peptides and proteins has emerged as a powerful means to efficiently prepare high value bioconjugates for a range of applications in chemical biology and for the development of next-generation therapeutics. Herein, we report a novel method for the chemoselective late-stage modification of peptides and proteins at cysteine in aqueous buffer with suitably functionalised diaryliodonium salts, furnishing stable  thioether-linked synthetic conjugates. The power of this new platform is showcased through the late-stage modification of the affibody zEGFR and the histone protein H2A.

### Sample Protocol
Modified proteins were characterised by trypsin digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously [PMID: 33657384]. Briefly, proteins were denatured, reduced using TCEP and alkylated with chloroacetamide followed by trypsin digestion. Peptides were purified using SDB-RPS Stagetips and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on 45 min gradients using data-dependent acquisition with HCD-MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA) with a 2% false-discovery rate and an error tolerance of 7 ppm at the precursor level and 30 ppm at the fragment level. Allowed modifications included the reaction-specific mass addition to cysteine, protein N-terminal acetylation, protein C-terminal amidation, and Gln/Glu pyro-glutamic acid formation at peptide N-termini. The Swissprot E. coli protein database was used in combination with the sequences of the zEGFR and H2A T120C proteins used in these experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The modification of peptides and proteins has emerged as a powerful means to efficiently prepare high value bioconjugates for a range of applications in chemical biology and for the development of next-generation therapeutics. Herein, we report a novel method for the chemoselective late-stage modification of peptides and proteins at cysteine in aqueous buffer with suitably functionalised diaryliodonium salts, furnishing stable thioether-linked synthetic conjugates. The power of this new platform is showcased through the late-stage modification of the affibody zEGFR and the histone protein H2A.

### Keywords
Modification, Synthesis, H2a

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


