### Accession
PXD001846

### Title
SILAC Mass Spectrometry of U2AF2 Interactome in Resting and Activated CD4 T cells

### Description
T cell activation leads to dramatic changes in cellular phenotype.  We used activated human CD4 T cells to study how RNA binding proteins define the post-transcriptional landscape. Using RIPseq, we identified the RNA interactome of U2AF2 and show that U2AF2 binds the majority of transcripts that are differentially expressed and/or alternatively spliced during activation. Using RIP mass spectrometry, a unique protein interactome centered on U2AF2 is assembled by activation and comprised of both directly bound central members (RNAse-resistant) and indirectly bound peripheral members (RNAse-sensitive). Knocking down specific U2AF2 interactome members (U2AF1, SYNCRIP, SRRM2, ILF2) selectively affects cytokine secretion and activation markers. The expression and/or alternative splicing of transcripts important for immune cell function are also affected by knocking down these interactome members, both peripheral and central. Furthermore, we show that knockdown of interactome members can affect the proteins and transcripts bound to U2AF2, altering the transcriptome of activated T cells.  Our work highlights the importance of understanding the assembly of RNA binding protein complexes as regulators of T cell activation and function.

### Sample Protocol
Previously frozen CD4 T cells were thawed in deficient media (FBS/antibiotic supplemented RPMI 1640 lacking Lysine and Arginine amino acids). The remaining viable cell population was split in two, culturing each in media containing Lysine (0.274mM) and Arginine (1.15mM): 1) unlabeled (14N) Lysine and Arginine; 2) labeled (15N) Lysine and Arginine. Cells were expanded for an additional seven days when one of the randomly chosen groups was collected and frozen down as “resting” cells and the other group was stimulated with T-activator beads for 48h then frozen down as “activated”. Lysates were prepared from the frozen cell pellets and mixed based on initial cell number. These mixed lysates were used as input for U2AF2 RIP  and the eluate was used as input into a TRIZOL LS separation and the protein fraction isolated, washed and pelleted. Protein pellets (~15ug) were resuspended in 40ul of 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate + 5% Acetonitrile (ACN) and sequentially incubated with 4ul of 50mM DTT (10’ @ 65oC), 4ul of 100mM Iodoacetamide (30’ @ 30oC) and 4ul of 400ng of Trypsin (4hrs @ 37oC without light). The digested samples were run over C-18 spin columns (Thermo), vacuum dried, and resuspended in 10ul 5% ACN + 0.1% Formic Acid. Peptides were loaded onto cHiPLC Nanoflex system (Eksigent) with an analytical separation column packed with ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) and eluted off a linear gradient of 5-35% Solvent B at a flow rate of 0.4ul/min over 60’ (Solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water; Solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
An experimental peak list was compared to a theoretical digest of the human proteome. Additionally, 14N and 15N peaks corresponding to the same peptide were required to elute close to each other and exhibit the same charge state. Peaks with multiple identities were excluded. Isotope distributions were extracted for each of the identified 14N−15N peak pairs. Extracted mini-spectra were fit to theoretical isotope distributions using in-house software which implements a least squares Fourier transform convolution (LS-FTC) method. Resulting least-squares fits were visually inspected and filtered to eliminate data with low signal-to-noise ratio or spectral overlaps that are hard to resolve. The fit parameters for the 14N and 15N amplitudes were used for relative quantification of peptide levels and converted to ratios of resting/activated. Ratios for all peptides within a protein were log-transformed to meet to the requirements of the statistical test then used to calculate each mean and standard deviation. We used one-sample, two-tailed student’s t-test with multiple testing correction (Ho = 1, adjusted p-value < 0.05) to identify proteins with significant changes in U2AF2 association during activation.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of CD4 T cells is a reaction to challenges such as microbial pathogens, cancer and toxins that defines adaptive immune responses. The roles of T cell receptor crosslinking, intracellular signaling, and transcription factor activation are well described, but the importance of post-transcriptional regulation by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) has not been considered in depth. We describe a new model expanding and activating primary human CD4 T cells and applied this to characterizing activation-induced assembly of splicing factors centered on U2AF2. We immunoprecipitated U2AF2 to identify what mRNA transcripts were bound as a function of activation by TCR crosslinking and costimulation. In parallel, mass spectrometry revealed the proteins incorporated into the U2AF2-centered RNA/protein interactome. Molecules that retained interaction with the U2AF2 complex after RNAse treatment were designated as "central" interactome members (CIMs). Mass spectrometry also identified a second class of activation-induced proteins, "peripheral" interactome members (PIMs), that bound to the same transcripts but were not in physical association with U2AF2 or its partners. siRNA knockdown of two CIMs and two PIMs caused changes in activation marker expression, cytokine secretion, and gene expression that were unique to each protein and mapped to pathways associated with key aspects of T cell activation. While knocking down the PIM, SYNCRIP, impacts a limited but immunologically important set of U2AF2-bound transcripts, knockdown of U2AF1 significantly impairs assembly of the majority of protein and mRNA components in the activation-induced interactome. These results demonstrated that CIMs and PIMs, either directly or indirectly through RNA, assembled into activation-induced U2AF2 complexes and play roles in post-transcriptional regulation of genes related to cytokine secretion. These data suggest an additional layer of regulation mediated by the activation-induced assembly of RNA splicing interactomes that is important for understanding T cell activation.

### Keywords
Cd4 t cell activation/mrna splicing/rna-binding proteins/u2af

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Thomas Whisenant

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel R. Salomon, M.D.
Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA 92037


