### Accession
PXD001179

### Title
Spaceflight adaptation requires organ specific alterations in the proteomes of Arabidopsis

### Description
This experiment was launched on STS-129 in 2009 and was supported by NASA grant NNX07AH27G - Transgenic Plant Biomonitors of Space Flight Exposure to R.J. Ferl and A-L. Paul.<br><br>Life in spaceflight demonstrates remarkable adaptive processes within the specialized environments of space vehicles which are subject to the myriad of attending and unique environmental issues associated with orbital trajectories. To examine the adaptive processes that occur in plants in space, leaves and roots from Arabidopsis seedlings that were grown from seed for 12 days on the International Space Station and preserved on orbit in RNAlater were returned to earth and analyzed using iTRAQ broad scale proteomics procedures.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample (three replicate root samples and the single leaf sample for the flight and ground controls), 16 μg of the recovered proteins were reduced, alkylated, trypsin-digested, and labeled according to the manufacturer's instructions (AB Sciex Inc.). The three biological replicates of ground root samples were labeled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114, and 115, and those of flight root samples were labeled with 116, 117, and 118, respectively. The ground shoot sample was labeled with iTRAQ tag 119, while the flight shoot was labeled with 121. The combined labeled peptide mixtures were desalted with C18-solid phase extraction and dissolved in strong cation exchange solvent A [25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (pH 2.8)]. The peptides were fractionated by an Agilent HPLC system 1260 with a polysulfoethyl A column (2.1×100 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) with a flow rate of 200 μL/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0–20% solvent B [25% (v/v) acetonitrile and 500 mM ammonium formate (pH 6.8)] over 50 min followed by ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5 min. Fourteen fractions were collected by monitoring the absorbance at 280 nm and lyophilized (supplementary data are available online at www.liebertonline.com/ast).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed by a thorough search considering biological modification and amino acid substitution against the non-redundant uniprot Arabidopsis thaliana database (53,270 entries downloaded on June 14, 2014, at http://beta.uniprot.org) by using the Fraglet and Taglet searches under the Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) of ProteinPilot v.4.5 software (AB Sciex, Inc.) and Sequest search (Eng et al., 1994) under Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 software (Thermo Scientific, Inc.). Mascot searches (Perkins et al., 1999) under Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) were conducted with the following parameters: trypsin digestion allowing for up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and iTRAQ on N-termini and lysines, iTRAQ 8-plex quantification, 10 ppm tolerance for MS and MS/MS, peptide charges of +1, +2, and +3, and monoisotopic masses. Plant protein, cysteine modification with methyl methanethiosulfate, fixed iTRAQ modification of free amine in the N-terminus and lysine, and variable iTRAQ modifications of tyrosine were considered. ProteoIQ2.7 (PREMIER Biosoft, Palo Alto, CA, USA) was used to cluster peptides to proteins (protein groups) and output lists of proteins having a minimum peptide probability of >0.95 and a minimum protein probability of <0.95 from all search results for final identification at a 5% false discovery rate (FDR; for comparison of FDRs, see Supplementary Fig. S2) (Tang et al., 2008). Systematic bias was corrected from non-redundant spectrum per peptide from all three search algorithms by using intensity normalization of protein quantification across samples by ProteoIQ2.7 (PREMIER Biosoft). Protein relative quantification was performed by using the ratios from tandem mass spectra when the peptides were uniquely assigned to detected protein. To be identified as being significantly differentially expressed, a protein had to be quantified with at least three peptides in experimental replicates, a p value <0.05, and a fold change >1.2 or <0.8 as determined with a Fisher's combined probability of <0.05 (Fisher, 1948). For identified proteins, the functional annotation was assigned to identified protein sequences by Blast2GO suite (Conesa et al., 2005) (http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome) and confirmed with the Arabidopsis functional catalog (Bevan et al., 1998). In addition, we used parametric analysis of gene set enrichment (PAGE) of the agriGO tool (http://bioinfo.cau.edu.cn/agriGO) to determine specifically enriched biological processes.

### Publication Abstract
Life in spaceflight demonstrates remarkable acclimation processes within the specialized habitats of vehicles subjected to the myriad of unique environmental issues associated with orbital trajectories. To examine the response processes that occur in plants in space, leaves and roots from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings from three GFP reporter lines that were grown from seed for 12 days on the International Space Station and preserved on orbit in RNAlater were returned to Earth and analyzed by using iTRAQ broad-scale proteomics procedures. Using stringent criteria, we identified over 1500 proteins, which included 1167 leaf proteins and 1150 root proteins we were able to accurately quantify. Quantification revealed 256 leaf proteins and 358 root proteins that showed statistically significant differential abundance in the spaceflight samples compared to ground controls, with few proteins differentially regulated in common between leaves and roots. This indicates that there are measurable proteomics responses to spaceflight and that the responses are organ-specific. These proteomics data were compared with transcriptome data from similar spaceflight samples, showing that there is a positive but limited relationship between transcriptome and proteome regulation of the overall spaceflight responses of plants. These results are discussed in terms of emergence understanding of plant responses to spaceflight particularly with regard to cell wall remodeling, as well as in the context of deriving multiple omics data sets from a single on-orbit preservation and operations approach.

### Keywords
Space biology, Proteomics, Iss, Gene expression

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Jin Koh

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Koh
University of Florida


