### Accession
PXD035565

### Title
Comparison of saliva from healthy and patients with dental erosion

### Description
To compare the salivary proteins from healthy and dental erosion patients to determine if there is an absence of proteins forming the enamel pellicle that may reduce their protection from acid erosion

### Sample Protocol
Resting whole mouth saliva samples collected over 5 mins were centrifuged (13,000g x 5 mins) to remove cellular debris and then stored frozen (-80C) until analysis

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.06). Mascot was set up to search null (selected for Homo sapiens, unknown version, 20243 entries) (only samples "File Name: pr303_1.raw (F032848)", "File Name: pr303_2.raw (F032855)", "File Name: pr303_3.raw (F032856)", "File Name: pr303_4.raw (F032850)", "File Name: pr303_5.raw (F032854)", "File Name: pr303_6.raw (F032851)" and "File Name: pr303_7.raw (F032852)") assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and uniprot_sprot_120221.fasta (selected for Homo sapiens, unknown version, 20243 entries) (only "File Name: pr303_8.raw (F032853)") also assuming trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and TMT-6plex of lysine were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the n-terminus and TMT-6plex of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.1.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Acquired enamel pellicle, Zinc alpha-2 glycoprotein, Calcium, Statherin, Saliva, Prolactin-induced protein

### Affiliations
Professor of Oral Biology Centre for Host-Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of Dental, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences,   King’s College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Guy Carpenter
Professor of Oral Biology Centre for Host-Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of Dental, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences,   King’s College London


