### Accession
PXD027467

### Title
ComBat HarmonizR enables the integrated analysis of independently generated proteomic datasets through data harmonization with appropriate handling of missing values

### Description
The integration of proteomic datasets, generated by non-cooperating laboratories using different LC-MS/MS setups can overcome limitations in statistically underpowered sample cohorts but has not been demonstrated to this day.  In proteomics, differences in sample preservation and preparation strategies, chromatography and mass spectrometry approaches and the used quantification strategy distort protein abundance distributions in integrated datasets. The Removal of these technical batch effects requires setup-specific normalization and strategies that can deal with missing at random (MAR) and missing not at random (MNAR) type values at a time. Algorithms for batch effect removal, such as the ComBat-algorithm, commonly used for other omics types, disregard proteins with MNAR missing values and reduce the informational yield and the effect size for combined datasets significantly. Here, we present a strategy for data harmonization across different tissue preservation techniques, LC-MS/MS instrumentation setups and quantification approaches. To enable batch effect removal without the need for data reduction or error-prone imputation we developed an extension to the ComBat algorithm, ´ComBat HarmonizR, that performs data harmonization with appropriate handling of MAR and MNAR missing values by matrix dissection The ComBat HarmonizR based strategy enables the combined analysis of  independently generated proteomic datasets for the first time. Furthermore, we found ComBat HarmonizR to be superior for removing batch effects between different Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-plexes, compared to commonly used internal reference scaling (iRS).  Due to the matrix dissection approach without the need of data imputation, the HarmonizR algorithm can be applied to any type of -omics data while assuring minimal data loss

### Sample Protocol
Mixed Organism Proteome:A mixed organism proteome with defined protein abundance fold changes was generated by mixing human K562 Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia cell digests (Promega), Escherichia Coli (donated by Prof Holger Rohde, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Microbiology) and Saccharomyces Cerevisiae (Promega) digests.  Three technical replicates of 80% human cell digests, 10% E. Coli and 10% yeast and three technical replicates with 80% human, 15% E. Coli and 5% yeast were generated with expected mean fold changes for human cell digests of 1 (no abundance change), 1.5-fold for E. Coli digests and 2-fold for yeast digests.  Transgenic mice and mouse sample preparation:  hGFAP-cre mice25 and SmoM2Fl/Fl mice26 were purchased from The Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). All experiments using transgenic animals were approved by the district government of Hamburg, and all animal handling was done in accordance with local governmental and institutional animal care regulations. Both male and female mice were examined. Cerebellar tumors of hGFAP-cre::SmoM2Fl/+ and cerebella of SmoM2Fll+  littermate controls were bisected. One half was snap frozen and stored at -80°C  degrees until further processing (fresh frozen (FF) condition). The other half was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS overnight at room temperature. Tissue for paraffin-embedded sections was dehydrated, embedded, and sectioned at 4 μm according to standard protocols (Formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) condition). Histomorphology of tumor or cerebellar tissue was verified by H&E-staining.  Protein extraction and tryptic digestion:  FFPE mouse tissue sections were deparaffinized with 300 μl N-heptane over a period of 10 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 g. The supernatant was removed, and samples were reconditioned in 300μl ethanol and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 g. The supernatant was removed, and samples resuspended and lysed in 200 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate. (SDC). Heat induced reverse formalin fixation and protein denaturation were performed at 99°C over a period of 1 hour at a rotation speed of 400 rpm using a ThermoMix®C. Sonification was performed for 10 pulses at 30% power. Corresponding FF samples were resuspended and lysed in 200 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate. (SDC). Protein extraction was performed for 10 Minutes at 99°C at a rotation speed of 400 rpm using a ThermoMix®C. Sonification was performed for 5 pulses at 30% power. The protein concentration of denatured proteins in deparaffinized, reversed formalin fixed samples was determined by the Pierce TM BCA Protein assay kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. 20 μg of protein for each tissue lysate were used for tryptic digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10mM DTT at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed for 16 hours at 37°C, using a trypsin / protein ratio of 1:100. After tryptic digestion the inhibition of trypsin activity as well as the precipitation of SDC was achieved by the addition of 1% formic acid (FA). Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 g.The supernatant was dried in a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until further use  Liquid chromatograph:  Liquid-chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) measurements of 1µg peptides in 0.1% FA were performed on various (nano-)UPLCs and mass spectrometers Tryptic peptides (1 µg per sample in nano-UPLC mode and 5 µg in UPLC cap-flow mode) were injected to the LC system via an autosampler, purified and desalted using a reversed phase trapping column. Trapping was done for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with solvent A (0.1 % FA). Separation and elution of peptides were achieved by a linear gradient from 2 to 30 % solvent B in 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min on a nano-UPLC or 5 µL/min on a UPLC in cap-flow and were analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA), data independent acquisition (DIA) or sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) mode.   Instrumentational setup:  Quadrupole ion trap orbitrap MS (Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with nano-UPLC (Dionex UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific; Quadrupole orbitrap MS (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with nano-UPLC (nano-Acquity, Waters);Quadrupole time of flight MS (TripleTOF 6600, SCIEX) in SWATH-MS mode with UPLC (Dionex UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
DDA Data:  The DDA data acquired were processed with the Andromeda Algorithm included in the MaxQuant Software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.6.2.10). All batches were searched separately. For the mixed organism proteome spectra were searched against the reviewed human, yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain ATCC 204508) and Escherichia Coli strain K12 protein database downloaded from Uniprot (release December 2017, 31400 entries). Mouse tissue samples were searched against a reviewed murine data database (release Februrary 2020, 17015 entries).   All samples were handled as individual experiments. The label-free quantification option with match between runs was used Trypsin was selected as enzyme used to generate peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages). A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid was set as variable modification. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification. For mixed proteome samples the error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm. 10ppm was applied for mouse samples. For the following main search 4.5 ppm was applied in all experiments. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. A false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold <0.01, using a reverted decoy peptide database approach was set for peptide identification. Label free quantification was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1.  DIA Data:  Processing results were imported into Skyline software version 4.2 allowing only high confidence peptides with more than 4 fragment ions. A maximum of 5 fragment ions per peptide were used for information extraction from DIA files for peptides with a dot product of > 0.85. Peptide peak areas were summed to generate protein areas which were then used for relative abundance comparison. Protein areas were imported into Perseus software version 1.5.8 for statistical analysis.   Normalization of individual Data subsets prior to data harmonization   Obtained relative intensities for protein groups were loaded into the Perseus software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.5.8.5) for statistical data analysis. Spike in Experiments: Prior to inter-study data harmonization data SWATH-TOF, DIA-Orbitrap and DDA-Orbitrap Data was handled separately. Relative protein abundance values were log2 transformed. Due to the Trimodal probability distribution of E-Coli and Yeast spiked HeLa cell lines no normalization was performed.  Mouse tissue samples: Prior to ComBat HarmonizR usage, all observed timepoints and tissue types were handled separately. Relative protein abundances were log2 transformed and median normalized across columns.  Cetuximab treated DiFi cells: For TMT data, batch effects between different TMTeight Plex Batches were removed using ComBat HarmonizR. For performance comparison to internal reference scaling (iRs), the adjustment of TMT batches was additionally performed by dividing reporter ion intensities by the arithmetic means of the two channels representing the reference mix, as described by Stepath & Zülich et al. 5 ComBat HarmonizR adjusted TMT data was used for all further data processing steps. Prior to data harmonization across different quantification techniques TMT, SILAC and DDA data was handled separately. Relative protein abundance values, TMT reporter intensities and SILAC ratios were log2 transformed and normalized across columns by subtraction of the median. Relative protein intensities were adjusted to SILAC ratios by mean subtraction across rows, individually for TMT and DDA data.  For each dataset relative protein abundances from different MS types, tissue types or quantification approaches were combined based on the Uniprot identifier. Batch Effect Removal was perfromed by ComBat HarmonizR in the R software environment

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Fresh-frozen, Tissue, Metastudy, Ffpe, Missing values, Data integration, Combat, Swath, Tmt, Silac, Dia, Harmonisazion

### Affiliations
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg eppendorf
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hartmut Schlüter
Section of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg eppendorf


