### Accession
PXD024583

### Title
Proteomic response of Gammarus fossarum subjected to dietary methyl-mercury

### Description
Proteogenomics analysis from Gammarus fossarum exposed to dietary methyl-mercury informed by RNA-seq derived database.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from individual animals.  Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
The transfer of methyl-Hg (MeHg) from food is central for its effects in aquatic animals, but we still lack knowledge concerning its impact on invertebrate primary consumers. In aquatic environments, cell walls of plants are particularly recalcitrant to degradation and as such remain available as a food source for long periods. Here, the impact at the proteomic level of dietary MeHg in <i>Gammarus fossarum</i> was established and linked to subcellular distribution of Hg. Individuals of <i>G. fossarum</i> were fed with MeHg in cell wall or intracellular compartments of <i>Elodea nuttallii</i>. Hg concentrations in subcellular fractions were 2 to 6 times higher in animals fed with cell wall than intracellular compartments. At the higher concentrations tested, the proportion of Hg in metal-sensitive fraction increased from 30.0 &#xb1; 6.1 to 41.0 &#xb1; 5.7% for individuals fed with intracellular compartment, while biologically detoxified metal fraction increased from 30.0 &#xb1; 6.1 to 50.0 &#xb1; 2.8% when fed with cell wall compartment. Data suggested that several thresholds of proteomic response are triggered by increased bioaccumulation in each subcellular fraction in correlation with Hg exclusively bound to the metal-sensitive fraction, while the increase of biologically detoxified metal likely had a cost for fitness. Proteomics analysis supported that the different binding sites and speciation in shoots subsequently resulted in different fate and cellular toxicity pathways to consumers. Our data confirmed that Hg bound in cell walls of plants can be assimilated by <i>G. fossarum</i>, which is consistent with its feeding strategy, hence pointing cell walls as a significant source for Hg transfers and toxicity in primary consumers. The high accumulation of Hg in macrophytes makes them a risk for food web transfer in shallow ecosystems. The present results allowed gaining new insights into the effects and uptake mechanisms of MeHg in aquatic primary consumers.

### Keywords
Invertebrate, Toxicant, Proteogenomics, Bioaccumulation, Amphipod, Aquatic organism, Mercury

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


