### Accession
PXD034071

### Title
Proteomic profiling of RNA binding proteins in mouse oocyte

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control the fate of RNAs. Tissue regeneration and homeostasis depend on tissue-specific stem cells, but the scope of RBP involvementin these processes remains largely unknown. Here, we identified the RBP repertoire of the mouse oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
In order to systematically identify RBPs in mouse oocytes, we performed mRNA interactome capture combined LC-MS/MS analyses

### Data Protocol
The raw data generated by the LC-MS/MS analyses were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8), and searched against the reference mouse proteome form the UniProt database. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleaved by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum peptide length required was six. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included Acetylation (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 0.1 Da, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 40 ppm. At least one unique peptide was required for protein report. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification was estimated by searching against the databases with the reversed protein sequences. The FDR cut-offs for site, peptide and protein were set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian oogenesis features reliance on the mRNAs produced and stored during early growth phase. These are essential for producing an oocyte competent to undergo meiotic maturation and embryogenesis later when oocytes are transcriptionally silent. The fate of maternal mRNAs hence ensures the success of oogenesis and the quality of the resulting eggs. Nevertheless, how the fate of maternal mRNAs is determined remains largely elusive. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are crucial regulators of oogenesis, yet the identity of the full complement of RBPs expressed in oocytes is unknown. Here, a global view of oocyte-expressed RBPs is presented: mRNA-interactome capture identifies 1396 RBPs in mouse oocytes. An analysis of one of these RBPs, LSM family member 14 (LSM14B), demonstrates that this RBP is specific to oocytes and associated with many networks essential for oogenesis. Deletion of Lsm14b results in female-specific infertility and a phenotype characterized by oocytes incompetent to complete meiosis and early embryogenesis. LSM14B serves as an interaction hub for proteins and mRNAs throughout oocyte development and regulates translation of a subset of its bound mRNAs. Therefore, RNP complexes tethered by LSM14B are found exclusively in oocytes and are essential for the control of maternal mRNA fate and oocyte development.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Mouse，oocyte，rbps

### Affiliations
shang dong university
shang dong unversity

### Submitter
Li Hui

### Lab Head
Dr SU You-qiang
shang dong unversity


