### Accession
PXD004200

### Title
Proteomic changes occurring along gonad maturation in the edible sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus

### Description
We report the proteomic characterization of gonads from wild P. lividus collected along coastal Sardinia, and describe the changes occurring in gonads according to sex and developmental stage. Gonads in the recovery, pre-mature, mature, and spent stages were analyzed using a shotgun proteomics approach based on filter-aided sample preparation followed by tandem mass spectrometry and label-free differential analysis. A detailed characterization of the proteome changes occurring in gonads of both sexes along maturation was achieved. Significant changes were seen in numerous proteins involved in nutrient accumulation and in gamete biology and maturation. Adding to an improved understanding of the P. lividus reproductive cycle in its natural environment, the results described in this work form the basis for defining novel protein markers and procedures for an easier sexing and staging, and for monitoring sea urchin gonad maturation in aquaculture plants.

### Sample Protocol
This study was carried out on specimens of P. lividus of commercial size (test diameter ≥ 50 mm without spines). Sex and stage characterization were carried out by histology and one of the five gonads extracted from each sea urchin was stored in -80°C before protein extraction. Protein extraction was performed using a small portion of tissue (100 mg) placed in 2 ml Eppendorf safe-lock tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), immersed at 2% w/v in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 2% CHAPS) plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). Each sample was then processed and subjected to three cycles of 5 min at 30 oscillations/s in a TissueLyser mechanical homogenizer (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) followed by freezing/thawing. All extracts were then subjected to sonication on ice using an ultrasonic homogenizer (three 30 seconds bursts with a titanium microtip ) (BioLogics, Inc. Manassas, Virginia) and then clarified for 15 min at 14,000×rpm at 4 °C, quantified with the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific -Rockford, IL), tested for quality and quantity by SDS-PAGE, and stored at −80 °C until analysis. Each protein extract of three individuals per stage and sex were investigated by shotgun proteomics. Protein extracts were diluted to 200 uL with UA solution (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8), loaded into the Microcon Ultracel YM-10 filtration devices (Millipore, now Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and then processed according to Protein extracts were subjected to on-filter reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units with Ultracel-10 membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Peptide mixture concentration was estimated by using PierceTM 158 BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific - Rockford, IL). LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q-TOF hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nano lock Z161 spray source and coupled on-line with a NanoAcquity chromatography system (Waters) as described in Pagnozzi et al., 2014. The peptide mixture was concentrated and washed on an enrichment column, and fractionated on a C18 reverse phase column directly coupled to a nanospray source, using a 250 min gradient. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode where a full-scan spectrum was followed by tandem mass spectra, selecting peptide ions as the three most intense peaks of the previous scan. ProteinLynx software (Version 2.2.5), was used for analysis of raw MS and MS/MS spectra and the production of the peak lists, as pkl files.

### Data Protocol
Both the peak lists from Q-TOF analysis, converted into a MGF file, and the MGF files from Ion Trap mass spectrometer were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Scientific), with a workflow consisting of the following nodes (and respective parameters): Spectrum Selector for spectra pre-processing (precursor mass range: 350–5000 Da; S/N Threshold: 1.5), Sequest-HT as search engine (Protein Database: Echinoidea sequences from UniProtKB/SwissProt (15530586 residues, 32894 sequences), release 2014_4; Enzyme: Trypsin; Max. missed cleavage sites: 2; Peptide length range 5–50 amino acids; Max. Delta Cn: 0.05; Precursor mass tolerance: 50 ppm for Q-TOF analysis, and 300 ppm for Ion Trap analysis; Fragment mass tolerance 0.4 Da for Q-TOF analysis, and 0.6 Da for Ion Trap; Static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Dynamic modification: methionine oxidation), and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1% based on peptide q-value). Protein annotations concerning protein families and gene ontology were retrieved from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org). The uncharacterized sequences obtained from Uniprot database were blasted on another non-redundant database: NCBI (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to find the homologous proteins. For shotgun results, the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) was used in order to estimate the extent of differential protein abundance of functional categories among sample groups; it was calculated according to Zybailov et al., 2006. Functional categories showing RNSAF>0.5 or <−0.5 were considered as differentially abundant between groups. Statistical significance of differential protein abundance was determined by applying Student’s t test (two-sample comparison, p < 0.05) to logarithmized (normally distributed) NSAF values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paracentrotus lividus gonads, Proteomics, Gonads maturation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche S.r.l.

### Submitter
Stefania Ghisaura

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Filippa Addis
Porto Conte Ricerche S.r.l.


