### Accession
PXD020202

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis identifies novel liver-related signaling in retinal pigment epithelial cells during epithelial-mesenchymal transition

### Description
Epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is associated with several potentially blinding retinal diseases. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic studies were performed on human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived RPE (hiPSC-RPE) monolayers to better understand the pathways mediating RPE EMT. EMT was induced by enzymatic dissociation of RPE monolayers from their culture substrate or by co-treatment with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) (TGNF). The proteome and phosphoproteome were analyzed at 1 hr post EMT induction to capture early events in kinase/phosphatase signaling cascades and at 12 hrs to define early changes in protein abundance. Pathway enrichment analysis revealed that TGNF and dissociation rapidly perturbed signaling in many of the same pathways, with striking similarity in the phosphoproteome at 1 hr. Surprisingly, functions related to liver cell proliferation and hyperplasia were strongly enriched in the phosphosites altered by both treatments at 1 hr and in protein abundance changes at 12 hrs. Hepatocyte Growth Factor-cMET signaling exhibited the strongest overall enrichment in both treatments. These signaling pathways may serve as suitable targets for the development of therapeutic strategies for the inhibition of RPE EMT, and thus may be targets for inhibiting progression of several debilitating visual diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Human iPSCs reprogrammed from IMR-90 fibroblasts (Bhise et al., 2013) were cultured and differentiated into RPE as previously described (Maruotti et al., 2015; Maruotti et al., 2013).Protein extraction from cells, protease digestion, and labeling were performed following the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) protocol described previously (Clark et al., 2019; Mertins et al., 2018). Briefly, cells were harvested in 8M urea, 1M ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer with complete EDTA free protease inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) and 1X phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins from cell lysates were reduced under 5 mM DTT for 1 hr at 37°C, alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark, diluted 1:8 with HPLC H2O and proteolytically cleaved by sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison,WI) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio overnight at 37°C. After desalting using SepPak C18 columns (Waters, Milford, MA), the ten samples were labeled by TMT 10-plex isobaric tags (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Samples were pooled in a 1:1 ratio and then separated into 96 fractions on a 250 mm C18 column via high-pH reverse-phase LC (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) with a gradient shifting over the course of 120 minutes from ammonium formate and 2% Acetonitrile (ACN) Buffer A to ammonium formate and 90% ACN buffer B. These 96 fractions were concatenated down to 24 in a pattern that maximized fraction complexity. Ten percent of each fraction was saved for proteomic analysis, while the remaining 90% was concatenated down further to 12 fractions, then subjected to Fe3+ immobilized metal affinity chromatography for phosphopeptide extraction. Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) were bound to Fe3+ after stripping them of previously bound metal ions using 100 mM EDTA and extensive rinsing with HPLC H2O. Peptide fractions were incubated with Fe3+ beads, unbound peptides removed by removing supernatant and rinsing, then the bead suspension was transferred to C18 stage tips. Within the C18 tips, phosphopeptides were eluted from the immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) beads and then the C18 resin, resulting in a final elution of desalted phosphopeptides. Global proteome and phosphoproteome samples were separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) protected by an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm; Thermo Scientific) before injection into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of Buffer A (0.1% FA, 3% ACN) and Buffer B (0.1% FA, 90% ACN) and flow rate was 0.300 μL/min. Global samples were eluted from the column using a gradient of 10 min 2 to 5% Buffer B, 80 min 5 to 30% B, 22 min 30 to 38% B, 3 min 38 to 95% B, 10 min 95% B, 4 min 95 to 2% B, and 1 min 2% B. Phospho samples were eluted by a gradient of 10 min 2 to 7% B, 80 min 7 to 26% B, 22 min 26 to 34% B, 3 min 34 to 95% B, 10 min 95% B, 4 min 95 to 4% B, and 1 min 4% B. Spray voltage was set to 1.5 kV for both sample sets. Full MS spectra were collected from 400–2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target of 3×106 and maximum injection time 60 ms. Data-dependent HCD MS2 spectra were collected from the top 12 most abundant ions with a 1.4 m/z isolation window and dynamic exclusion of 30s. MS2 spectra were collected at 35,000 resolution from 200 to 2000 m/z and 110 m/z fixed first mass, with a 2×105 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time, 32% NCE, 3.3 × 104 intensity threshold, peptide match set to ‘preferred’, and rejection of 1 and >8 charge states.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were matched against the Uniprot human proteome database (released 7/17/18, using MaxQuant Version 1.6.2, and mainly default settings. FDR was assessed by a reverse decoy database with 0.01 peptide and protein FDR cutoff. 7 aa minimum peptide size, 20 ppm MS/MS tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT reagent modification of N-termini and lysines set to static modifications with oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as dynamic modifications. Max 3 modifications per peptide. Matching between runs used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epithelial-mesenchymal translation (emt), Tnfα, Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hipsc), Phosphoproteomics, Retinal pigment epithelium (rpe), Hgf, Proteomics, Tgfβ

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins Medical School
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joseph Mertz

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical School, USA


