### Accession
PXD022128

### Title
A genome-wide screen for essentiality upon telomerase inhibition identifies a novel p53 regulator, C16ORF72/TAPR1

### Description
Telomere erosion contributes to age-associated tissue dysfunction and senescence, and p53 plays a crucial role in this response. We undertook a genome-wide screen to identify gene deletions that sensitized p53-positive human cells to loss of telomere integrity, and uncovered a previously unannotated gene, C16ORF72, which we term Telomere Attrition and p53 Response 1: TAPR1. CRISPR-Cas9 mediated deletion of TAPR1 led to elevated p53 and induction of p53 transcriptional targets. TAPR1-disrupted cells exhibited a synthetic-sick relationship with the loss of telomerase, or treatment with the topoisomerase II inhibitor doxorubicin. Stabilization of p53 with nutlin-3a further decreased cell fitness in cells lacking TAPR1 or telomerase, whereas deletion of TP53 rescued the decreased fitness of TAPR1-deleted cells. We propose that TAPR1 regulates p53 turnover, thereby tapering the p53-dependent response to telomere erosion. We discuss the possible implications of such a mechanism in the preservation of genome integrity during senescence or aging.

### Sample Protocol
The cDNA sequence of C16ORF72 (TAPR1) was retrieved from the CCDS database (#10538.1), ordered as a gBlock dsDNA fragment from IDT and cloned into a 3XFLAG-miniTurbo plasmid (provided by Brian Raught and Anne-Claude Gingras; a gift from Feng-Qian Li and Ken-Ichi Takemaru; Addgene #124647) under the control of a MNDU3 promoter (obtained from a modified version of pCCL-c-MNDU3-X, a gift from Donald Kohn; Addgene #81071) (Logan et al., 2004) using Gibson assembly (Branon et al., 2018, Gibson et al., 2009). Proximity labeling of TAPR1 interactors was carried out as described previously, with the following modifications (Meant et al., 2020). Briefly, NALM-6 expressing miniTurbo-TAPR1, miniTurbo-EGFP or miniTurbo-NLS-EGFP (3 replicates, 30 million cells per replicate) were grown in the presence of 50 µM biotin for 1h. Cells were washed to remove excess biotin and cells are lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with Benzonase (250U), sonicated on ice and cleared by centrifugation before protein quantification using the Lowry method. 50 µL of pre-equilibrated Streptavidin-sepharose beads with RIPA buffer were incubated with 2 mg of protein lysate overnight at 4 °C with agitation followed with 3 washes with RIPA buffer to remove non-specific binding and 10 washes in PBS to remove any traces of detergent.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and searched against a concatenated forward and reverse a Uniprot human database (20349 entries). Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C). Variable selected posttranslational modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY). The data were visualized with Scaffold 4.3.0 (protein threshold, 99%, with at least 2 peptides identified and a false-discovery rate [FDR] of 1% for peptides). Tabulated total peptide count for proteins identified in each sample were used for subsequent analysis after filtering to remove low-count proteins and only keep proteins that are detected in 2 out of 3 replicates of a given bait and that have a minimum of 5 peptides for a given bait. Median-ratio normalization is used to account for inter-sample total peptide count variability followed by log-transformation of the peptide counts (base 2, pseudo-count of 1 added to remove zeros) (Valikangas et al., 2018). Potential contaminants were filtered by removing proteins that are present in at least 20% of experiments reported in the CRAPome database V1.1 (as at May 30th 2020) (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013). The average log2-transformed peptide counts for control baits (n=6) were subtracted from that of TAPR1 bait (n=3) to calculate the fold-change and the Welch t-test was used to calculate a p-value for each fold-change followed by p-value adjustment for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to obtain an FDR. Proteins with an FDR below 0.1 and a fold-change higher than 2 were considered as potential TAPR1 interactors.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomere erosion, C16orf72, Genome-wide screen, Crispr-cas9, Telomerase inhibitor, P53

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Lea Harrington
IRIC-Université de Montréal


