### Accession
PXD039663

### Title
Phosphosite mapping on PI3Kc1 by ULK1 and TBK1 kinases.

### Description
Autophagy is a highly conserved catabolic process which degrades and recycles intracellular components. To accomplish this task the surplus material (cargo) is sequestered in a double membranous vesicle termed autophagosome. To initiate the formation of autophagosome autophagy machinery is recruited to cargo in a controlled manner. One of the first factors recruited to damaged mitochondria during mitophagy (selective removal of damaged mitochondria by autophagy) are two protein kinases, ULK1/2 complex and TBK1. They both promote a subsequent recruitment of the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PI3Kc1 complex) which function is to generate the lipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI(3)P) on phagophore membranes. Both ULK1 and TBK1 were reported to phosphorylate several autophagy factors. Here, we probed phosphorylation of PI3Kc1 by ULK1 and TBK1 to gain a full picture of the phosphosites map of PI3Kc phosphorylated by both protein kinases. Recombinant PI3Kc1 was incubated with recombinant ULK1 complex or TBK1 in the presence of ATP and MgCl2. As a negative control, the same protein mixtures were incubated in a kinase buffer lacking MgCl2 and ATP. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie. The bands for each subunit of the PI3KC3-C1 complex (VPS15, VPS34, ATG14, and Beclin1) were extracted from the gel and submitted for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The Coomassie-stained gel band was destained with a mixture of acetonitrile (Chromasolv®, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (Roche) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Digestion was carried out with trypsin (Promega; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) at 37°C overnight. Formic acid was used to stop the digestion and extract peptides.

Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% and finally 80% solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid; solvent A 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 60 min. 

Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a customized nano-spray EASY-Spray ion-source (Thermo-Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA), and survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 375-1500 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 60k at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 15 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy, and the spectra recorded for max. 100 ms at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30k. Peptides with a charge of +1 or >+6 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to preferred, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 20 seconds.


### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 2.0.3.0), and target proteins sequences, the Uniprot Spodoptera frugiperda reference proteome (version 2021.04, www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of three missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tbk1, Ulk1, Pi3kc3-c1

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Martens
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, Vienna, Austria


