### Accession
PXD021400

### Title
Xanthocillin X Effectively Kills A.Baumannii via Dysregulation of Heme Biosynthesis

### Description
Isonitrile natural products exhibit promising antibacterial activities, however, their mode of action (MoA) remains largely unknown. Based on the nanomolar potency of xanthocillin X (Xan) against diverse difficult-to-treat Gram-negative bacteria, including the critical priority pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii, we performed in-depth studies to decipher its MoA. While neither metal binding nor cellular protein targets were relevant for Xan´s antibiotic effects, sequencing of resistant strains revealed a conserved mutation in the heme biosynthesis enzyme porphobilinogen synthase (PbgS). This mutation caused impaired enzymatic efficiency indicative of reduced heme production. This discovery led to the validation of an untapped mechanism by which direct heme sequestration of Xan prevents its binding into cognate enzyme pockets resulting in uncontrolled cofactor biosynthesis, accumulation of porphyrins and corresponding stress with deleterious effects for bacterial viability. Thus, Xan represents a promising antibiotic displaying activity even against multidrug resistant strains while exhibiting low toxicity to human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Overnight cultures (37 °C, 200 rpm) were diluted 1:100 in LB medium and incubated at 37 °C, 200 rpm until OD600 of 2.0. Bacterial cells were harvested (6,000 × g, 4 °C, 15 min), washed with PBS and resuspended in PBS to give a final theoretical OD600 of 40. 1 mL portions were aliquoted and XP (3 µM, final concentration of DMSO 1%) or DMSO (1%) were added, followed by incubation at 37 °C, 200 rpm for 2 h. For competition labelling, cells were pre-treated with Xan (30 µM, final concentration of DMSO 1%) for 2 h at 37 °C, 200 rpm. After compound treatment, bacteria were harvested (6,000 × g, 4 °C, 15 min) and washed with PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS + 0.4% (w/v) SDS and lysed by sonication (4 x 30 sec, 75% intensity; Sonopuls HD 2070 ultrasonic rod, Bandelin electronic GmbH) with cooling breaks on ice. Cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation (max. speed, 30 min, 4 °C). Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology) and sample concentrations adjusted to equal protein amount. Next, 500 µL clear cell lysate (2 mg/mL protein concentration) were subjected to click-reaction (CuACC) by adding biotin azide (60 µM), TCEP (1 mM), TBTA ligand (0.1 mM) and CuSO4 (1 mM) and incubated for 1 h at RT. Following CuACC, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (4 volumes) at -20 °C overnight, centrifuged (16,900 x g, 4 °C, 15 min) and washed twice with ice-cold methanol (1 mL). Pellets were resuspended in 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS (0.5 mL) at RT by sonication (10% intensity, 10 s; Sonopuls HD 2070 ultrasonic rod, Bandelin electronic GmbH). Affinity enrichment was performed with Avidin agarose resin (A9207 Sigma-Aldrich, pre-washed three times with 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS (1 mL); 400 x g for 2 min was used to pellet beads; typically, 50 µL of bead slurry was used for enrichment). Samples were added to the resin in LoBind Eppendorf tubes and incubated with agitation for 1 h at RT. To remove unbound proteins, the beads were washed three times with 1 mL PBS + 0.4% (w/v) SDS, two times with urea (6 M in ddH2O) and three times with 1 mL PBS. For quantitative mass spectrometric analyses, avidin agarose beads with bound proteins were resuspended in 200 µL denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM pH 7.5 HEPES buffer). Upon on-bead reduction with TCEP (5 mM) at 37 °C for 1 h, proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA, 10 mM) at 25 °C for 30 min and samples were quenched with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM) at RT for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 600 µL triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (50 mM in ddH2O) and digested with 1.5 µL trypsin (0.5 µg/µL; sequencing grade, modified, Promega) at 37 °C overnight under continuous shaking (450 rpm). On the next day, the digestion was stopped by adding 10 µL formic acid (FA) and the suspension was then centrifuged (13000 rpm, 3 min, RT) to pelletize the beads. The supernatant was loaded on 50 mg SepPak C 18 columns (Waters) equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were washed three times with 1 mL 0.1% TFA and 500 µL 0.5% FA. Afterwards, the peptides were eluted three times with 250 µL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% FA), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until further usage. The experiment was performed in n = 4 (E. coli K12) and in n = 3 (A. baumannii ATCC19606) independent experiments.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Before MS measurements the lyophilized peptides were resolved in 25 µL 1% FA and filtered through 0.22 µm PVDF filters (Millipore), which were equilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA. The filtrate was transferred into MS-vials and stored at -20 °C until the measurements were performed.  Samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 (75 µm ID × 2 cm) trap column and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 μm ID × 50 cm) separation column coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher) in EASY-spray setting. Samples were loaded on the trap column and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: ACN with 0.1% FA, flow 300 nL/min, gradient 5 to 22% buffer B in 115 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, then to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min). Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP10 data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 140000 and an AGC target of 3e6 (maximum injection time of 80 ms) in a scan range of 300−1500 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states of >1 and intensities greater than 1e5 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were collected to an AGC target of 1e5 (maximum injection time of 100 ms) and acquisition was performed at a resolution of 17500 in a scan range of 200−2000 m/z. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) and detected in the orbitrap. MS data analysis Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) with the Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine); variable modification: oxidation (methionine), acetylation (N-terminus); proteolytic enzyme: trypsin/P; missed cleavages: 2; main search tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; false discovery rates: 0.01. The options “LFQ” and “match between runs” (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time windows) were enabled; “second peptides” was disabled.10 Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for A. baumannii ATCC19606 (taxid: 575584, 29.06.2020) or E. coli K12 (taxid: 83333, 01.07.2020). Statistical analysis of the data was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.5.0.).11 Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site were deleted. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and data was filtered for either three valid values in at least one group (ABPP with XP in E. coli, AfBPP with XPP in A. baumannii) or two values in at least one group (ABPP with XP in A. baumannii) and a missing value imputation was performed over the total matrix. For statistical evaluation, -log10 (p-values) were obtained by a two-sided two sample Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Isonitrile natural products exhibit promising antibacterial activities. However, their mechanism of action (MoA) remains largely unknown. Based on the nanomolar potency of xanthocillin X (<b>Xan</b>) against diverse difficult-to-treat Gram-negative bacteria, including the critical priority pathogen <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i>, we performed in-depth studies to decipher its MoA. While neither metal binding nor cellular protein targets were detected as relevant for <b>Xan</b>'s antibiotic effects, sequencing of resistant strains revealed a conserved mutation in the heme biosynthesis enzyme porphobilinogen synthase (PbgS). This mutation caused impaired enzymatic efficiency indicative of reduced heme production. This discovery led to the validation of an untapped mechanism, by which direct heme sequestration of <b>Xan</b> prevents its binding into cognate enzyme pockets resulting in uncontrolled cofactor biosynthesis, accumulation of porphyrins, and corresponding stress with deleterious effects for bacterial viability. Thus, <b>Xan</b> represents a promising antibiotic displaying activity even against multidrug resistant strains, while exhibiting low toxicity to human cells.

### Keywords
Antibiotics, Isonitriles

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Ines Hübner

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technical University of Munich


