### Accession
PXD005084

### Title
HLA-I peptidomes and phosphopeptidomes (B*40, B*27, B*07, B*39)

### Description
As aberrant phosphorylation is a hallmark of tumor cells, the display of tumor-specific phosphopeptides by Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) class I molecules can be exploited in the treatment of cancer by T-cell-based immunotherapy. Yet, the characterization and prediction of HLA-I phospholigands is challenging as the molecular determinants of the presentation of such post-translationally modified peptides are not fully understood. Here, we employed a peptidomic workflow to identify phosphorylated ligands associated with HLA-B*40, -B*27, -B*39 and -B*07. Remarkably, these phosphopeptides showed similar molecular features. Besides the specific anchor motifs imposed by the binding groove of each allotype, the predominance of phosphorylation at peptide position 4 (P4) became strikingly evident, as was the enrichment of basic residues at P1. This molecular understanding of the presentation of phosphopeptides by HLA-B molecules can help in predicting tumor-specific neo-antigens that arise from aberrant phosphorylation in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of the GR cell line (HLA-B*27 and -B*07 positive) or stable transfectants of HLA-B*40 and -B*39 in the HMy2-C1R (C1R) cell line were subjected to immunoprecipitation with the mAb W6/32, acid extraction of the bound peptide pool and phosphopeptide enrichment before LC-MS/MS analysis. In other experiments, the proteome of the C1R-B*40 cell line was trypsin-digested and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf files with Peakview 1.2 (AB SCiex) and searched against a concatenated target-decoy database containing the 88,266 Uniprot entries of the Homo sapiens complete proteome set (as of November 5, 2013) and their corresponding reverse sequences. Five independent search engines were used: MASCOT (version 2.4.0), OMSSA (version 2.1.9), X!Tandem2 (version 2013-02-01-1), X!Tandem2 with k-score plugin (version 2.3-7806) and Myrimatch (version 2.2.140). The datasets corresponding to HLA-I-bound peptides were searched without enzyme restriction and with an MS tolerance of 0.01 Da and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da. The following variable modifications were considered: oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal glutamine or glutamic acid and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. For the analysis of the phosphoproteome of C1R-B*40 cells, trypsin was selected as enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The variable modifications specified were: oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal glutamine or glutamic acid and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The individual outputs of the search engines were combined by converting each engine-specific scoring scheme to a common probability-based scale as previously described (Ramos-Fernández et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008.7(9):1748-54). The p-values of the peptide-spectrum matches were computed based on score distribution models and identifications were filtered at a FDR ≤ 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
As aberrant protein phosphorylation is a hallmark of tumor cells, the display of tumor-specific phosphopeptides by Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) class I molecules can be exploited in the treatment of cancer by T-cell-based immunotherapy. Yet, the characterization and prediction of HLA-I phospholigands is challenging as the molecular determinants of the presentation of such post-translationally modified peptides are not fully understood. Here, we employed a peptidomic workflow to identify 256 unique phosphorylated ligands associated with HLA-B*40, -B*27, -B*39, or -B*07. Remarkably, these phosphopeptides showed similar molecular features. Besides the specific anchor motifs imposed by the binding groove of each allotype, the predominance of phosphorylation at peptide position 4 (P4) became strikingly evident, as was the enrichment of basic residues at P1. To determine the structural basis of this observation, we carried out a series of peptide binding assays and solved the crystal structures of HLA-B*40 in complex with a phosphorylated ligand or its nonphosphorylated counterpart. Overall, our data provide a clear explanation to the common motif found in the phosphopeptidomes associated to different HLA-B molecules. The high prevalence of phosphorylation at P4 is dictated by the presence of the conserved residue Arg62 in the heavy chain, a structural feature shared by most HLA-B alleles. In contrast, the preference for basic residues at P1 is allotype-dependent and might be linked to the structure of the A pocket. This molecular understanding of the presentation of phosphopeptides by HLA-B molecules provides a base for the improved prediction and identification of phosphorylated neo-antigens, as potentially used for cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Phosphopeptidome, Mhc, Hla, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit - Dpt. of Macromolecular Structures - Spanish National Biotechnolgy Centre (CNB-CSIC)
Proteomics Unit. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre (CNB-CSC). Madrid. Spain.

### Submitter
Miguel Marcilla

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Paradela
Proteomics Unit. Spanish National Biotechnology Centre (CNB-CSC). Madrid. Spain.


