### Accession
PXD011388

### Title
IRES-dependent ribosome repositioning directs translation of a +1 overlapping ORF that enhances viral infection

### Description
Elucidation of a novel +1 frame translational mechanism from the CrPV intergenic region IRES.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets harvested from CrPV-infected cells at 6 hpi were solubilized in 1% sodium deoxy cholate and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Protein concentrations were determined via BCA assay (Thermo). Proteins (100 µg) were reduced (2 µg DTT, 37C, 30 min) and alkylated (5 µg iodoacetamide, RT, 20 min). Samples were digested with trypsin overnight at room temperature. Peptides were acidified with 1% TFA to pH <2.5 and the precipitated deoxycholate was remove via centrifugation. Peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 STAGE-tips, eluted in 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf)(Rappsilber, Ishihama, & Mann, 2003). Samples were resuspended in 20% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid before loading on an Agilent 6550 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30). Parameters included: carbamidomethylated cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (variable), glutamine and asparagine deamidation (variable), and protein N-terminal acetylation (variable); trypsin specific; maximum 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance; 1% FDR; +1 to +7 charge states; and common contaminants were included. Both the Drosophila and CrPV protein databases used were the most recent annotations downloaded from UniProt (www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
RNA structures can interact with the ribosome to alter translational reading frame maintenance and promote recoding that result in alternative protein products. Here, we show that the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) from the dicistrovirus Cricket paralysis virus drives translation of the 0-frame viral polyprotein and an overlapping +1 open reading frame, called ORFx, via a novel mechanism whereby a subset of ribosomes recruited to the IRES bypasses 37 nucleotides downstream to resume translation at the +1-frame 13th non-AUG codon. A mutant of CrPV containing a stop codon in the +1 frame ORFx sequence, yet synonymous in the 0-frame, is attenuated compared to wild-type virus in a Drosophila infection model, indicating the importance of +1 ORFx expression in promoting viral pathogenesis. This work demonstrates a novel programmed IRES-mediated recoding strategy to increase viral coding capacity and impact virus infection, highlighting the diversity of RNA-driven translation initiation mechanisms in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Virus, Translation, Ires, Crpv, Drosophila

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

### Submitter
Craig Kerr

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Jan
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


