### Accession
PXD022185

### Title
Outward-facing structures of a multidrug ABC exporter with and without bound drug

### Description
Multidrug ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) exporters use an alternating access mechanism to translocate drugs across membranes, but the molecular mechanism of substrate release is still elusive due to the poor affinity of the drug-binding pocket for its ligand at this stage. Here, we bring new information on this mechanism by resolving two ATP-bound outward-facing conformations of the homodimer BmrA from Bacillus subtilis by X-ray crystallography with no drug bound and by cryo-EM in the presence of rhodamine 6G. This revealed the first structure of a multidrug pump with a substrate bound to the drug-binding pocket in a pre-release state. Two molecules of the dye are located in an hydrophobic region at the level of the outer leaflet between transmembrane (TM) helices 1, 2 and 6. Markedly, the X-ray structures display a half-closed TM1-2 region that is widely open in the cryo-EM one. Hydrogen-Deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the high flexibility of this region, presumably driving the release of structurally divergent compounds.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS experiments were performed using a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer coupled to a NanoAcquity UPLC M-Class System with HDX Technology (Waters™). All the reactions were carried out manually. Labeling was initiated by diluting 5 µL of typically 15 µM BmrA in nanodiscs, in 95 µL D2O labeling buffer, 5 mM Hepes-HCl pD 8.4, 50 mM NaCl. For the Vanadate-trapped condition, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM Vanadate. Samples were labeled for 2, 5, 15 and 30 minutes at 20 °C. Subsequently, the reactions were quenched by adding 22 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer, 0.5 M glycine, 8 M guanidine-HCl pH 2.2, 0.035% DDM and 0.03% sodium cholate, to 100 µL of labelled sample, in ice bath. After 1 min, the 122-µL quenched sample was added into a microtube containing 200 µg of activated zirconium magnetic beads (MagReSyn Zr-IMAC from Resyn Biosciences, USA), to remove the phos-pholipids. After 1 minute, the magnetic beads were removed and the supernatant injected immediately using a 100-µL loop. Labelled proteins were then subjected to in-line digestion at 15 °C using a pepsin column (Waters Enzymate™ BEH Pepsin Column 300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 x 30 mm). The resulting peptides were trapped and desalted for three minutes on a C4 precolumn (Waters ACQUITY UPLC Protein BEH C4 VanGuard Pre-column 300 Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 x 5 mm, 10K - 500K) before separating them with a C4 column (Waters ACQUITY UPLC Protein BEH C4 Column 300 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 x 100 mm) using a linear acetonitrile gradient of 5-40% in 15 min and then four alterna-tive cycles of 5% and 95% until 25 minutes. The valve position was adjusted to divert the sample after 11.2 min of each run from C4 column to waste to avoid contaminating the mass spectrometer with detergent. Two full kinetics were run for each condition, one after the other, to get duplicate of each deuteration timepoint. Blanks, with equilibration buffer, 5 mM Hepes-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, were injected after each sample injec-tion and pepsin column washed during each run with pepsin wash (1.5 M guanidine-HCl, 4% acetonitrile, 0.8% formic acid pH 2.5) to minimize the carryover. Electrospray ionization Mass spectra were acquired in positive mode in the m/z range of 50−2000 and with a scan time of 0.3 s.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of non-deuterated peptides, data was collected in MSE mode and the resulting peptides were identified using PLGS™ software (ProteinLynx Global SERV-ER 3.0.2 from Waters™). Deuterated peptides were identified using DynamX 3.0 soft-ware (Waters™), using the following parameters, minimum intensity of 1000, minimum products per amino acid of 0.3 and file threshold of 2. HDX-Viewer and Deuteros 2.0 software were used for data analysis, visualization and statistical treatments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transport mechanism, Substrate release, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Membrane exporter crystal and cryo-em structure, Nanodiscs

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse, France
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse, France


