### Accession
PXD024675

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveals SnRK1-dependent phosphosites in rice sheaths during grain filling

### Description
Insufficient leaf photosynthesis promotes sheath NSC transport to the panicle during grain filling. SnRK1 regulates assimilate distribution between plant tissues and organs. However, the mechanism by which SnRK1 regulates sheath NSC transport to the panicle and its response to limited leaf assimilation remain unclear. Here, we performed leaf cutting (LC) at anthesis to simulate insufficient leaf assimilation and set no treatment as a CK. In response to LC, SnRK1 activity increased rapidly, and NSC transport was advanced. Sheath NSCs were not transported in a snrk1a mutant with deficient SnRK1 activity. These results indicated that SnRK1 activity is important for sheath NSC transport. The high correlation of T6P and sucrose and the inhibition of SnRK1 by T6P in sheaths in vitro implied that T6P slightly inhibits SnRK1 activity in rice sheaths in response to sucrose availability. The increase in SnRK1 activity was accompanied by an increase in OsSnRK1a expression and a low sucrose content. Low sucrose signaling increases SnRK1 transcription. Therefore, we speculated that OsSnRK1a expression positively regulates SnRK1 activity in response to low sucrose availability in rice sheaths. Through phosphoproteomics and further PRM verification, 20 phosphosites that depend on SnRK1 and are correlated with NSC transport were obtained. Based on the function of these sites and proteins, we found that SnRK1 regulates starch degradation, sucrose metabolism, phloem transport, sugar transport across tonoplast, and glycolysis via phosphorylation to promote sheath NSC transport. Overall, our results revealed the importance, function and regulatory mechanism of SnRK1 in sheath NSC transport.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for phosphoproteomics  Total proteins were extracted from 500 mg ground tissue in four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor on ice. After centrifugation, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation, the residue was washed with cold acetone and redissolved in 8 M urea. The protein concentration was determined by BCA kit. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin (1:50, trypsin: protein, w/w) was added for the first digestion overnight, and then trypsin (1:100, trypsin: protein, w/w) was added again for the second digestion for 4 h. To enrich phosphopeptides, immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) was used. Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microsphere suspensions. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation. The IMAC microspheres were washed to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides and then added to elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS was performed using a tims-TOF Pro (Bruker, USA) coupled to a NanoElute 1000 UPLC system (Bruker, USA). The LC solvents were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient was as follows: 6%-24% solvent B for 70 min, 24%-35% for 14 min, 35%-80% for 3 min and then holding at 80% for 3 min. The flow rate was 450 nL min-1. After being subjected to an ion source, the peptides and the fragments were detected with tims-TOF Pro MS. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 m/z for the MS/MS scan. The parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) data collection mode was used.

### Data Protocol
Database search and data analysis Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.6.0) and searched against the UniProt database (Oryza_sativa_subsp._japonica). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm in both the first search and main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) was specified as a variable modification. The FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to <1%. The minimum score for phosphopeptides was set as > 40. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Identified protein domains were functionally annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used. The KEGG online service tool KAAS was used to annotate the KEGG database descriptions of proteins, and then the KEGG online service tool KEGG mapper was used to map the annotation results to the KEGG pathway database. Wolfpsort, a soft subcellular localization prediction tool, was used to predict subcellular localization. The motif-x algorithm was used to analyze the model of sequences, with amino acids in specific positions of modified-13-mers that were 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site. All the database protein sequences were used as background database parameters. The minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. GPS 5.0 software was used to predict kinase-substrate regulation. The corresponding proteins in the kinase family were obtained by comparison with the kinase sequences in the IEKPD2.0 database. Coexpression clusters were analyzed by the WGCNA R package (Zhang and Horvath, 2005). GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed using OmicShare tools, a free online platform for data analysis (http://www.omicshare.com/tools).

### Publication Abstract
The remobilization of nonstructural carbohydrates (NSCs) reserved in rice (Oryza sativa) sheaths is essential for grain filling. This assimilate distribution between plant tissues and organs is determined by sucrose non-fermenting-1-related protein kinase 1 (SnRK1). However, the SnRK1-mediated mechanism regulating the sheath-to-panicle transport of NSCs in rice remains unknown. In this study, leaf cutting treatment was used to accelerate NSC transport in the rice sheaths. Accelerated NSC transport was accompanied by increased levels of OsSnRK1a mRNA expression, SnRK1a protein expression, catalytic subunit phosphorylation of SnRK1, and SnRK1 activity, indicating that SnRK1 activity plays an important role in sheath NSC transport. We also discovered that trehalose-6-phosphate, a signal of sucrose availability, slightly reduced SnRK1 activity in vitro. Since SnRK1 activity is mostly regulated by OsSnRK1a transcription in response to low sucrose content, we constructed an snrk1a mutant to verify the function of SnRK1 in NSC transport. NSCs accumulated in the sheaths of snrk1a mutant plants and resulted in a low seed setting rate and grain weight, verifying that SnRK1 activity is essential for NSC remobilization. Using phosphoproteomics and parallel reaction monitoring, we identified 20 SnRK1-dependent phosphosites that are involved in NSC transport. In addition, the SnRK1-mediated phosphorylation of the phosphosites directly affected starch degradation, sucrose metabolism, phloem transport, sugar transport across the tonoplast, and glycolysis in rice sheaths to promote NSC transport. Therefore, our findings reveal the importance, function, and possible regulatory mechanism of SnRK1 in the sheath-to-panicle transport of NSCs in rice.

### Keywords
Nsc remobilization; snrk1; grain filling; sheath; phosphoproteomics; oryza sativa.

### Affiliations
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University.

### Submitter
Hu Yuxiang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxiang Hu
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China


