### Accession
PXD040159

### Title
Using CRISPR-Cas9/Phosphoproteomics to Identify Kinase Substrates: Calmodulin Kinase 2 Delta

### Description
The Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein kinase 2 (CAMK2) family of protein kinases are key protein kinases involved in regulation of cellular processes in a variety of tissues including brain, smooth muscle and kidney.  One member, CAMK2-delta (CAMK2D), has been proposed to be involved in vasopressin signaling in the renal collecting duct, which controls water and salt excretion by the kidney. To identify CAMK2D target proteins in renal collecting duct cells (mpkCCD), we deleted Camk2d in mpkCCD cells and carried out LC-MS/MS-based quantitative phoshoproteomics analysis. Using CRISPR/Cas9 with two different gRNAs targeting the CAMK2D catalytic domain, we created multiple CAMK2D knock-out cell lines.  Using these cells and control cell lines, we carried out large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis (TMT-labeling) in the presence of the vasopressin analog dDAVP (0.1 nM, 30 min).  Of the 11,570 phosphopeptides quantified, 206 were significantly increased and 169 were decreased. These data are available for browsing or download at https://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Databases/CAMK2D-proteome/. Motif analysis of the decreased phosphorylation sites revealed a target preference of –(R/K)-X-X-p(S/T)-X-(D/E), matching the motif identified in previous in vitro studies using recombinant CAMK2D.   Thirty-five of the significantly down-regulated phosphorylation sites in CAMK2D knock-out cells had exactly this motif and are judged to be sites that are most likely direct CAMK2D targets. These targets include Ser256 of aquaporin-2 (AQP2), a site known to regulate AQP2 trafficking to the plasma membrane, controlling water excretion by the kidney. The other changes, including phosphorylation sites that increased in response to CAMK2D deletion, are likely phosphorylated by other protein kinases that are regulated by CAMK2D in kinase cascades.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS for three times and lysed with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Thremo Fisher Scientific, 90114 ) containing 1% SDS and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thremo Fisher Scientific, 78445). The collected lysates were loaded onto the QIAshredder (QIAGEN, 79656) and centrifuged at 16,000xg for 10 min at 4°C to homogenize the lysates. Then, protein concentration was measured by BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23227). Each sample (500 µg of protein) was reduced with 24 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Fisher Scientific, A39255) for 1 hr at room temperature (RT), and alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90034) for 1 hr at RT in dark. Pre-chilled acetone at -20°C was added with 6 times of sample volume and incubated overnight at -20°C to precipitate proteins. The precipitated proteins were resuspended with 100 mM TEAB and digested with 10 µg of Trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5073) at 37°C for 18 hr. The peptide concentration was measured using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23275). 500 µg of peptides from each sample were labeled using TMT11plex Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A37725, Lot no. VD299910) per manufacturer’s instructions. The TMT-labeled peptides from each sample were pooled, desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (WAT094225, Oasis), then subjected to high pH reversed phase fractionation into 24 fractions. 5% aliquots were taken for total proteomics and the rest of samples were enriched for phospho-proteomics and combined into 12 fractions. Phosphopeptides were enriched sequentially using High-Select TiO2 and High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific, A32993 and A32992) followed the Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography protocol (SMOAC) from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Samples were vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were searched against the mouse UniProt reference proteome (UP000002494_10116.fasta, downloaded in Sep. 2021) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was configured as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y), oxidation of methionine (M). The FDR was limited to 1% using the target-decoy algorithm. Other parameters were kept as the defaults. Results are reported as MS2 reporter ion intensity ratios between Camk2d KO and Intact cells.

### Publication Abstract
Ca<sup>2+</sup>/Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2 (CAMK2) family proteins are involved in the regulation of cellular processes in a variety of tissues including brain, heart, liver, and kidney. One member, CAMK2&#x3b4; (CAMK2D), has been proposed to be involved in vasopressin signaling in the renal collecting duct, which controls water excretion through regulation of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2). To identify CAMK2D target proteins in renal collecting duct cells (mpkCCD), we deleted Camk2d and carried out LC-MS/MS-based quantitative phosphoproteomics. Specifically, we used CRISPR/Cas9 with two different guide RNAs targeting the CAMK2D catalytic domain to create multiple CAMK2D KO cell lines. AQP2 protein abundance was lower in the CAMK2D KO cells than in CAMK2D-intact controls. AQP2 phosphorylation at Ser256 and Ser269 (normalized for total AQP2) was decreased. However, trafficking of AQP2 to and from the apical plasma membrane was sustained. Large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis (TMT-labeling) in the presence of the vasopressin analog dDAVP (0.1&#xa0;nM, 30&#xa0;min) allowed quantification of 11,570 phosphosites of which 169 were significantly decreased, while 206 were increased in abundance in CAMK2D KO clones. These data are available for browsing or download at https://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Databases/CAMK2D-proteome/. Motif analysis of the decreased phosphorylation sites revealed a target preference of -(R/K)-X-X-p(S/T)-X-(D/E), matching the motif identified in previous in&#xa0;vitro phosphorylation studies using recombinant CAMK2D. Thirty five of the significantly downregulated phosphorylation sites in CAMK2D KO cells had exactly this motif and are judged to be likely direct CAMK2D targets. This adds to the list of known CAMK2D target proteins found in prior reductionist studies.

### Keywords
Camk2d, Mass spectrometry, Aqp2, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  National Institutes of Health


