### Accession
PXD028801

### Title
Identification of novel blood protein biomarkers in infants with Acute Intracranial Hemorrhage

### Description
Abusive head trauma (AHT) is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity in infants. We explored novel AHT biomarkers via untargeted proteomics of peripheral postmortem blood (PMB) specimens collected during medico-legal autopsies of infants. The panel of PMB biomarkers was confirmed in antemortem serum samples as a potential signature capable of being applied to living patients to support AHT screening and improve their prognosis through early medical care.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated from peripheral blood of each individual case, digested to peptides and after clean up peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw data acquired in DDA mode were used to create a crude blood-  or  serum-  specific spectral library, while DIA data were used to obtain relative  protein  intensities for quantification. All data searches and generation of quantitative data matrices were limited solely to tryptic peptides, and performed by Spectronaut proteomic software (version: 14 Biognosys). Unique proteins identified at 1% of protein false discovery rate (FDR)   were used for quantification across the PMB and serum samples according to criteria that each protein be quantified in at least half of the samples per respective condition.

### Publication Abstract
Abusive head trauma (AHT) is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity in infants. While the reported incidence is close to 40 cases per 100'000 births/year, misdiagnoses are commonly observed in cases with atypical, subacute, or chronic presentation. Currently, standard clinical evaluation of inflicted intracranial hemorrhagic injury (ICH) in infants urgently requires a screening test able to identify infants who need additional investigations. Blood biomarkers characteristic of AHT may assist in detecting these infants, improving prognosis through early medical care. To date, the application of innovative omics technologies in retrospective studies of AHT in infants is rare, due also to the blood serum and cerebrospinal fluid of AHT cases being scarce and not systematically accessible. Here, we explored the circulating blood proteomes of infants with severe AHT and their atraumatic controls. We discovered 165 circulating serum proteins that display differential changes in AHT cases compared with atraumatic controls. The peripheral blood proteomes of pediatric AHT commonly reflect: (i) potentially secreted proteome from injured brain, and (ii) proteome dysregulated in the system's circulation by successive biological events following acute ICH. This study opens up a novel opportunity for research efforts in clinical screening of AHT cases.

### Keywords
Dia-ms, Postmortem blood proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty Unit of Toxicology, University Center of Legal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Chemin de la Vuillette 4, 1000 Lausanne 25, Switzerland
University Center of Legal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital

### Submitter
Tatjana Sajic

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Aurelien Thomas
Faculty Unit of Toxicology, University Center of Legal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Chemin de la Vuillette 4, 1000 Lausanne 25, Switzerland


