### Accession
PXD013323

### Title
iTRAQ of Wucai (Brassica campestris L.)leaf color

### Description
Chlorophyll plays critical roles in photosynthetic light harvesting, energy transduction and plant development. In this study, a novel wucai (Brassica campestris L.) germplasm with green outer leaves and yellow inner leaves at the adult stage (W7-2) was used to examine chlorophyll metabolism response to cold acclimation. A green leaf wucai genotype without leaf color changes named W7-1 was selected as the control to evaluate the chlorophyll metabolism changes of W7-2. Compared to W7-1, the contents of chlorophyll a (Chl a) and chlorophyll b (Chl b) in W7-2 were significantly reduced at five developmental stages (13, 21, 29, 37 and 45 days after planting (DAP). An iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis was carried out at 21 and 29 DAP according to the leaf color changes in both of genotypes. A total of 1409 proteins were identified, of which 218 showed differential accumulations between W7-2 and W7-1 during the two developmental stages.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves of the two wucai genotypes at 21 DAP and 29 DAP were selected for protein extraction according to Isaacson26 with some modification. Proteins were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method.27 Three biological replications were performed. Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure of Wisniewski, and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent. One unit of iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 24 μL isopropanol. The peptides labeled with the isobaric tags were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was terminated by adding 200 μL water. To prepare for strong cationic exchange chromatography using an Agilent 1100 HPLC Purifier system (Agilent Technologies Inc., California, USA), the iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted and acidified in 4 mL of buffer A [25 mM KH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 2.7] and loaded onto a 2.1 × 150 mm Agilent Zorbax Extend-C18 column. The peptide was eluted at a flow rate of 300 μL min-1 with a linear gradient of 5% buffer B (25 mM KH2PO4 and 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 7 min, 560% buffer B for 20 min and 60100% buffer B for 2 min, and then maintained in 100% buffer B for 1 min. Elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and the fractions were collected every minute. The collected fractions were desalted using a C-18 column and were vacuum dried. Each fraction was resuspended were carried out at a flow rate 3 μL min-1 for 10 min with buffer C [acetonitrile (ACN)/formic acid (FA)/water = 2/0.1/98 (v/v/v)]. A total of 5 μL of supernatant was loaded onto the C18-reversed phase analytical column (75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 120 Å, ChromXP Eksigent). The samples were loaded at 300 nL/min with a linear gradient of 5% buffer D (95% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 5 min, 335% buffer D for 35 min, 3560% buffer D for 35 min, 6080% buffer D for 2 min, 5% buffer D for 1 min, and finally maintained in 5% buffer D for 10 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the method of Zhang29. Full MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 - 1600 m/z with a mass resolution of 70000 and the AGC target value was set at 1e6.The ten most intense peaks in MS were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with NCE of 30 in data-dependent positive ion mode. MS/MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 2e5 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) run against the UniProt database30(January 28, 2018, 172630 sequences), The search results were filtered with these options: significance threshold P < 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and ion score or expected cut-off < 0.05 (with 95% confidence).  The main parameters are as follows:  MS tolerance: 20 ppm  MS/MS tolerance: 0.5 Da  enzyme: Trypsin  database: Brassica. fasta. Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ-8-plex (N-term), iTRAQ-8-plex (K). Variable modification: Oxidation (M). Acetyl (Protein N-term) Decoy database pattern: reverse Peptide FDR:0.01 Protein FDR:0.01 For protein quantification, the protein ratios were calculated as the median of only the unique peptides of the protein. All peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio.  Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were analyzed for significant up regulation or down regulation. One-sample t-tests were used to identify significant (P<0.05) differences between two developmental stages. For differential expression analysis, the fold change was calculated as the average ratios of 115/113 and 116/114. Proteins with a fold change of >1.2 or < 0.83 were considered to be differentially expressed. Bioinformatic analysis of proteins Bioinformatic analysis of proteins was performed according to Yang27. The identified proteins were annotated by searching against the UniProt database. DEPs were grouped in line with biological functions using gene ontology (GO) terms (http://www.geneontology.org/) and were mapped to the reference authoritative pathways in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) to determine the active biological pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Chlorophyll is a vital photosynthetic pigment that plays a key role in plant development, participating in light energy capture and energy conversion. In this study, a novel wucai ( Brassica campestris L.) germplasm with green outer leaves and yellow inner leaves at the adult stage (W7-2) was used to examine chlorophyll metabolism response to cold acclimation. A green leaf wucai genotype without leaf color changes named W7-1 was selected as the control to evaluate the chlorophyll metabolism changes of W7-2. Compared to W7-1, the contents of chlorophyll a (Chl a) and chlorophyll b (Chl b) in W7-2 were significantly reduced at five developmental stages (13, 21, 29, 37, and 45 days after planting (DAP)). An iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis was carried out at 21 and 29 DAP according to the leaf color changes in both of genotypes. 1409 proteins were identified, while 218 of them displayed differential accumulations between W7-2 and W7-1 during the two developmental stages. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) mainly assigned to chlorophyll biosynthesis, photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, ribosome metabolism and posttranslational modification. Among these DEPs, NADPH-protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (PORB) and Mg-protoporphyrin IX chelatase 1 (CHLI1) were the key enzymes participating in chlorophyll (Chl) biosynthesis, which was down-regulated at 21 DAP and up-regulated at 29 DAP in W7-2 compared with W7-1, respectively. The expression analysis of genes of three subunits of Mg-chelatase ( CHLI1, CHLD, and CHLH), Genomes Uncoupled 4 ( GUN4), and Thioredoxin ( TRX3) associated with chlorophyll metabolism also displayed significant down-regulation in W7-2. In particular, PORB showed significant up-regulation in W7-2, significantly affecting chlorophyll biosynthesis. Additionally, differences in chlorophyll metabolism between W7-2 and W7-1 were in terms of altered photosynthesis, carbohydrate, and energy metabolism. We found that the transcription levels of most photosynthesis proteins showed significantly lower levels, and the genes expression level, associated with carbohydrate and energy metabolism, were lower in W7-2 than in W7-1. Therefore, the present study results help understand the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying leaf coloring responding to cold acclimation.

### Keywords
Wucai; leaf color; itraq-based quantitative proteomics; chlorophyll biosynthesis

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Vegetable Genetics and Breeding Laboratory, Anhui Agricultural University, 130 West Changjiang Road, 230036 Hefei, Anhui, China;
Anhui Agricultural University 

### Submitter
Lingyun Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Lingyun Yuan
College of Horticulture, Vegetable Genetics and Breeding Laboratory, Anhui Agricultural University, 130 West Changjiang Road, 230036 Hefei, Anhui, China;


