### Accession
PXD037944

### Title
Comparative proteome analysis of different Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains during growth on sucrose and glucose

### Description
Rodrigues et al., (2022) compared the proteomes of exponentially growing S. cerevisiae cells in a defined medium containing either sucrose or glucose as the sole carbon source. Bioreactor cultivations were performed with three different strains: CEN.PK113-7D, UFMG-CM-Y259 and JP1 (contact: aljoscha.wahl@fau.de).

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots with approximately 2 mg protein biomass were withdrawn from the bioreactor during exponential growth phase and immediately centrifuged at 867 g for 5 minutes. Cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and phosphatase/protease inhibitors. Protein extraction was performed using glass bead milling (425–600 µm, acid-washed) using a bead beater. The protein supernatant was reduced by using DTT and alkylated using iodoacetamide. Protein precipitation was performed by adding four volumes of ice-cold acetone. The proteins were solubilized using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolytic digestion was performed using sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) for overnight. Peptides were purified using solid phase extraction with an Oasis HLB 96-well µElution plate (Waters). Eluates were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 3% ACN/0.01% TFA in MS grade water prior to MS-analysis.   An aliquot corresponding to approx. 250 ng protein digest was analysed using an one dimensional shot-gun proteomics approach. Briefly, the samples were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano LC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nl.min-1 over a linear gradient from 6% to 26% solvent B over 65 minutes, followed by an increase to 50% solvent B over 20 min and a subsequent back equilibration to starting conditions. Data were acquired from 2.5 to 90 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals from 385-1250 m/z at 70K resolution. The top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 28. Fragments were acquired at 17.5K resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were mapped to the proteome database from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Uniprot, strain ATCC 204508 / S288C, Tax ID: 559292, July 2018) using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. To limit false-positive peptide identification, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to peptide spectrum matches and identified proteins were considered significant when ≥ 2 unique peptides were identified in all three biological replicates. Label free quantitative comparison was performed on the identified peptides using the PEAKS Q software tool (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada). The peak areas were normalized to the total ion count (TIC) of the respective analysis run before performing pairwise comparison between the carbon sources for each strain. Protein abundance ratio between sucrose and glucose conditions was filtered with fold change ratios ≥ 1.2, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to test the statistical significance of the observed abundance changes, with p values below 0.05 considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioreactor, Yeast, Carbon source, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


