### Accession
PXD041040

### Title
A Treg specific long non-coding RNA maintains immune-metabolic homeostasis in ageing liver

### Description
To find specific transcription factors (TFs) interact with Altre to regulate target gene expression by Cis- or Trans- action on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Live CD45+CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs isolated from Altre-WT and Altre-KO mice were sorted by FACS Aria III (BD Bioscience)

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Fitgene Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China). The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a QEXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled online to high-performance liquid chromatography. Protein identification was performed with MASCOT software by searching Uniprot_Aedis Aegypti. Peptide mass tolerance values were 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerances were 0.6 Da

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T (T<sub>reg</sub>) cells modulate several aging-related liver diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating T<sub>reg</sub> function in this context are unknown. Here we identified a long noncoding RNA, Altre (aging liver T<sub>reg</sub>-expressed non-protein-coding RNA), which was specifically expressed in the nucleus of T<sub>reg</sub> cells and increased with aging. T<sub>reg</sub>-specific deletion of Altre did not affect T<sub>reg</sub> homeostasis and function in young mice but caused T<sub>reg</sub> metabolic dysfunction, inflammatory liver microenvironment, liver fibrosis and liver cancer in aged mice. Depletion of Altre reduced T<sub>reg</sub> mitochondrial integrity and respiratory capacity, and induced reactive oxygen species accumulation, thus increasing intrahepatic T<sub>reg</sub> apoptosis in aged mice. Moreover, lipidomic analysis identified a specific lipid species driving T<sub>reg</sub> aging and apoptosis in the aging liver microenvironment. Mechanistically, Altre interacts with Yin Yang 1 to orchestrate its occupation on chromatin, thereby regulating the expression of a group of mitochondrial genes, and maintaining optimal mitochondrial function and T<sub>reg</sub> fitness in the liver of aged mice. In conclusion, the T<sub>reg</sub>-specific nuclear long noncoding RNA Altre maintains the immune-metabolic homeostasis of the aged liver through Yin Yang 1-regulated optimal mitochondrial function and the T<sub>reg</sub>-sustained liver immune microenvironment. Thus, Altre is a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of liver diseases affecting older adults.

### Keywords
Altre treg lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Chenbo Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Chenbo Ding
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


