### Accession
PXD027596

### Title
Metastasis-entrained eosinophils enhance lymphocyte-mediated anti-tumor immunity

### Description
The recognition of the immune system as a key component of the tumor  microenvironment (TME) led to promising therapeutics. Since such therapies benefit  only subsets of patients, understanding the activities of immune cells in the TME is  required. Eosinophils are an integral part of the TME especially in mucosal tumors.  Nonetheless, their role in the TME and the environmental cues that direct their activities  are largely unknown, especially in metastasis. We report that breast cancer-driven lung  metastasis is characterized by resident and recruited eosinophils. Eosinophil recruitment  to the metastatic lung was regulated by G protein coupled receptor signaling but  independent of CCR3. Functionally, eosinophils promoted lymphocyte-mediated anti tumor immunity. Transcriptome and proteomic analyses identified the TME rather than  intrinsic differences between eosinophil subsets as a key instructing factor directing anti tumorigenic eosinophil activities. Specifically, TNF-a/IFN-g-activated eosinophils facilitated CD4+ and CD8+ T cell infiltration and promoted anti-tumor immunity. Collectively, we identify a mechanism by which the TME entrains eosinophils to adopt anti-tumorigenic properties, which may lead to the development of eosinophil-targeted therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample preparation - 10,000 cells were sorted into each well in a 96 wells plate (Eppendorf twin.tec® PCR Plates) containing 33 ul of lysis buffer. Lysis buffer was composed of 2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 20mM Tris(2‐carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 80 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) and completion to total volume with 100mM HEPES solution 8.5pH. After sorting, plates were spun to enable proper mixing between the cells and the lysis buffer and heated to 95⁰C for 5 minutes. Further sample preparation was based on the SP3 protocol1 that suits to low proteins amounts samples. The first day of the protocol was done using the Bravo Automated Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent) and the second day was done manually. In brief, magnetic beads (SeraMag magnetic beads; Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the samples following by the addition of ethanol (ethanol final concentration of 50%) and incubated to allow the connection of the proteins to the beads. Beads were washed twice more with ethanol and incubated for overnight digestion with trypsin (promega). The day after, samples were transferred to clean lobind tubes and fresh beads were added following with the addition of acetonitrile (ACN) to promote peptides attachment to the beads. Samples were washed once more with ACN. To release the peptides from the beads 2% DMSO in water was added. Samples were collected to PCR tubes, vacuum dried, and re-suspend in 3ul buffer containing 2% ACN and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). All reagents in this part are LC-MS grade. 2. LC-MS - LC-MS/MS runs were performed on the EASY-nLC1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific)2. Peptides were separated with a 75uM X 50 cm EASY-spray column (Thermo Scientific) using a water-acetonitrile gradient of 110 minutes, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 40⁰C. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 120,000 and 60,000 respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of all samples were jointly analyzed by MaxQuant 3 version 1.6.2.6. MS/MS spectra were referenced to the Uniprot Mus musculus proteome (http://www.uniprot.org/). Statistical analysis – Analyses were performed using the Perseus software4 version 1.6.2.3.. Network analysis was based on student's t-test results (FDR < 0.1, S0 = 0.1) and on the STRING algorithem5 and visualization was done using the Cytoscape software 6. Biological annotations were taken from Gene Ontology (GO) 8 and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 9

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Asthma., Lung metastasis, Tumor microenvironment, Breast cancer, Inflammation, Eosinophils

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemsitry, Tel Aviv University, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemsitry, Tel Aviv University, Israel


