### Accession
PXD023877

### Title
Enhancement of Tryptic Peptide Signals from Tissue Sections using MALDI IMS Post-ionization (MALDI-2)

### Description
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI IMS) allows for highly multiplexed, unlabeled mapping of analytes from tissue sections.  However, further work is needed to improve sensitivity and depth of coverage for protein and peptide IMS. Laser-based post-ionization MALDI-2 has been shown to increase sensitivity for several molecular classes but has not yet been reported for peptides. We demonstrate signal enhancement of proteolytic peptides from thin tissue sections of human kidney by conventional MALDI (termed MALDI-1), and conventional MALDI augmented using a second ionizing laser (termed MALDI-2).  Proteins were digested in situ using trypsin prior to IMS analysis.  For tentative identification of peptides and proteins, a tissue homogenate from the same tissue analyzed by IMS was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  These proteins were digested in silico to generate a database of theoretical peptides to then match to MALDI IMS datasets. Peptides were tentatively identified by matching the MALDI peak list to the database peptide list employing a 5 ppm error window.  This resulted in 314 ± 45 (n=3) peptides and 1 112 ± 84 (n=3) peptides for MALDI-1 and MALDI-2, respectively. Protein identifications requiring two or more peptides per protein resulted in 55 ± 13 proteins identifications with MALDI-1 and 205 ± 10 with MALDI-2. These results demonstrate that MALDI-2 provides enhanced sensitivity for the spatial mapping of tryptic peptides and significantly increases the number of proteins identified in IMS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Sections of fresh frozen human kidney were prepared in technical triplicate. Human kidney tissues were collected as part of normal non-neoplastic portions of nephrectomy samples and were prepared for peptide analysis. Tissue blocks(1) were frozen using an isopentane/dry ice slurry,(2) embedded in carboxymethyl cellulose, and cryosectioned at 10 µm thickness onto indium-tin oxide coated slides (Delta Technologies, Loveland, CO).(3) Sections were washed to remove the carboxymethyl cellulose embedding material using ethanol and water(4) followed by a Carnoy’s solution wash protocol to remove salts and lipids. Antigen retrieval was performed to thermally denature the proteins prior to trypsin application with a pneumatic sprayer, as previously described(5) and samples were digested at 37°C overnight in a 100% relative humidity oven (Espec North America). Sample preparation for peptides was optimized to maximize signal for MALDI-1 and to maintain the spatial localization of peptides across the tissue. The MALDI matrix α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid was applied by pneumatic sprayer (HTX Technologies). Tissue sections were analyzed in positive ion mode using an Orbitrap Elite instrument equipped with a MALDI ion source (Spectroglyph), which included a second laser for MALDI-2 functionality (266 nm, CryLaS) as described previously.(6) Samples were analyzed at 50 µm spatial resolution with MALDI-1 and MALDI-2. Similar and adjacent regions of the same section were analyzed, and the ion images contained a ~15 000 in each region. Averaged spectra were deisotoped and peak picked based on a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) threshold of 10. For tentative peptide identification, a tissue homogenate of the same tissue used for IMS was analyzed using bottom-up LC-MS/MS proteomic protocols (2, 3).(7,8)  (1)  Brewer, M.; Allen, J.; Neumann, E.; Fogo, A.; Harris, R.; Gutierrez, D.; De Caestecker, M.; Spraggins, J. Collection and Post-Surgical Excision of Human Kidney Tissue through the Cooperative Human Tissue Network; 2019. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.7gehjte. (2)  Allen, J.; Brewer, M.; Neumann, E.; Gutierrez, D.; Decaestecker, M.; Spraggins, J. Freezing Fresh Tissue V.2; 2019. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.6wghfbw. (3)  Anderson, D.; Neumann, E.; Allen, J.; Brewer, M.; Gutierrez, D.; Spraggins, J. Cryostat Sectioning of Tissues for 3D Multimodal Molecular Imaging; 2019. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.7ethjen. (4)  Anderson, D. M. G.; Lambert, W.; Calkins, D. J.; Ablonczy, Z.; Crouch, R. K.; Caprioli, R. M.; Schey, K. L. Imaging MS of Rodent Ocular Tissues and the Optic Nerve. In Methods in Molecular Biology; Humana Press Inc., 2017; Vol. 1618, pp 15–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7051-3_3. (5)  Patterson, N. H.; Tuck, M.; Van de Plas, R.; Caprioli, R. M. Advanced Registration and Analysis of MALDI Imaging Mass Spectrometry Measurements through Autofluorescence Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90 (21), 12395–12403. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02884. (6)  McMillen, J. C.; Fincher, J. A.; Klein, D. R.; Spraggins, J. M.; Caprioli, R. M. Effect of MALDI Matrices on Lipid Analyses of Biological Tissues Using MALDI‐2 Post‐Ionization Mass Spectrometry. J. Mass Spectrom. https://doi.org/10.1002/JMS.4663. (7)  Gutierrez, D.; Allen, J.; Jenkins, Z.; Spraggins, J. LC-MS/MS Label-Free Proteomic Data Acquisition V.3; 2020. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bft3jnqn. (8)  Allen, J.; Spraggins, J.; Gutierrez, D. Automated, Rapid Preparation of Tissue Sections for Proteomic Analysis V.2; 2019. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.67nhhme.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant.9 The resulting lead proteins were digested in silico using Protein Prospector to obtain a database of all tryptic peptides. Deisotoped IMS peak lists from MALDI-1 and MALDI-2 analyses (with S/N of 10 or greater) were compared to the peptide data from the in-silico digestion. To deal with multiple peptide matches to a single MALDI ion, a simple scoring system was implemented that 1) ranked proteins in the LC-MS/MS dataset using sequence coverage and the number of identified peptides per protein normalized to molecular weight, and 2) ranked the mass accuracy of the MALDI-to-peptide matches as well as the number of potential peptides per protein for each match. The scoring system also considered the number of potential matches with the same mass difference. It was implemented here to provide tentative IDs to further compare MALDI and MALDI-2. To deal with multiple peptide matches to a single MALDI ion, a simple scoring system was implemented that 1) ranked proteins in the LC-MS/MS dataset using sequence coverage, the number of identified peptides per protein normalized to molecular weight, and intensity, and 2) ranked the mass accuracy of the MALDI-to-peptide matches as well as the number of potential peptides per protein for each match. The scoring system also considered the number of potential matches with the same mass difference. This identification strategy has not yet been validated and it possible that it is bias toward higher molecular weight proteins. It was implemented here to provide tentative IDs to further compare MALDI and MALDI-2.  (9)  Gutierrez, D.; Allen, J.; Jenkins, Z.; Spraggins, J. LC-MS/MS Label-Free Proteomic Data Analysis Parameters V.2; 2020. https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bfshjnb6.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI IMS) allows for highly multiplexed, unlabeled mapping of analytes from tissue sections. However, further work is needed to improve the sensitivity and depth of coverage for protein and peptide IMS. We demonstrate signal enhancement of proteolytic peptides from thin tissue sections of human kidney by conventional MALDI (MALDI-1) augmented using a second ionizing laser (termed MALDI-2). Proteins were digested <i>in situ</i> using trypsin prior to IMS analysis. For tentative identification of peptides and proteins, a tissue homogenate from the same organ used for IMS was analyzed by LC-MS/MS, and data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023877. These identified proteins were then digested <i>in silico</i> to generate a database of theoretical peptides to then match to MALDI IMS data sets. Peptides were tentatively identified by matching the MALDI peak list to the database peptide list based on mass accuracy (5 ppm mass error). This resulted in 1337 &#xb1; 96 (<i>n</i> = 3) peptides and 2076 &#xb1; 362 (<i>n</i> = 3) unique peptides matched to IMS peaks from MALDI-1 and MALDI-2, respectively. Protein identifications requiring two or more peptides per protein resulted in 276 &#xb1; 20 proteins with MALDI-1 and 401 &#xb1; 60 with MALDI-2. These results demonstrate that MALDI-2 provides enhanced sensitivity for the spatial mapping of tryptic peptides and significantly increases the number of proteins identified in IMS experiments.

### Keywords
Maldi-2, Imaging mass spectrometry, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Research Center Departments of Biochemistry, Chemistry, Pharmacology, Medicine Vanderbilt University Nashville TN, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Danielle Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Richard M. Caprioli
Mass Spectrometry Research Center Departments of Biochemistry, Chemistry, Pharmacology, Medicine Vanderbilt University Nashville TN, USA


