### Accession
PXD001553

### Title
Proteomic profiling of cathepsin specificity by FPPS

### Description
Identification of protease substrates and determination of their specificities can provide important insights into their function. In the past decade, several proteomic approaches for identification of protease cleavage sites were developed, each relying on various strategies for peptide labelling and enrichment. Those approaches often rely on several experimental steps, amongst others involving sample labelling and/or several cycles of chromatographic separation. Here we present a simple and straightforward approach for proteomic identification of protease specificities in a complex proteome background. By combining in solution isotopic labelling with Stage Tip fractionation we developed a simple method to profile protease specificities. We tested our approach by profiling the substrate specificities of the cathepsins K, L and S, three lysosomal proteases known to play important roles in numerous molecular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Fast Profiling of Protease Specificity (FPPS) Cell lysate preparation and in vitro digestion with recombinant cathepsins Breast carcinoma cells (MDA-MB-231) were grown to confluency, washed twice with PBS (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) and detached with Hank's based enzyme-free cell dissociation solution (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Detached cells were centrifuged and lysed on ice for 15 min with lysis buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% SDS, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) followed by a short sonication (10 pulses of 5 s each). Insoluble material was removed after centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 min. Next, the protein concentration was determined with the Bio-Rad assay, and aliquots containing 0.5 mg protein were frozen at -80°C until further use. Total cell lysates were dialysed (or buffer exchanged) in a microfilter device with a cut-off of 3,000 Da (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) against 50 mM phosphate buffer, containing 150 mM NaCl and 2.5 mM DTT, pH 6.0. Next, the pH was checked and the sample was transferred to a low-binding eppendorf tube (500 μg of total protein). Recombinant cathepsin K, L or S were then added to an approximate 1:100 enzyme/substrate molar ratio based on the assumption that the average Mw of a protein in the sample was 50,000 Da. Samples were then incubated at 37°C for 1 h before adding E-64 at a final concentration of 25 µM to block cathepsin activity.   In solution N-terminal labelling and sample preparation using microfilter devices The cathepsin-treated samples were transferred to a 500 µl microfilter device with a cut-off of 3,000 Da (Millipore) and the buffer was exchanged to 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8.5. The volume of the samples was adjusted to 400 µl with 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8.5, before 2 mg of an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of trideutero-acetate (AcD3-NHS, made in-house) was dissolved in the sample. The samples were incubated for 1 h at 30°C, after which the labelling step was repeated. In order to reverse partial labelling of serine, threonine and tyrosine side-chains (O-acylation), 10 µl of 50% NH2OH was added per sample and left to incubate at room temperature for 20 min. Urea was then added to the samples to a final concentration of 8 M and proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature. Cysteine residues were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. To quench unreacted iodoacetamide, the samples were incubated with 50 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature. After exchanging the buffer with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 by spinning the microcolumns in the centrifuge at 6000 x g for 15 min, the sample volume was adjusted to 250 µl with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8. Sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at a 1:100 (w/w, enzyme/substrate) ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. The next day, the peptide-containing flowthrough was collected by spinning the microcolumns in the centrifuge at 6000 x g for 10 min and concentrated down to 50 µl.  Sample fractionation using SAX-C18 StageTips The generated peptide mixture was mixed with Britton & Robinson buffer (20 mM acetic acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid and 20 mM boric acid), pH 11 (the pH was adjusted with 1 M NaOH if necessary). Anion exchanger tips were prepared by stacking 6 discs of Empore/Disk Anion Exchange (1214-5012) (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA) in a 200 µl pipet tip, while C18 tips were prepared by stacking 4 discs of Empore/C18 (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Peptides were fractionated on SAX-C18 StageTips with buffers at pH 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4 and 3 as described elsewhere and subsequently desalted on C18 tips with elution in 50 µl 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water. Eluted samples were concentrated to 15 µl by vacuum drying prior to further LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon nano-LC HPLC unit. The peptide samples were loaded on a C18 trapping column (Proxeon EASY-ColumnTM) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) and separated on a C18 PicoFritTM AQUASIL analytical column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Elution was performed using a 120 min 5-50% linear gradient of solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. During the gradient, full MS spectra were recorded and MS/MS spectra were obtained by CID fragmentation of the nine most intense precursor ions from the full MS scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 2 and 60 s exclusion time. Full MS spectra were recorded in Orbitrap at resolution of 30,000, MS/MS spectra were recorded in profile mode in the linear ion trap at resolution of 7,500. Precursors with nonasigned charge state were not chosen for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis, including database searches, was performed using the MaxQuant software package version 1.4.0.5 and the Andromeda search engine. The raw spectral data were searched against the human protein sequences in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (UniProtKB, Homo sapiens, canonical database containing 20,249 sequences, release of May 1, 2013) with trideutero-acetylation of peptide N-termini (+45.034 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as variable modifications and trideutero-acetylation of lysines (+45.034 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.02 Da) as fixed modifications. Database searches were performed with semi-ArgC/P as enzyme setting allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. A reversed database search was performed and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Peptides with peptide score above 100 and posterior error probability (PEP) score below 0.05 were retained as positive hits. Peptides with trideuteroacetylated N-termini, which were present in the cathepsin treated sample but not in the negative control, were considered to be product of cathepsin cleavage. The P1'-P4' positions were determined from the peptide N-terminus, whilst the P4-P1 positions were determined bioinformatically. The iceLogos were generated using frequencies of positional amino acid occurrence normalized to natural amino acid abundances in the human Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are important effectors of numerous physiological and pathological processes. Reliable determination of a protease's specificity is crucial to understand protease function and to develop activity-based probes and inhibitors. During the last decade, various proteomic approaches for profiling protease substrate specificities were reported. Although most of these approaches can identify up to thousands of substrate cleavage events in a single experiment, they are often time consuming and methodologically challenging as some of these approaches require rather complex sample preparation procedures. For such reasons their application is often limited to those labs that initially introduced them. Here, we report on a fast and simple approach for proteomic profiling of protease specificities (fast profiling of protease specificity (FPPS)), which can be applied to complex protein mixtures. FPPS is based on trideutero-acetylation of novel N-termini generated by the action of proteases and subsequent peptide fractionation on Stage Tips containing ion-exchange and reverse phase chromatographic resins. FPPS can be performed in 2 days and does not require extensive fractionation steps. Using this approach, we have determined the specificity profiles of the cysteine cathepsins K, L and S. We further validated our method by comparing the results with the specificity profiles obtained by the N-terminal combined fractional diagonal chromatography method. This comparison pointed to almost identical substrate specificities for all three cathepsins and confirmed the reliability of the FPPS approach. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001536 and PXD001553 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001536; http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001553).

### Keywords
Degradomics, Proteases, Cathepsins

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of biochemistry, molecular and structural biology Jozef Stefan Institute Ljubljana Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of biochemistry, molecular and structural biology Jozef Stefan Institute Ljubljana Slovenia


