### Accession
PXD002413

### Title
Mouse myoblast fusion -  Separating myoblast differentiation from muscle cell fusion using IGF-I and the p38 MAP kinase inhibitor SB202190

### Description
The p38 MAP kinases play critical roles in skeletal muscle biology, but the specific processes that they regulate remain poorly defined.  Here we find that activity of p38α/β is important not only for early phases of myoblast differentiation, but also in later stages of myocyte fusion and myofibrillogenesis.  By treating C2 myoblasts with the pro-myogenic growth factor, IGF-I, we were able to overcome the early block in differentiation imposed by co-incubation with the p38 chemical inhibitor, SB202190.  Yet, IGF-I could not overcome the later impairment of muscle cell fusion, as marked by the nearly complete absence of multinucleated myofibers.  Removal of SB202190 from the medium of differentiating myoblasts showed that the fusion block was reversible, as multinucleated myofibers were detected several hours later, and reached ~90% of the culture within 30 hours.  Analysis by quantitative mass spectroscopy of proteins that changed in abundance following removal of the inhibitor revealed a cohort of up-regulated muscle-enriched molecules that may be important for both myofibrillogenesis and fusion.  We have thus developed a model system that allows separation of myoblast differentiation from muscle cell fusion, which should be useful in identifying specific steps regulated by p38 MAP kinase-mediated signaling in myogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of tryptic peptides from cellular protein lysates. C2 myoblasts at ~95% of confluent density were incubated in DM with SB202190 [5 µM] and R3-IGF-I [1 nM].  After 48 hrs, cells were washed with DMEM, and medium was replaced with DM plus SB202190 and R3-IGF-I, or with DM and R3-IGF-I.  Protein lysates were collected 0, 4, 12, and 24 hr later: cells were washed twice with PBS; ammonium bicarbonate [50 mM] was added; cells were scraped from the plate, lysed by passage x5 through a 22 G needle, and probe sonicated (Model 60 Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) using a 4-watt setting with 3 x 5 sec bursts and 15 sec of cooling on ice in between.  Protein content in the suspension was then determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and BSA as a standard.  100 μg portions of each protein sample was then dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 50 μl of 8M deionized urea, 1 M Tris (pH 8.5), 8 mM CaCl2 and 0.2 M methylamine. Samples were then reduced by addition of 15 mM dithioerythritol (DTT) and incubation at 50°C for 30 min, alkylated by addition of 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubation at room temperature for 15 min in the dark, followed by additional 30 mM DTT to scavenge excess IAA and another 15 min incubation in the dark. Proteins were then digested by diluting the final urea concentration to 2M and addition of 4 μg of trypsin.  Following an overnight digestion at 37°C, samples were acidified by addition of 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid, solid phase extracted using Sep-Pak Light C18 cartridges (Waters, WAT023501), and 25 μg portions of peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Each digest was then dissolved in 25 μl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and labeled using 200 μg of freshly prepared tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent, dissolved in anhydrous ethanol using the manufacturer-suggested protocol, except peptide and reagent amounts were decreased by a factor of 4.  Following quenching using hydroxylamine, labeled samples were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation in preparation for mass spectrometric analysis.  Mass spectrometric analysis. TMT labeled peptides were separated by two dimensions of on-line reverse phase chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for sample loading and 2nd dimension reverse phase separation, and a Dionex NCP-3200RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for dilution of the 1st dimension eluent.  20 μg of pooled TMT-labeled digest was injected for 10 min onto a NanoEase 5 μm XBridge BEH130 C18 300 μm x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 μl/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  Peptides were then eluted by sequential injection of 20 μl volumes of 8, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 30, 50, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at 3 μl/min flow rate.  Eluted peptides were then diluted at a tee with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 12 μl/min flow rate and peptides delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100 μm x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 μm trap on a switching valve.  After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 μm x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were then separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 92 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nl/min flow rate.  Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific).  Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole.  Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.  Detailed instrument parameters are included in Supplementary File 1.

### Data Protocol
TMT data analysis.  RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT software and a Swiss Prot canonical mouse protein database, version 2014.05 (Swiss Bioinformatics Institute, Geneva, Switzerland) having 16,669 protein sequences.  Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 peptide N-terminus and K residues) and alkylated cysteines (+57.021 C residues), variable oxidation of methionine (+15.995 M residues), parent ion tolerance of +/- 1.25 Da, fragment ion tolerance of 1.0 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages).  Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery (1) and identifications were validated by Percolator software (2).  Only peptides having at least 6 amino acids with q-values < 0.05 (5% false discovery rate) were accepted.  TMT reporter ion quantification was performed using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm of the most confident centroid in MS3 scans.  Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matching only single protein entries were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts to generate summed reporter ion intensities for each protein.  A minimum of 2 peptides contributing to the total protein reporter ion intensity was also required to improve data quality.

### Publication Abstract
The p38 MAP kinases play critical roles in skeletal muscle biology, but the specific processes regulated by these kinases remain poorly defined. Here we find that activity of p38&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; is important not only in early phases of myoblast differentiation, but also in later stages of myocyte fusion and myofibrillogenesis. By treatment of C2 myoblasts with the promyogenic growth factor insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, the early block in differentiation imposed by the p38 chemical inhibitor SB202190 could be overcome. Yet, under these conditions, IGF-I could not prevent the later impairment of muscle cell fusion, as marked by the nearly complete absence of multinucleated myofibers. Removal of SB202190 from the medium of differentiating myoblasts reversed the fusion block, as multinucleated myofibers were detected several hours later and reached &#x223c;90% of the culture within 30 h. Analysis by quantitative mass spectroscopy of proteins that changed in abundance following removal of the inhibitor revealed a cohort of upregulated muscle-enriched molecules that may be important for both myofibrillogenesis and fusion. We have thus developed a model system that allows separation of myoblast differentiation from muscle cell fusion and should be useful in identifying specific steps regulated by p38 MAP kinase-mediated signaling in myogenesis.

### Keywords
Mouse, Myoblast, Differentiation, Fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences Paul L. Foster School of Medicine Texas Tech Health Sciences Center 5001 El Paso Drive El Paso, Texas 79905
OHSU

### Submitter
Sean Gross

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Rotwein
Department of Biomedical Sciences Paul L. Foster School of Medicine Texas Tech Health Sciences Center 5001 El Paso Drive El Paso, Texas 79905


