### Accession
PXD036953

### Title
The interactome of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) with RNA-binding proteins

### Description
We explored the interactome of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and the matrix of UV-immobilised FAD bound more than 3,000 proteins from SW-620 lysate. GO enrichment analysis showed that about 600 RNA-binding proteins were bound to FAD beads and, surprisingly, more than 40 proteins showed clear dose-dependent binding competition with nanomolar affinities indicating that their direct or indirect interaction with free FAD is both specific and strong. Among the few known consensus sequences for RNA-binding proteins, we selected the PUF motif 5'-UGUANAUA-3' to investigate whether FAD is binding the Pumilio homologs PUM1 and PUM2 in their RNA-binding pocket, as both these proteins showed dose-response behaviour in the FAD versus FAD-beads. Immobilisation of an oligomer containing the consensus sequence on NHS-activated Sepharose beads yielded PUM-beads that did enrich the Pumilio homologs. Oligomer vs FAD-beads and FAD vs PUM-beads together with the FAD vs FAD-beads dose-response competition indicated that the binding of FAD does not seem to influence the binding of the RNA. It is therefore most likely that FAD binding is allosteric for PUMs.

### Sample Protocol
NHS-activated sepharose beads were functionalized with custom-synthesized primary amine-containing RNA sequence (Sigma Aldrich) with 10 nM/mL beads coupling density. In brief, 0.5 mL of settled beads was washed three times with 5 mL deionized water, re-suspended in 0.5 mL (1:1) of 100 mM HEPPS (EPPS, Sigma Aldrich) buffer pH=8.5 NaOH, 10 μL of 500 nM RNA stock in 50 mM NaCl 1 mM EDTA was added and beads were incubated for 3 hours on end-over-end shaker at room temperature. Remaining free NHS groups were blocked with 100 μL of 1.5 % hydroxylamine stock in deionized water (incubation 1 h). Obtained RNA-loaded beads were washed 4 times with 5 mL of deionized water, then re-suspended 1:1 in deionized water and stored until further use. For competition pulldowns in 96-well plates, 500 μL of cell lysates (protein concertation in lysate adjusted to 5 mg/mL, 2.5 mg of protein per pulldown) were pre-incubated with 9 compound concentrations (ranging from vehicle DMSO to 100 μM) for 45 min at 4 oC in an end-over-end shaker. Affinity matrices were added to a 96-well filter plate (18 μL settled beads per well) and pre-equilibrated with 1 mL CP buffer (CP lysis buffer without phosphatase inhibitors, protease inhibitor and IGEPAL) and 2 mL of 0.4% IGEPAL CP buffer (CP lysis buffer without phosphatase and protease inhibitors, containing 0.4% IGEPAL detergent). Subsequently, compound-lysate mixtures were incubated with beads functionalized with the corresponding compound for 30 min at 4 oC in an end-over-end shaker. To assess the degree of protein depletion from the lysates, a second pulldown was performed with fresh beads and the unbound protein flow through of the vehicle DMSO control lysates.  The beads were then consecutively washed with 1 mL of 0.4% IGEPAL CP buffer, 2 mL of 0.2% IGEPAL CP buffer and 3 mL of CP buffer. Proteins were denatured with 40 μL 8M urea, 10 mM DTT in 40 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 (30 min, 40 oC) and alkylated with 4 μL 550 mM chloroacetamide (RT, 30 min). Urea concentration was diluted to 1 M by the addition of 250 μL 40 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, proteins were digested overnight with 30 μL of 10 ng/μL trypsin. Digested peptides were eluted, acidified with 7 μL 10 % formic acid (final pH≈3) and subjected to C18 StageTip desalting.  Competition pulldown samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometers coupled an online Dionex Ultimate3000.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed with MaxQuantv.1.5.3.30. Acquired raw MS data was searched against all canonical protein sequences annotated in Swissprot Human reference database using the integrated search engine Andromeda. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. IBAQ, label free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs (MBR) were enabled. All searches were performed with 1 % PSM and protein FDR. Other search parameters were set as default. For plotting of dose response competition curves (four-parameter log-logistic regression) an in-house built R pipeline was utilized. Relative binding for every compound concentration and correction (correction factor) for protein depletion was calculated as a ratio of LFQ intensity for every compound concentration to the DMSO control. The correction factor is calculated as a ratio of LFQ intensities from the second consecutive pulldown with the flowthrough of the DMSO vehicle pulldown to the LFQ intensities in the DMSO vehicle control.  EC50 values were derived from dose response curves. Apparent binding constants Kdapps were calculated by multiplying EC50 values with a correction factor (Kdapp = EC50 *correction factor). Targets or interactors were annotated manually if the resulting binding curve showed typical sigmoidal shape. Unique peptides and acquired MSMS spectral counts for each condition that showed a dose-dependent decrease  were used as additional level of evidence for binder annotation, together with competition curves based on protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fad, Photo-immobilisation, Competition pulldown, Pum-rna

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, 85354 Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354 Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Polina Prokofeva

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, 85354 Freising, Germany


