### Accession
PXD022278

### Title
Core Stress Responsive Proteome of Medicago truncatula

### Description
Here, we investigated the Core Stress Responsive proteome of Medicago truncatula in response to moderate drought stress.

### Sample Protocol
Air-dried protein pellets were dissolved in 250 µL urea buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM DTT and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic). After a 40 min incubation, protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay, using BSA as a standard. Aliquots containing 50 µg protein were diluted 4 fold with trypsin buffer (25 mM AmBic, 10% acetonitrile, 5 mM CaCl2) and alkylated for 90 min in the dark (RT) with 10 mM iodoacedamide. Concentrated phloem sap in AmBic buffer volumes corresponding to 50 µg protein was placed in Lo-Bind tubes and DTT, iodoacedamide and CaCl2 were added to 10 mM, 15 mM and 1 mM final concentrations, respectively. Samples were then incubated overnight at 37°C with Porosyzme immobilised trypsin beads (1:20, vol/vol; Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). After the addition of formic acid until 1% final concentration, samples were centrifuged in a microfuge at maximum speed for 10 minutes. Supernatants were desalted with C18-SPEC 96-well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried. samples, air-dried protein pellets were dissolved in 250 µL urea buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM DTT and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic). After a 40 min incubation, protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay, using BSA as a standard. Aliquots containing 50 µg protein were diluted 4 fold with trypsin buffer (25 mM AmBic, 10% acetonitrile, 5 mM CaCl2) and alkylated for 90 min in the dark (RT) with 10 mM iodoacedamide. Concentrated phloem sap in AmBic buffer volumes corresponding to 50 µg protein was placed in Lo-Bind tubes and DTT, iodoacedamide and CaCl2 were added to 10 mM, 15 mM and 1 mM final concentrations, respectively. Samples were then incubated overnight at 37°C with Porosyzme immobilised trypsin beads (1:20, vol/vol; Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). After the addition of formic acid until 1% final concentration, samples were centrifuged in a microfuge at maximum speed for 10 minutes. Supernatants were desalted with C18-SPEC 96-well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The canonical M. truncatula fasta file was downloaded from UniProt (access date: 6.12.2016). Identification and quantification were performed in MaxQuant v1.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with following settings: 20 ppm precursor tolerance for the first peptide search, 8 ppm precursor tolerance for the main search, 0.7 Da match tolerance for ITMS scanned fragment ions; maximum 3 of the following variable modifications allowed per peptide: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus, maximum two missed cleavages allowed, optimum retention time alignment function was determined in a 20 min window, identifications were matched between runs in a 0.7 min window. A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification and at least two peptides were required for protein identification. For label-free quantification (LFQ), one MS2 scan was required with a minimum LFQ ratio of 2. The FDR cut-off for PSM and protein identification was set to a stringent minimum of 1% identifications in the target decoy database (revert).

### Publication Abstract
During moderate drought stress, plants can adjust by changes in the protein profiles of the different organs. Plants transport and modulate extracellular stimuli local and systemically through commonly induced inter- and intracellular reactions. However, most proteins are frequently considered, cell and organelle specific. Hence, while signaling molecules and peptides can travel systemically throughout the whole plant, it is not clear, whether protein isoforms may exist ubiquitously across organs, and what function those may have during drought regulation. By applying shotgun proteomics, we extracted a core proteome of 92 identical protein isoforms, shared ubiquitously amongst several <i>Medicago truncatula</i> tissues, including roots, phloem sap, petioles, and leaves. We investigated their relative distribution across the different tissues and their response to moderate drought stress. In addition, we functionally compared this plant core stress responsive proteome with the organ-specific proteomes. Our study revealed plant ubiquitous protein isoforms, mainly related to redox homeostasis and signaling and involved in protein interaction networks across the whole plant. Furthermore, about 90% of these identified core protein isoforms were significantly involved in drought stress response, indicating a crucial role of the core stress responsive proteome (CSRP) in the plant organ cross-communication, important for a long-distance stress-responsive network. Besides, the data allowed for a comprehensive characterization of the phloem proteome, revealing new insights into its function. For instance, CSRP protein levels involved in stress and redox are relatively more abundant in the phloem compared to the other tissues already under control conditions. This suggests a major role of the phloem in stress protection and antioxidant activity enabling the plants metabolic maintenance and rapid response upon moderate stress. We anticipate our study to be a starting point for future investigations of the role of the core plant proteome. Under an evolutionary perspective, CSRP would enable communication of different cells with each other and the environment being crucial for coordinated stress response of multicellular organisms.

### Keywords
Medicago truncatula, Phloem, Drought stress, Csrp

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
University of Vienna, Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, Molecular Systems Biology,

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna, Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, Molecular Systems Biology,


