### Accession
PXD029252

### Title
Mimicked synthetic ribosomal protein complex for benchmarking cross-linking mass spectrometry workflows

### Description
The field of cross-linking mass spectrometry has matured to a frequently used tool for the investiga-tion of protein structures as well as interactome studies up to a system wide level. The growing com-munity generated a broad spectrum of applications, linker types, acquisition strategies and specialized data analysis tools, which makes it challenging, especially for newcomers, to decide for an appropriate analysis workflow. Therefore, we here present a large and flexible synthetic peptide library as reliable instrument to benchmark cross-linkers with different reactive sites as well as acquisition techniques and data analysis algorithms. Additionally, we provide a tool, IMP-X-FDR, that calculates the real FDR, compares results across search engine platforms and analyses crosslink properties in an auto-mated manner. The library was used with the reagents DSSO, DSBU, CDI, ADH, DHSO and azide-a-DSBSO and data were analysed using the algorithms MeroX, MS Annika, XlinkX, pLink and Max-Lynx. We thereby show that the correct algorithm and search setting choice is highly important to im-prove ID rate and FDR in combination with software and sample-complexity specific score cut-offs. When analysing DSSO data with MS Annika, we reach high identification rates of up to ~70 % of the theoretical maximum (i.e. 700 unique lysine-lysine cross-links) while maintaining a low real FDR of < 3 % at cross-link level and with extraordinary high reproducibility, representatively showing that our test system delivers valuable and statistically solid results.

### Sample Protocol
For lysine reactive cross-linker reagents (DSSO, DSBSO, DSBU, CDI) 9.3 mM cross-linker reagent stock solutions were freshly prepared in dry DMSO. 0.5 μL of stock solution was added to 1 μL of each peptide group in separate vials. Additional stock solution was added 4x every 30 min adding up to a total of 2.5 μL cross-linker stock solution. The resulting 3.5 μL reaction mix were quenched using 31.5 μL 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) buffer for 30 min and pooled to a single tube. The resulting mix was digested by addition of 5 ng trypsin/group over night at 37 °C. Finally azide protec-tion groups were reduced to the respective amines by incubation to 50 mM (final concentration) tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECEP) for 30 min at room temperature. Reduced peptides were pooled to a single vial, aliquoted and stored at -70 °C upon further usage. For aspartic acid and glutamic acid reactive cross-linker reagents (DHSO, ADH) 300 mM cross-linker reagent and 1.2 M (4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methyl-morpholinium chloride) (DMTMM) stock solutions were prepared in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5. 0.25 uL of cross-linker and DMTMM stock-solution were added 5x every 30 min to 1 uL of each peptide group. The reaction was quenched by adding trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 4 % (w/v) for 20 min fol-lowed by re-neutralization by addition of 50 uL 1M Tris pH 7.5 buffer. Peptides were pooled and digested as described above.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed against a custom shotgun database containing 171 E. coli ribosomal pro-teins at 1 % FDR level. For analyses using Annika or XlinkX, Thermo raw files were loaded to Ther-mos Proteome Discoverer 2.5 that and both search engines were used as node within that software. MaxLynx was used as part of MaxQuant v 2.0.2.0 by direct usage of Thermo raw files as well. For MeroX, raw files were converted to mzML and for pLink and xiSearch files were converted to mgf using MSCon-vertGUI v3.0.21084. Post processing was done using the graphical user interface of our in house developed tool IMP-X-FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome, Fdr, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IMP / University of Vienna
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Manuel Matzinger

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria


