### Accession
PXD027283

### Title
Identification of molecular machinery mediating ER to lipid droplet protein targeting

### Description
Lipid droplets (LDs) are organelles that store lipids and contain important metabolic proteins at their surfaces. The pathway for membrane-embedded hydrophobic proteins to reach the LD surface from the ER is largely unknown. Here, we find that many proteins, including key lipid synthesis and degradation enzymes, are excluded from forming LDs in the ER by the seipin oligomeric complex and target LDs via ER-LD membrane continuities that are established well after LD formation. We utilized systematic, unbiased approaches to identify key components of this ER-to-LD (ERTOLD) pathway. We find that specific membrane-fusion machinery, including membrane fusion regulators (Trs20 and Rab1), a tether (Rint1), and effectors (Syx5, membrin, Bet1, Ykt6), are required for late ERTOLD targeting of GPAT4 and other proteins that utilize this pathway. The fusion machinery components localize to the interface of LDs and the ER, and within the ER, appear to be organized at ER exit sites. Our data therefore uncover a novel mechanism for membrane protein trafficking for ERTOLD targeting via heterotypic organelle fusion between the ER and LDs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins pellet from lipid droplet enriched fractions were resuspended in 0.1 M NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich) and subsequently neutralized using 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid). Solubilized proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 7.5, at 37°C for 1 hour. Reduced disulfide bonds of cysteine residues were alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour in the dark. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiothreitol. Alkylated protein mixture were diluted 6-fold (v/v) using 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5 and digested for 16 hour at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington Biochemical) in a 1:100 trypsin to protein ratio. Digested peptides were desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM). Desalted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and injected onto an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a 500 mm self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) containing Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9 µm particle size resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatography separation was carried out using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5 – 40 % (v/v)) containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid over a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top ten method at a mass-over-charge (m/z) range of 300-2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 using the following setting: oxidized methionine residues and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Only peptides longer than 6 amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein is 2. The false discovery rate was set to 5% for peptide and protein identifications. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant software against the UniProt Drosophila melanogaster database containing 20,981 entries (December 2018). “Matching between runs” algorithm with a time window of 0.7 min was employed to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD??????. To identify proteins regulated by different genotypes, the MaxQuant output files were exported to Perseus 1.5.1.6. Known contaminant and decoy sequences were removed. Projection and clustering of the dataset was performed using principal component analysis to identify potential sample outlier. The cutoff of potential principal components was set at Benjamini-Hochberg FDR 5%

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane fusion, Lipid droplet, Protein targeting, Endoplasmic reticulum, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health


