### Accession
PXD011334

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of the proteome, phosphoproteome and N-linked sialylated glycoproteome of C2C12 myoblasts

### Description
C2C12 myoblast is a model that has been used extensively to study the process of skeletal muscle differentiation. Proteomics has advanced our understanding of skeletal muscle biology and the process of myogenesis. However, there is still no deep coverage of C2C12 myoblast proteome, which is important for the understanding of key drivers for the differentiation of skeletal muscle cells. Here, we conducted a multi-dimensional proteome profiling with TiSH strategy to get a comprehensive analysis of proteome, phosphoproteome and N-linked sialylated glycoproteome of C2C12 myoblasts. A total of 8313 protein groups were identified in C2C12 myoblasts, including 7827 protein groups from non-modified peptides, 3803 phosphoproteins and 977 formerly N-linked sialylated glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Myoblasts protein extraction, reduction, alkylation and enzymatic digestion C2C12 myoblasts were washed with ice-cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS) twice and scraped into ice cold PBS containing EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Cells were collected by centrifugation. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT supplemented with EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche). The cells were lysed on ice using a probe sonicator and centrifuged at 16 000 rpm for 10 min. Then, proteins were alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. After that, endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Japan) was added to the protein sample (1:50 (w/w)) and the solution was incubated for 3 hours. Then, the sample was diluted eight times with 20 mM TEAB (pH 7.5) and digested with trypsin (1:50 (w/w)) overnight at 37°C. The enzymatic digestion was stopped with 5% formic acid (FA) and peptide sample was cleared by centrifugation at 14 000 g for 15 minutes. The concentration of proteins and peptides was determined by fluorometric quantification (QubitTM-Life technologies).  Enrichment of phosphopeptides and N-linked silaylated glycopeptides Multiphosphorylated peptides and monophosphorylated peptides as well as N-linked sialylated glycopeptides were separated from non-modified peptides using a TiO2-SIMAC-HILIC (TiSH) workflow as described previously.  Desalting of peptides  Three modified peptide fractions (multiphosphopeptides, monophosphopeptides and deglycopeptides) were desalted using home-made P200 tip-based columns packed with Poros OligoR3 reversed-phase resin (Applied Biosystems). The non-modified peptides were dried and desalted on Oasis HLB plus LP extraction cartridge (Waters) as described previously.  High pH reversed-phase and/or HILIC fractionation of peptides Monophosphopeptide and deglycopeptide fractions were fractionated using HILIC. To increase the coverage of proteome, non-modified peptides were fractioned with a two-dimensional method (high pH reversed-phase and HILIC): the peptides were first fractionated with high pH reversed-phase. Briefly, the dried non-modified peptides were dissolved into 1.5% ammonium hydroxide solution (pH 11.3) (buffer A). The high pH reversed-phase StageTip was prepared by packing P200 tip with POROS Oligo R3 reversed-phase resin. After washing the column with 50 μl ACN and equilibrating the column with 50 μl buffer A, 100 μg peptides were loaded onto the column. The flow-through (FT) fraction was collected and the column was washed with 50 μl buffer A. The FT fraction and the washing fraction were combined as FT/wash fraction, which was dried for direct LC-MS/MS analysis. Then, the peptides were eluted from column with 50 μl elution buffer (X% ACN in buffer A, X=12, 15, 17.5, 60). Then, the four peptide fractions separated by high pH reversed-phase were dried and dissolved in HILIC buffer as described above for another round of HILIC fractionation.  Reversed-phase nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis All the HILIC-fractionated peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and were automatically injected and loaded on a 100 μm inner diameter x 3 cm trap column in-house packed with 5 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ. The peptides were then separated at 250 nl/min on an in-house packed separation column (75 μm x 18 cm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ), which was operated on an EASY-nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Mobile phases were H2O/0.1% FA (buffer A) and 95% ACN/ 0.1% FA (buffer B). Depending on different samples, the gradient was from 1% to 30% solvent B in 80 min (monophosphorylated-, deglycosylated- and non-modified peptides) or 110 min (multiphosphorylated peptides), 30-50% B in 10 min, 50-100% B in 5 min and 8 min at 100% B. The nano-LC system was online connected to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution (120,000 FWHM) in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 350-1400 Da. The 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected from MS for high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (collision energy: 28 V) if they were at least doubly charged. Fragmentation was performed at high resolution (30,000 FWHM) for a target of 1 x105 and a maximum injection time of 150 ms using a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Uniprot mouse reference database supplemented with known contaminants via Mascot (v2.3.02, Matrix Science) and Sequest HT search engines, respectively. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were applied, allowing no more than two missed cleavages for trypsin. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da). Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da), phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.9663 Da) for phosphopeptide data, deamidation of Asn (+ 0.984 Da) for deglycosylated data. To ensure a high-confident identification of peptides, we used the percolator algorithm (q value filter set to 0.01), Mascot and Sequest HT peptide rank 1 and a cut-off value of Mascot score ≥ 22 as well as Sequest HT ΔCn of 0.1. Moreover, a cut-off value of Xcorr score for peptides with charge states of +1, +2, +3 and +4 higher than 1.5, 2, 2.25 and 2.5, respectively, was considered for further analysis.  The phosphosites were localized by phosphoRS node within the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. N-linked sialylated glycoproteins were identified with the following criteria: 1) Unique N-linked sialylated glycopeptides contain a deamidated asparagine within the consensus motif for N-linked glycosylation (N-X-S/T/C; where X is any amino acid except proline). These peptides were termed as formerly N-linked sialylated glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
The C2C12 myoblast is a model that has been used extensively to study the process of skeletal muscle differentiation. Proteomics has advanced our understanding of skeletal muscle biology and also the differentiation process of skeletal muscle cells. However, there is still no comprehensive analysis of C2C12 myoblast proteomes, which is important for the understanding of key drivers for the differentiation of skeletal muscle cells. Here, we conducted multidimensional proteome profiling to get a comprehensive analysis of proteomes and PTMomes of C2C12 myoblasts with a TiSH strategy. A total of 8313 protein groups were identified, including 7827 protein groups from nonmodified peptides, 3803 phosphoproteins, and 977 formerly sialylated N-linked glycoproteins. Integrated analysis of proteomic and PTMomic data showed that almost all of the kinases and transcription factors in the muscle cell differentiation pathway were phosphorylated. Further analysis indicated that sialylation might play a role in the differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. Further functional analysis demonstrated that C2C12 myoblasts showed a decreased level of sialylation during skeletal muscle cell differentiation. Inhibition of sialylation with the sialyltransferase inhibitor 3Fax-Neu5Ac resulted in the lower expression of MHC and suppression of myoblast fusion. In all, these results indicate that sialylation has an effect on the differentiation of skeletal muscle cells.

### Keywords
Mouse, Skeletal myoblasts, Ptmome, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Xiulan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Fuquan Yang
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


