### Accession
PXD004061

### Title
Bathymodiolus azoricus host-symbiont proteomics

### Description
Bathymodiolus azoricus is a deep-sea mussel found in the hydrothermal vent fields of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It lives in symbiosis with sulfur- and methane-oxidizing γ-proteobacteria within its gills. In our study, we aimed to understand the metabolic and physiological interconnections between the symbiotic partners. For this purpose, symbionts and host were physically separated using density gradient centrifugation. This procedure yielded a symbiont-enriched gradient pellet fraction and a supernatant fraction enriched in host components. The cytosolic and membrane-associated proteome of both these fractions along with whole gill and foot tissue of the mussel were then investigated through 1D-PAGE LC-MS/MS. Proteins were quantified based on their spectral counts using the NSAF method. For efficient identification, sequences from evolutionarily related endosymbiotic and free-living bacteria and from bivalve host relatives were compiled into a comprehensive protein database. A total of 3178 host and symbiont proteins were identified from all samples.

### Sample Protocol
The following samples were processed for proteomics: a) soluble proteins from whole gill tissue, b) membrane proteins from whole gill tissue, c) soluble proteins from foot tissue, d) soluble proteins from the symbiont-enriched gradient pellet, e) membrane proteins from the symbiont-enriched gradient pellet and f) soluble proteins from the host-enriched supernatant. Approximately 20 μg of protein of the membrane and soluble protein extracts, respectively, was dissolved in 20 μl of sample loading buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 20% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% bromophenol blue). Proteins were separated by one-dimensional (1D) SDS PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gels, fixed and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (G250). The gel lanes were cut into 10 equal-sized pieces, which were destained with washing buffer (200 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate, 30% acetonitrile), and dried, before proteins were subjected to overnight in-gel digestion with trypsin. Prior to mass spectrometric analysis, the peptides were purified using Ziptips. Tryptic digests of the cytosolic samples were subjected to liquid chromatography performed on an EASYnLC with self-packed columns. Following loading and desalting at a flow of 700 nl/min at a maximum of 220 bar of water in 0.1% acetic acid, separation of the peptides was achieved by the application of a binary non-linear 70 min gradient from 5 to 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The soluble protein extracts of gradient pellet and supernatant samples were each analyzed in two separate measurements a) on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) in biological duplicates and also b) on an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) in biological triplicates. Soluble protein extracts from gill and foot tissue samples were analyzed only on the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (in biological duplicates). In case of the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos measurements, the LC was coupled online to the mass spectrometer at a spray voltage of 2.4 kV. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (R = 30,000), MS/MS data were recorded for the twenty most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not taken into account for MS/MS analysis. The lock mass option was enabled throughout all analyses. All membrane protein extracts were measured on the LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (biological replicates were pooled for this purpose). Tryptic digests of the membrane samples were analyzed the same way as the cytosolic samples with the modification that only the five most intensive precursor ions were chosen for MS/MS analysis in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification of host and symbiont proteins, all MS/MS spectra were searched against an in-house compiled protein database. The search was done on a SORCERERTM system (SageN, Milpitas, CA, USA) using the integrated SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 27, revision 11) without charge state deconvolution and de-isotoping. The following parameters were used: parent mass tolerance 0.0065 Da; fragment ion tolerance 1 Da; up to 2 missed cleavages allowed (internal lysine and arginine residues), fully tryptic peptides only, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification (+ 15.99 Da). The protein identifications were filtered on the basis of their SEQUEST scores implemented in Scaffold using the following thresholds: XCorrs of at least 2.5 (charge +2) and 3.5 (charges > +2), DeltaCN > 0.08 and at least two unique peptides for each identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
Bathymodiolus mussels live in symbiosis with intracellular sulfur-oxidizing (SOX) bacteria that provide them with nutrition. We sequenced the SOX symbiont genomes from two Bathymodiolus species. Comparison of these symbiont genomes with those of their closest relatives revealed that the symbionts have undergone genome rearrangements, and up to 35% of their genes may have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer. Many of the genes specific to the symbionts were homologs of virulence genes. We discovered an abundant and diverse array of genes similar to insecticidal toxins of nematode and aphid symbionts, and toxins of pathogens such as Yersinia and Vibrio. Transcriptomics and proteomics revealed that the SOX symbionts express the toxin-related genes (TRGs) in their hosts. We hypothesize that the symbionts use these TRGs in beneficial interactions with their host, including protection against parasites. This would explain why a mutualistic symbiont would contain such a remarkable 'arsenal' of TRGs.

### Keywords
Bathymodiolus, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Host, Symbiont

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institut für Pharmazie/C_DAT, Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 3, 17489 Greifswald
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Ruby Ponnudurai

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder, Stephanie Markert
University of Greifswald, Institut für Pharmazie/C_DAT, Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 3, 17489 Greifswald


