### Accession
PXD043729

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondrial proteome in mtran mutants

### Description
Mitochondrial proteomes from mtran double mutants were compared to wild type mitochondrial proteomes

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of isolated mitochondria were dissolved in 50 μl of 2% SDS in 100 mM TRIS buffer, pH 7.5 for 30 minutes at room temperature with vortexing at 500 RPM. Debris was removed by centrifugation for 3 min at 13000 RPM. Reduction and alkylation of proteins was performed using DDT and iodoacetamide. S-Trap columns (ProtiFi, Huntington, NY) were used for protein cleanup and digestion with trypsin using the manufacturer instructions with 3 hours tryptic digestion. Peptides were dried in a Speedvac and stored at -20°C before desalting on C18 columns (The Nest Group, Ipswich, MA) according to the manufacturer instructions. The peptides were dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid, quantification using Nanodrop and storage at -20°C. Approximately 400 ng peptides per sample were loaded to Evotips and injected on an Evosep One LC system (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) connected online with a Q-Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were separated on an 8 cm EV1109 column (Evosep) using the 60 Samples per day method. MS data were acquired in profile mode using data independent acquisition (DIA) with one full MS scan 350-1400 m/z followed by 49 windows DIA with isolation widths of 13.7 m/z and window centers from 471.5 to 1129.1 m/z. For full MS scans AGC target was 3e6, resolution 120000 and maximum injection time 25 ms. For DIA scans AGC target was 3e6, target resolution 15000, maximum injection time 22 ms and normalized collision energy 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML using Proteowizard version 3.0.21098 with vendor peakpicking enabled. The mzML files were processed in DIA-NN version 1.8 in library free mode against Araport pep 20220103. In DIA-NN enzymatic cleavage was set after KR with maximum one missed cleavage and cystein carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and N- terminal methionine excision as variable modification. Match between runs was enabled with automated mass accuracy estimation and other settings were set to default. The protein groups (pg) file from DIA-NN was used for data analysis and normalization of quantitative values was performed in NormalyzerDE using Cyclic Loess normalization.  Differential abundance analysis was performed using LIMMA in NormalyzerDE version 1.14.0.

### Publication Abstract
Plant mitochondria represent the largest group of respiring organelles on the planet. Plant mitochondrial messenger RNAs (mRNAs) lack Shine-Dalgarno-like ribosome-binding sites, so it is unknown how plant mitoribosomes recognize mRNA. We show that "mitochondrial translation factors" mTRAN1 and mTRAN2 are land plant-specific proteins, required for normal mitochondrial respiration chain biogenesis. Our studies suggest that mTRANs are noncanonical pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR)-like RNA binding proteins of the mitoribosomal "small" subunit. We identified conserved Adenosine (A)/Uridine (U)-rich motifs in the 5' regions of plant mitochondrial mRNAs. mTRAN1 binds this motif, suggesting that it is a mitoribosome homing factor to identify mRNAs. We demonstrate that mTRANs are likely required for translation of all plant mitochondrial mRNAs. Plant mitochondrial translation initiation thus appears to use a protein-mRNA interaction that is divergent from bacteria or mammalian mitochondria.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University


