### Accession
PXD018294

### Title
Characterization of NEK10 proteomic interactions under genotoxic stress

### Description
Genetic studies in Aspergillus nidulans identified a family of protein kinases (NIMA- Never in mitosis gene A) crucial for cell cycle progression in fungus. Highly conserved in mammals, various members of NEKs (Nima-related kinases) cross-function in signaling networks depicted in at least one of the following main biological processes: mitotic events, DNA damage repair and response and in cilliagenesis. Recent studies have shown new functions for NEK1, 2, 4 and 5 in mitochondria respiration, apoptosis and protein complexes. NEK10 is the least studied member of the Neks, nevertheless NEK10 has been reported in Neks recurrent functions: G2/M control, centrosomes and cilliagenesis. Besides, the downregulation of Nek10 was associated with poor prognosis and aggressive breast tumors. Given that Neks function relies on protein signaling networks, we investigated Nek10 protein interacting partners and Nek10´s biological roles through IP-MS/MS. Our mass spectrometry data identified new interactions for Nek10 proteomics including mitochondria functional genes: SIRT3, ATAD3A, ATAD3B and OAT. The number of mitochondrial partners was augmented more than 3-fold after zeocin treatment: FKBP4, TXN, PFDN2, ATAD3B, MRPL12, ATP5J, DUT, YWHAE, CS, SIRT3, HSPA9, PDHB, GLUD1, DDX3X, and APEX1. We focused on exerting Nek10 function on the mitochondria and we first confirmed Nek10 localization in the mitochondria and its interaction with mitochondria proteins. To extend our understanding in Nek10 roles, we depleted Nek10 in mammalian cell lines further denoting mitochondria-related phenotypes such as inhibition of mitochondrial respiration, loss of mtDNA amplification and defects on mitochondria morphology. Our proteomics and functional data contributes to the first evidences of Nek10 role in mitochondria and our overall work drive Nek10 unknown roads towards the avenues of modulating mechanisms of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with FLAG empty vector or FLAG-NEK10 for 48 hours and a subset of both pool of cells were treated with 300 μg/mL Zeocin for 3 hours. Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris 7,4, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 30 μg/mL DNase I, 1% Triton X- 100) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany). FLAG and FLAG-NEK10 lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M1 Agarose Affinity Gel (Sigma- Aldrich) during 16 h at 4 °C. Immunoprecipitated (IP) complexes using anti-FLAG were eluted with 3x FLAG peptide and lysates and IP samples were resolved in SDS-PAGE gels. For visualization of FLAG-NEK10 expression and immunoprecipitation quality, SDS-PAGE gels were immunobloted using anti-FLAG antibody and silver stained (Mortz et al., 2001).  For proteomic analysis, the immunocomplexes were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature protected from the light and digested with 20 ng/μl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The digested peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 30 μl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 4.5 μL was analyzed on an ETD enabled Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to the EASY-nano Liquid Chromatography (LC-MS/MS system (Proxeon Biosystem, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source as previously described by Aragao et al 2012 . Peptides were separated by a 2–30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL·min−1 over 30 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the source temperature was 275 °C. All instrument methods were set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 106. The resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000 and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s, and a repeat count of 1. An activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (msf) were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest search engine and searched against UniProt Human Protein Database (released on January 22nd; 2014; 88,429 sequences, 35,079,223 residues) with carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), as variable modification, one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 1 Da for fragment ions, using the FDR less than 1%.  The peptides identified in the mass spectrometry were considered only if (1) immunoprecipitated in at least 2 replicates of FLAG-NEK10 samples and (2) detected in none or only one replicate of control-FLAG immunoprecipitates. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed at the Mass Spectrometry Facility in the Brazilian Bioscience National Laboratory (LNBio-CNPEM, Campinas-SP-Brazil).  The proteomic data retrieved from IP-LC-MS/MS was submitted to the Integrated Interactome System. The the Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes were obtained as described previously and the subcellular localization (cellular component –CC) was defined according to the selected CC obtained from the annotation and interactome module. The protein network was assembled by Cytoscape 3.7.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Nek10

### Affiliations
LNBio
Laboratory of Signaling Mechanisms -LMS Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences-FCF University of Campinas- UNICAMP

### Submitter
PRISCILA SLEPICKA

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Kobarg
Laboratory of Signaling Mechanisms -LMS Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences-FCF University of Campinas- UNICAMP


