### Accession
PXD024984

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of Sertoli cells in buffalo

### Description
Sertoli cells provide nutrients and support for germ cell differentiation and maintain a stable microenvironment for spermatogenesis. Comprehensive identification of Sertoli cellular proteins is important in understanding spermatogenesis. In this study, we performed an integrative analysis of the proteome and phosphoproteome to explore the role of Sertoli cells in spermatogenesis. A total of 2912 and 753 proteins were identified from the proteome and phosphoproteome in Sertoli cells; 438 proteins were common to the proteome and phosphoproteome. In the proteome, ACTG1, ACTB, ACTA2, MYH9 were the most abundant proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that most of the proteins are involved in the processes of localization, biosynthesis, gene expression, and transport. In addition, part of proteins related to Sertoli cell functions were also enriched. In the phosphoproteome, most of the proteins are involved in gene expression and the RNA metabolic process; the pathways mainly involve the spliceosome, mitogen-activated protein kinase（MAPK） signaling pathway, focal adhesion, and tight junctions. The pleckstrin homology-like domain is the most highly enriched protein domain in phosphoproteins. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and protein kinases C (PKCs) were found to be highly active kinases in kinase-substrate network analysis. Ten proteins most closely related to network stability were found in the analysis of network interactions of proteins identified jointly by the phosphoproteome and proteome. Through immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence verification of vimentin, it was found that there were localization differences between phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated vimentin in testicular tissue. This study is the first in-depth proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of the buffalo testicular Sertoli cells. The results provide insight into the role of Sertoli cells in spermatogenesis and provide clues for further study of male reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
1Protein Extraction The Sertoli cells were digested with trypsin, centrifuged at 130 X g, and cold-PBS washed three times. Approximately 1x108 cells were taken and added to 10 mL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium vanadate, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 8.0) for protein extraction. An Ultrasonic Processor (Q700, Qsonica)was used for ultrasonic treatment of the samples, with the following parameters: output power, 15W; working time 15 s; interval time, 1 min. Sonication was repeated three times before samples were centrifuged at 12000 X g (4 ℃) for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  2Trypsin Digestion The protein samples were added to 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 55 ℃ for 30 min. Then 100 mM iodoacetamide was added and samples were placed in darkness at room temperature for 15 min to alkylate. Three times the volume of 20 mM HEPES (pH = 8) was added to dilute the alkylated protein solution and trypsin (1:100, w/w) was added for digestion at 37 ℃ for 12 h. Subsequent digestion occurred with trypsin (1:50, w/w) for 6 h. After that 2% of the sample peptides were used for proteomic analysis, and 98% of the peptides were used for phosphopeptide enrichment and phosphoproteome analysis. The peptide solution was vacuum dried.  3High pH reverse liquid chromatography The dried peptides were dissolved using solution A (2% acetonitrile aqueous solution) and separated by high pH reverse liquid chromatography (HPLC) on the Waters E2695 liquid chromatograph (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using a Waters X-Bridge C 18 column (4.6 mm inner diameter, 25 cm outer diameter, 5µm, 130 Å; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase A solution was a 2% acetonitrile aqueous solution, and the mobile phase B solution was a 98% acetonitrile aqueous solution. The mobile phase pH was 10, and the elution time was a total of 80 min. The proportion of the mobile phase B from 0 minutes to 55 minutes was 0% to 35%, and from 55 min to 65 min was 35% to 100%. Fractions from 10 to 60 min were collected and were finally combined into 12 fractions. Each fraction was desalted using a Zip Tip C18 column (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).  4Phosphopeptide enrichment A High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (A32993, Thermo Fisher) was used for the enrichment of peptides, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, Binding Equilibration buffer was used to dissolve the freeze-dried peptides. TiO2 spin tips were prepared, washed twice with Wash buffer, and Binding/Equilibration buffer was added before loading the peptides. Binding/Equilibration buffer, Wash buffer and water were added separately to rinse the tips. Elution buffer was used to elute the phosphorylated peptides from the tips. The enriched solution was vacuum dried and prepared for mass spectrometry.  5Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis The fractionated peptides (after dissolving in solvent A; 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) were separated using the Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark), with A PepMap100 C18 HPLC capillary column (75 mm inner diameter, 15cm, 3 mm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The separation of the peptides was performed using solution B for a 60 min elution gradient. The solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 98% acetonitrile) was 0% to 32% within 0 to 45min and 35% to 100% within 45 to 55 min. Peptide signals was analyzed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following parameters: the resolution of the first mass spectrum was 70,000; the scanning range of the first mass spectrum was 300 to 2000 m/z; Secondary mass spectral resolution 17500; the collision mode was HCD; Normalized collision energy 27; and dynamic exclusion duration was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
1Mass spectrometry data analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software was used for mass spectrometry data analysis using the Bos taurus UniProt database (37512 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000009136). The retrieval conditions were set as follows: first-order quality error ± 20 ppm; secondary mass error ± 0.02 Da; oxidation of cysteine (C); static modification - carbamidomethyl ethyl; dynamic modification - methionine (M); maximum number of missed trypsin cleavage bits was 2; the false positive rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification was set at 1%. Furthermore, phosphorylation (S/T/Y) was added as a variable modification in the phosphoproteome analysis.  2Bioinformatics analysis UniProtKD (http://www.uniprot.org/) database was used to analyze the main functions of identified proteins. DAVID software (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov; version 6.8)[20] was used for Gene Ontology（GO) analysis and Domain annotation. GO annotation is mainly divided into cell components, biological processes, and molecular functions. The regulatory pathways were analyzed using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/)[21]. The IGPS software package (http://igps.biocuckoo.org/ ) [22] was used to predict potential site-specific kinase-substrate relationships. String 11.0 software (https://string-db.org/)[23] was used to obtain the protein-protein interaction (PPI) relationships, and the obtained data was imported into Cytoscape 3.2 software to visualize the network. Venn diagrams were used to reflect the duplication between sets of data (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/).

### Publication Abstract
Sertoli cells provide nutrients and support for germ cell differentiation and maintain a stable microenvironment for spermatogenesis. Comprehensive identification of Sertoli cellular proteins is important in understanding spermatogenesis. In this study, we performed an integrative analysis of the proteome and phosphoproteome to explore the role of Sertoli cells in spermatogenesis. A total of 2912 and 753 proteins were identified from the proteome and phosphoproteome in Sertoli cells, respectively; 438 proteins were common to the proteome and phosphoproteome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024984. In the proteome, ACTG1, ACTB, ACTA2, MYH9 were the most abundant proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that most of the proteins were involved in the processes of localization, biosynthesis, gene expression, and transport. In addition, some of the proteins related to Sertoli cell functions were also enriched. In the phosphoproteome, most of the proteins were involved in gene expression and the RNA metabolic process; the pathways mainly involved the spliceosome, mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway, focal adhesion, and tight junctions. The pleckstrin homology-like domain is the most highly enriched protein domain in phosphoproteins. Cyclin-dependent kinases and protein kinases C were found to be highly active kinases in the kinase-substrate network analysis. Ten proteins most closely related to network stability were found in the analysis of the network interactions of proteins identified jointly in the phosphoproteome and proteome. Through immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence verification of vimentin, it was found that there were localization differences between phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated vimentin in testicular tissue. This study is the first in-depth proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of buffalo testicular Sertoli cells. The results provide insight into the role of Sertoli cells in spermatogenesis and provide clues for further study of male reproduction.

### Keywords
Sertoli cell, Lc-ms/ms, Buffalo

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresources, Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi, China
Guangxi university

### Submitter
Pengfei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Pengfei Zhang
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresources, Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi, China


