### Accession
PXD000514

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of olfactory cilia membranes

### Description
Membranes of olfactory cilia were isolated from mouse olfactory epithelia. Sample fractionation was carried out in parallel by two methods: Proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, the gel lanes were cut into bands and the proteins digested in-gel. Alternatively, proteins were digested in solution and peptides fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography. Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. Mass spectrometric data of all replicates were searched together using the software MaxQuant (version 1.2.0.18) and its integrated search engine Andromeda against the UniProt reference proteome set for Mus musculus (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/complete-proteomes; version of March 2, 2012, containing 54,231 entries) appended with a list of common contaminant proteins provided by MaxQuant. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages and 7 ppm initial mass tolerance for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification; fixed modifications were not included. Peptides and proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Sample Protocol
The isolation of cilia from murine OE was performed based on the Ca2+/K+-shock method described previously. Briefly, four OE per replicate were prepared from 10-week-old male CD1 mice (Charles River, Sulzfeld, Germany), washed in ice-cold solution A (20 mm HEPES, 140 mm NaCl, 3 mm KCl, 2 mm MgSO4, 7.5 mm d-glucose, 5 mm EGTA (pH 7.4)) containing Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Diagnostics), and resuspended carefully in solution B (solution A containing 20 mm CaCl2 and 30 mm KCl). Cilia were detached from OE by gentle stirring for 20 min at 4 °C and separated from the remaining tissue by centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 × g and 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, and deciliation was repeated twice. Supernatants were combined and centrifuged for 30 min at 26,000 × g and 4 °C. The resulting cilia-containing pellet was resuspended in 100 mm ice-cold Na2CO3 (pH 11.2). Following incubation on ice for 20 min, a membrane fraction enriched in ciliary membrane proteins was gained by centrifugation for 30 min at 100,000 × g and 4 °C and resuspended in 10 mm Tris (pH 7.4) containing 3 mm MgCl2 and 2 mm EGTA. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. Following enrichment of ciliary membrane proteins, 10 µg of protein were separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE on a 4–12% NuPAGE BisTris gradient gel (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions and visualized by colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Gel lanes were cut into 29 slices. Destaining, tryptic in-gel digestion, peptide extraction, and further sample preparation steps were performed as described previously. 10 µg of protein were precipitated using chloroform/methanol, resuspended in 40 µl of 60% (v/v) methanol, 20 mm NH4HCO3, and digested overnight at 37 °C using 0.5 µg of trypsin dissolved in 50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). Peptide mixtures were then dried in vacuo and reconstituted in 60 µl of SCX chromatography solvent A (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mm KH2PO4). SCX chromatography was performed using an Ultimate classic system (Dionex LC Packings, Idstein, Germany (now Thermo Fisher Scientific)) equipped with a polysulfoethyl aspartamide column (1.0 mm inner diameter × 150 mm, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD). Peptides were loaded onto the column, washed for 20 min with SCX solvent A, and separated using the following KCl gradient: 0–30% SCX solvent B (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mm KH2PO4, 0.5 m KCl) in 40 min followed by 30–100% SCX solvent B in 10 min at a flow rate of 50 µl/min. A total of 25 fractions was collected: 6-min fractions from minute 1–30 and 2-min fractions from minute 31–70. Peptide fractions were dried in vacuo and reconstituted in 15 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 5% (v/v) acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data of all replicates were processed together using the software MaxQuant 1.2.0.18 and its integrated search engine Andromeda. For peptide and protein identification, peak lists of MS/MS spectra generated by MaxQuant using default settings were searched against the UniProt reference proteome set for Mus musculus. The species was restricted to M. musculus because exclusively proteins from mice were analyzed. In addition, MS/MS data were searched against a list of common contaminant proteins provided by MaxQuant. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages and 7 ppm initial mass tolerance for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification; fixed modifications were not included. Peptides and proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of 0.01. At least one unique peptide with a minimum length of six amino acids per protein was required. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined to a single protein group by MaxQuant. Only proteins identified with a minimum of two peptides, one of which was unique, in at least two out of three replicates for either the gel-based or the gel-free dataset are reported. Gene ontology (GO) terms in the “biology process,” “molecular function,” and “cellular component” ontology were obtained using the Perseus 1.4.1.3. IBAQ values defined as the sum of all peptide intensities of a protein divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides of the protein (i.e. full tryptic peptides with a length of 6–30 amino acids) were calculated by MaxQuant. The subcellular localization of proteins was determined based on information provided by UniProt and the GO database. For the prediction of the number of TM domains, the Phobius server was used. Analysis of enriched GO terms was carried out using the Cytoscape plugin BiNGO 2.44. The significance level was set to p < 0.01 as determined by hypergeometric test and Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate correction.

### Publication Abstract
In the nasal cavity, the nonmotile cilium of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) constitutes the chemosensory interface between the ambient environment and the brain. The unique sensory organelle facilitates odor detection for which it includes all necessary components of initial and downstream olfactory signal transduction. In addition to its function in olfaction, a more universal role in modulating different signaling pathways is implicated, for example, in neurogenesis, apoptosis, and neural regeneration. To further extend our knowledge about this multifunctional signaling organelle, it is of high importance to establish a most detailed proteome map of the ciliary membrane compartment down to the level of transmembrane receptors. We detached cilia from mouse olfactory epithelia via Ca(2+)/K(+) shock followed by the enrichment of ciliary membrane proteins at alkaline pH, and we identified a total of 4,403 proteins by gel-based and gel-free methods in conjunction with high resolution LC/MS. This study is the first to report the detection of 62 native olfactory receptor proteins and to provide evidence for their heterogeneous expression at the protein level. Quantitative data evaluation revealed four ciliary membrane-associated candidate proteins (the annexins ANXA1, ANXA2, ANXA5, and S100A5) with a suggested function in the regulation of olfactory signal transduction, and their presence in ciliary structures was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we corroborated the ciliary localization of the potassium-dependent Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCKX) 4 and the plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase 1 (PMCA1) involved in olfactory signal termination, and we detected for the first time NCKX2 in olfactory cilia. Through comparison with transcriptome data specific for mature, ciliated OSNs, we finally delineated the membrane ciliome of OSNs. The membrane proteome of olfactory cilia established here is the most complete today, thus allowing us to pave new avenues for the study of diverse molecular functions and signaling pathways in and out of olfactory cilia and thus to advance our understanding of the biology of sensory organelles in general.

### Keywords
Olfactory sensory neurons, Lc-m, Cilium, Membrane

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, ZKF 1.055, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
Bioinformatics / Biostatistics

### Submitter
Gerhard Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, ZKF 1.055, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany


