### Accession
PXD048172

### Title
Identification of Protein Targets of S-nitroso-Coenzyme A-Mediated S-Nitrosation Using Chemoproteomics

### Description
S-nitrosation is a cysteine post-translational modification (PTM) fundamental to cellular signaling. This modification regulates protein function in numerous biological processes in the nervous, cardiovascular, and immune systems. Small molecule or protein nitrosothiols act as mediators of NO signaling by transferring the NO group (formally NO+) to a free thiol on a target protein through a transnitrosation reaction. The protein targets of specific transnitrosating agents and the extent and functional effects of S-nitrosation on these target proteins have been poorly characterized. S-nitroso-Coenzyme A (CoA-SNO) was recently identified as a mediator of endogenous S-nitrosation. Here, we identified direct protein targets of CoA-SNO-mediated transnitrosation using a competitive chemical-proteomic approach that quantified the extent of modification on 789 cysteine residues in response to CoA-SNO. A subset of cysteines displayed high susceptibility to modification by CoA-SNO, including previously uncharacterized sites of S-nitrosation. We further validated and functionally characterized the functional effects of S-nitrosation on the protein targets phosphofructokinase, platelet type, ATP citrate synthase, and ornithine aminotransferase.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate treatment with NO donors Proteome samples were diluted to a 4 mg/mL solution in PBS and divided into 2 × 0.5 mL aliquots. Each aliquot was treated with either the appropriate NO (or NO+) donor (CoA-SNO, GSNO, or PAPA NONOate) to a final concentration of 200 µM or an equal volume of the respective control buffer (0.5 M HCl control for CoA-SNO, HEN buffer for GSNO, or 0.01 M NaOH/PBS for PAPA NONOate) for 1 h at 37 °C. Excess NO donor was removed by filtration using a Nap-5 column (Cytiva). Proteins were eluted from the column using 1 mL PBS and aliquoted into two 500 µL samples.   Chemoproteomic labeling and enrichment of cysteine residues  Each 500 µL sample was treated with a 100 µM IA-alkyne probe using 5 µL of a 10 mM stock in DMSO34. The labeling reactions were incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Click chemistry was performed by the addition of either the Light-Azo-Tag (NO donor treated sample) or Heavy-Azo-Tag (control sample) (100 µM, 5 mM stock in DMSO), 1 mM TCEP (fresh 50× stock in water), 100 µM TBTA ligand (17× stock in DMSO:t-Butanol 1:4), and 1 mM CuSO4 (50× stock in water). Samples were allowed to react at room temperature for 1 h. The Azo-L and Azo-H samples were mixed, and precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 6,500 × g (10 min, 4 °C). Protein pellets were washed three times with cold methanol, then solubilized in PBS containing 1.2% w/v SDS via sonication and heating (10 min, 80 °C).  The SDS-solubilized, probe-labeled proteome samples were diluted with PBS to a final SDS concentration of 0.2% w/v. The solutions were then incubated with 100 µL of streptavidin-agarose beads overnight at 4 °C, then incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The beads were washed sequentially with one 0.2% w/v SDS/PBS wash, three PBS washes and three water washes with centrifugation (1,400 × g, 3 min) between washes to pellet the beads.  On-bead trypsin and Azo digestion   The washed beads were suspended in 500 µL of 6 M urea/PBS and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, from 20× stock in water). Samples were incubated at 65 °C for 15 min. 20 mM iodoacetamide (from 50× stock in water) was then added and incubated at 37 °C with rotating for 30 min. Following reduction and alkylation, the sample was diluted 3-fold with PBS and centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 2 min to pellet the beads. The beads were resuspended in a mixture of 200 µL of 2 M urea/PBS, 1 mM CaCl2 (100× stock in water), and trypsin (2 µg). The digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C. The digest was separated from the beads using a mini centrifuge (Chemglass Life Sciences), and the beads were washed three times with PBS and three times with H2O. Azo-labeled peptides were cleaved from the beads using 50 µL of 50 mM sodium hydrosulfite (Na2S2O4) rotating at room temperature for 1 h, and the supernatant was collected. 50 mM sodium hydrosulfite (2 × 75 µL) was added to beads two more times with 1 h incubations to cleave any remaining peptides from the beads. The beads were washed with 2 × 75 µL of H2O, and the washes were combined with the cleaved peptide fractions from above. Formic acid (17.5 µL) was added to the sample and stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.  LC/LC-MS/MS and data analysis for isoTOP-ABPP LC/LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Azo digests were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were then eluted onto a biphasic column (100 µm fused silica with a 5 µm tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman) using a five-step multidimensional LC/LC-MS/MS protocol (MudPIT)75. Each of the five steps used a salt push (0%, 50%, 80%, 100%, 100%), followed by a gradient of 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.25 µL/min, and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV. One full MS1 scan (400-1800 MW or m/z) was followed by 8 data-dependent scans of the nth most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
The generated tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against the Homo sapiens UniProtKB database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for iodoacetamide alkylation, and differential modifications of +456.2849 (Azo-L modification) and +462.2987 (Azo-H modification) were specified on cysteine to account for probe modifications. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. Quantification of heavy:light ratios (R) was performed using the CIMAGE quantification package as previously described, and ratios were normalized to the median ratio of the corresponding dataset34. Considered cysteine-containing peptides were required to be identified in two replicate datasets and have a heavy:light ratio within a 2-fold increase or decrease compared to the replicate value.

### Publication Abstract
<i>S</i>-Nitrosation is a cysteine post-translational modification fundamental to cellular signaling. This modification regulates protein function in numerous biological processes in the nervous, cardiovascular, and immune systems. Small molecule or protein nitrosothiols act as mediators of NO signaling by transferring the NO group (formally NO<sup>+</sup>) to a free thiol on a target protein through a transnitrosation reaction. The protein targets of specific transnitrosating agents and the extent and functional effects of <i>S</i>-nitrosation on these target proteins have been poorly characterized. <i>S</i>-nitroso-coenzyme A (CoA-SNO) was recently identified as a mediator of endogenous <i>S</i>-nitrosation. Here, we identified direct protein targets of CoA-SNO-mediated transnitrosation using a competitive chemical-proteomic approach that quantified the extent of modification on 789 cysteine residues in response to CoA-SNO. A subset of cysteines displayed high susceptibility to modification by CoA-SNO, including previously uncharacterized sites of <i>S</i>-nitrosation. We further validated and functionally characterized the functional effects of <i>S</i>-nitrosation on the protein targets phosphofructokinase (platelet type), ATP citrate synthase, and ornithine aminotransferase.

### Keywords
S-nitrosation; chemoproteomics; s-nitroso-coenzyme a

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA
Boston College
Massachusetts General Hospital 

### Submitter
Julia Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA


