### Accession
PXD040099

### Title
SWATH-MS based protein quantification for diagnosis in systemic lupus erythematous

### Description
The gold standard for diagnosing lupus nephritis, one of the common symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, is an invasive procedure, a Renal biopsy. To overcome the risk of invasive methods, we constructed a spectral library using biological samples that can be obtained non-invasively and analyzed it using the SWATH-MS method, a quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis 500 ul of urine sample was firstly lyophilized in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (LABCONCO, CentriVap, Kansas City, MO, USA) to reduce volume. Dried samples were reconstituted with 100 L lysis buffer consisting of 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.55, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were processed with S trap-based tryptic digestion as previously described methods except trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, and the peptide concentration was determined by absorbance at 205 nm wavelength on NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). 40 g peptide of each sample was allocated to individual analysis and dried. All the remining peptide were combined for spectral library generation.   Middle-pH reverse phase fractionation for in-house urine proteome spectral library The fractionation of combined sample was performed on XBridge C18 column (4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 130 Å and particle size 5 μm; Waters Corporation, USA), using Shimadzu Prominence HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Japan) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) as mobile phase A and 10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (pH 10) as mobile phase B were used. Sample was dissolved in 200 μL mobile phase A, and then injected into a 2,100 μL sample loop. A gradient of 5-5% B for 15 min, 5–45% B for 62.5 min, 45–60% B for 5 min, 60–60% B for 12.5 min, 60–5% B for 7.5 min, and 5–5% B for 20 min were applied, followed by washing the column with 100% and 50% mobile phase B for each 30 min. Through the fractionation, the eluents were collected every 30 second using FRC-10A fraction collector of the Shimadzu Prominence (Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). The resulting 168 fractions were mixed with concatenate manner to be 24 fractions. Each fraction were dried and stored at −20 °C until use. Before Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, the peptides (library samples and individual samples) from the iRT Kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) were added to all samples according to vendor instructions (PMID:22577012).  Mass spectrometry analysis for quantitative proteomics  For in-house urine proteome spectral library generation. The samples were analyzed using SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ System mass spectrometer with the following LC-MS/MS setup: For LC separation the ekspertTM nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) was used with the Eksigent micro trap cartridge (ChromXP C18CL, 5 μm, 120 Å) as trap column and the Eksigent column (C18-CL, 0.3 x 150 mm, particle size 3 μm, pore size 120 Å) as analytical column with the column temperature maintained at 40 °C. The samples were loaded onto trap column using 100% eluent A: 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. After 10 minutes, Peptides were separated by a 87 minuets using eluent A and eluent B: 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile (eluent B from 3 to 25% over 68 min, 25 to 35% over 5 min, 35 to 80% over 2 min, and kept at 80% for 3 min, 80 to 3% over 1 min and kept at 3% for 8 min) at 5 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) top30 mode, with 250 and 50 ms acquisition time for the MS1 (400-1250 m/z) and MS2 (100-1500 m/z) scans respectively, and 15 s dynamic exclusion. Rolling collision energy was used for fragmentation with charge states from +2 to +5. Other parameters were set as follows: ion source gas 1 (GS1) 15; ion source gas 2 (GS2) 20; curtain gas (CUR) 30; temperature (TEM) 250 °C; ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) 5500.  For individual samples, all mass spectrometry runs were operated in sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) mode using 100 variable windows, as per SCIEX technical notes. LC setup was performed under the same conditions except for the gradient time as described above. A gradient of eluent B from 3 to 25% over 38 min, 25 to 32% over 5 min, 32 to 80% over 2 min, and kept at 80% for 3 min, 80 to 3% over 1 min and kept at 3% for 8 min were applied. The SWATH parameters were set as follows: lower m/z limit 400; upper m/z limit 1250; window overlap (Da) 1.0; CES was set at 5 for the smaller windows, 8 for the larger windows and 10 for the largest windows. MS2 spectra were collected in the range 100–1500 m/z for 2.5 ms in high sensitivity mode and the total cycle time was 2.8 s.

### Data Protocol
in-house urine proteome spectral library generation  All DDA raw files were processed with MaxQuant (PMID: 27809316) v1.6.7.0 using Andromeda Search engine (PMID: 21254760) against human UniProt database (released in January 2020; http://www.uniprot.org). The following search parameters were used: specific trypsin was selected as the enzyme, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 at both the protein and peptide spectrum match (PSM) levels. Proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were used. other settings were kept at their default values. Spectral libraries were built from MaxQuant DDA search results using Spectronaut Enterprise + x64 (13.12.200217) with default settings.   SWATH Data Analysis The SWATH-MS data for individual samples were processed using DIA-NN 1.7.10 with in-house urine proteome spectral library. Spectra were searched with default settings, except m/z ranges were 400-1250 for precursor and 100-1500 for fragment ion. Protein quantities were obtained using the MaxLFQ algorithm (PMID: 24942700) as implemented in the diann R package ( https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Proteomics, Swath, Lupus erythematous

### Affiliations
Convergence Medicine Research Center, Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, Asan Institution for Life Science, Asan Medical Center, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Korea
prometabio co., ltd.

### Submitter
Jeonghun Yeom

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Convergence Medicine Research Center, Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, Asan Institution for Life Science, Asan Medical Center, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Korea


