### Accession
PXD006012

### Title
SILAC analysis of relative protein abundance in nuclei - AG3258 and AG11498

### Description
Premature aging disorders provide a lens through which to study the drivers of aging. In Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) a mutant form of the nuclear scaffold protein lamin A distorts nuclei and sequesters nuclear proteins. We used stable isotope labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate nuclear protein abundance in primary HGPS-derived cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cycling wild type fibroblasts were grown for five population doublings in media containing stable heavy isotopes of lysine and arginine. A parallel population of HGPS fibroblasts were grown in normal media. Fibroblasts were induced to enter quiescence by switching subconfluent cultures to growth media containing 1% serum for 5 days.  Crude nuclear extracts were prepared as follows. Cells were harvested in PBS, then swollen in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM Tris acetate pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and protease inhibitors), followed by mechanical lysis through a 25-gauge needle and syringe. The nuclei were pelleted and the supernatant retained for cytosolic fractions. The nuclei were resuspended in buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% sucrose, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM MgCl2, 20 ug/ml DNAse I, and 1 ug/ml RNase I. After nuclease treatment, nuclei were layered on top of a 30% sucrose cushion and pelleted. Protein content was determined by BCA assay. Equal protein masses of wild type and HGPS nuclei were mixed 1:1 before trypsin digestion and protein identification by LC-MS/MS. Samples were denatured in 8 M urea / 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5; reduced with TCEP; alkylated with chloroacetamide; and digested overnight with trypsin. Digestion was quenched with 5% formic acid. Samples were run on a Thermo Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS/MS. The digest was injected directly into a 30cm, 75um ID column packed with BEH 1.7um C18 resin. Samples were separated at a flow rate of 200 nl/min on an LC 1000. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 5-30% B over 280 min, an increase to 40% B over 60 min, and increase to 90% B for another 10 min, followed by 90% B for the final 10 min was used for the 360 min total run time. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5kV voltage at the back of the column. The Q Exactive was operated in data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 70k resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z and an AGC target of 5e6. The ten most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS analysis with HCD fragmentation of 25NCE, an AGC target of 5e6 and minimum intensity of 1e4. Maximum fill times were set to 120 ms and 500 ms for MS and MS/MS scans respectively. Quadrupole isolation of 2.0 m/z was used, dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec and charge states of 1 and unassigned were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification, quantification, and analysis were performed with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline-IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications; www.integratedproteomics.com). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter52 and searched with ProLUCID53 against the human UniPROT database. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification. Data were searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 600 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Data was filtered to 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance post-search. Identified proteins were filtered using DTASelect54 and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery rate to 1% at the protein level. Census55 was utilized for quantitative analysis of SILAC labeled peptides. Peptide ratios were calculated for each tryptic peptide with a profile score >0.8 as the peak area ratio of the heavy isotope-containing mass spectrum to light isotope-containing mass spectrum. Ratios were averaged for all peptides identified for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human progeria silac

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies

### Submitter
Abby Buchwalter

### Lab Head
Dr Martin W. Hetzer
Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037


