### Accession
PXD001101

### Title
Identifying novel targets of oncogenic EGF receptor signaling in lung cancer through global phosphoproteomics

### Description
Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase domain occur in 10-30% of lung adenocarcinoma. Leucine to arginine substitution at amino acid position 858 (L858R) accounts for around 50% of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sensitizing mutations. A second site mutation in the gatekeeper residue (T790M) accounts for around 60% of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs. We sought to identify the immediate direct and indirect targets of these mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma and their modulation by erlotinib, the first generation, and most widely used EGFR-directed TKI. We undertook stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), phosphopeptide enrichment, and quantitative mass spectrometry to identify dynamic changes of phosphorylation downstream of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring L858R or L858R/T790M mutations and their modulation by erlotinib inhibition. Phosphorylation at the majority of phosphosites identified exhibited no change upon either EGF stimulation or erlotinib inhibition. Only around 7% of phosphosites identified and quantified showed increased phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation in either cell line. However, while phosphorylation at 61% of these phosphosites decreased upon erlotinib inhibition in the TKI sensitive H3255 cells, only 24% of such sites exhibited decreased phosphorylation upon erlotinib inhibition in the TKI resistant H1975 cells. Top canonical pathways that were inhibited upon erlotinib treatment in sensitive cells, but not the resistant cells include EGFR, Insulin receptor, HGF, MAPK, mTOR, p70S6K and JAK/STAT signaling. We identified phosphosites in proteins of the autophagy network, such as ULK1 (S623) that is constitutive phosphorylated in these lung adenocarcinoma cells, but phosphorylation is inhibited upon erlotinib treatment in sensitive cells, but not resistant cells.  Finally, kinase-substrate prediction analysis from our data indicated that substrates of basophilic kinase families, AGC, CAMK and STE were significantly enriched and those of proline directed kinase families, CMGC and CK were significantly depleted among substrates that exhibit increased phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation and reduced phosphorylation upon TKI inhibition. This is the first study to date to examine global phosphorylation changes upon erlotinib treatment of lung adenocarcinoma cells and results from this study provide new insights into signaling downstream of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cell Culture and preparation of lysates Two lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, H3255 harboring EGFR L858R mutation and H1975 with EGFR L858R/T790M mutation were used in this study. Light media was made using light arginine and lysine, medium state contained 13C6 arginine and 4,4,5,5-D4 lysine and heavy media contained 13C615N4 arginine and 13C615N2 lysine. Upon completion of labeling, cells were serum starved for 14 hours prior to treatment. Light cells were left untreated as the control, the medium labeled cells were stimulated with 100 ng/ml EGF for three minutes and the heavy cells were treated with erlotinib to a final concentration of 100 nM for two hours before EGF stimulation. Cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate. Combined lysates from the three SILAC states were reduced and alkylated with 45 mM dithriothreitol and 100 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Modified sequencing grade Trypsin was used to carry out digestion of the lysate at 37˚C for 16 hrs. The digest was then acidified using 0.1% TFA and tryptic peptides were cleaned using solid phase extraction C18 column, lyophilized, and subjected to SCX or basic RPLC. 2. Fractionation of tryptic peptides: SCX was performed using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system with C18 guard columns and a polysulfoethylA SCX column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD; 200 mm  2.1 mm inner diameter, 5 µm, 200-Å). Lyophilized tryptic peptides were resuspended in SCX Buffer A (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer containing 30% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 2.7), loaded onto SCX column and eluted over a gradient of SCX buffer B (Buffer A containing 350 mM KCl); 0–50% buffer B over a period of 30 min followed by 50-100% B for 7 min and 100% B for 3 min. A gradient cycle time of 50 min was used and 24 fractions collected. Basic RPLC separation was performed with an XBridge C18, 250 x 4.6 mm analytical column containing 5µm particles and equipped with a 20 x 4.6 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA) with a flow rate of 1mL/min. The solvent consisted of 7 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) as mobile phase (A) and 7 mM TEABC and 90% ACN as mobile phase B. Sample separation was accomplished using the following linear gradient: from 0 to 1% B in 5min, from 1 to 10% B in 5min, from 10 to 35% B in 30min, and from 35-100% B in 5min, and held at 100% B for an additional 3min. A total of 96 fractions were collected during the LC separation in a 96-well plate in the presence of 50µL of 1% formic acid, dried and concatenated into 12 fractions.  3. Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) Enrichment Dried peptides were dissolved in solution A containing 80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoracetic acid and 3% 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, and incubated with titanium dioxide (TiO2) (Titansphere, GL Sciences). Peptides were eluted using 3% NH4OH in 40% ACN and immediately acidified using formic acid. The peptides were vacuum dried and re-suspended prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. 4. LC-MS/MS analyses  Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of SILAC labeled peptides obtained from SCX chromatography followed by TiO2 enrichment were carried out on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer interfaced with a Eksigent nanoflow liquid chromatography  system and an Agilent 1100 microwell plate autosampler. Magic C18 AQ 5 µm, 100Å from Michrom Bioresources was used for packing nanoflow reversed-phase columns.    Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (75 µm x 2 cm) and separated on an analytical column (75µm x 15 cm) at 300 nl/min flow rate for 75-120 min duration.  The data dependent LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out by acquiring FT-MS at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and MS/MS of eight most abundant ions in ion trap. Multistage activation mode was enabled with neutral loss masses of 32.66, 48.99 and 97.97. Fragmented ions were excluded dynamically for 90 seconds. Peptides obtained from basic reversed-phase chromatography followed by TiO2 enrichment were analyzed on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Elite interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1000 RPLC. The enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm) and separated on a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, nanoViper). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% ACN, respectively. Peptides were eluted from the column at 300 mL/min using the following linear gradient: from 2 to 8% B in 5min, from 8 to 32% B in 100min, from 32 to 100% B in 10min, and held at 100% B for an additional 10min. The heated capillary temperature and spray voltage were 275°C and 2.2kV, respectively. Full spectra were collected from m/z 350 to 1800 in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000, followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS scans of the top ten most abundant ions, using 32% collision energy and dynamic exclusion time of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the Maxquant software package (version 1.3.0.5) with the Andromeda search engine as well as Proteome Discoverer with Mascot and Sequest search engines (Thermo Scientific).  MS/MS data were searched against the Refseq 49 human protein database and quantification was performed using default parameters for three-state SILAC in MaxQuant. Parameters for data analysis included trypsin as a protease with two allowable missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. False discovery rate was calculated using a decoy database and a 1% FDR cut off was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase domain occur in 10-30% of lung adenocarcinoma and are associated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sensitivity. We sought to identify the immediate direct and indirect phosphorylation targets of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma. We undertook SILAC strategy, phosphopeptide enrichment, and quantitative MS to identify dynamic changes of phosphorylation downstream of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring EGFR(L858R) and EGFR(L858R/T790M) , the TKI-sensitive, and TKI-resistant mutations, respectively. Top canonical pathways that were inhibited upon erlotinib treatment in sensitive cells, but not in the resistant cells include EGFR, insulin receptor, hepatocyte growth factor, mitogen-activated protein kinase, mechanistic target of rapamycin, ribosomal protein S6 kinase beta 1, and Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling. We identified phosphosites in proteins of the autophagy network, such as ULK1 (S623) that is constitutively phosphorylated in these lung adenocarcinoma cells; phosphorylation is inhibited upon erlotinib treatment in sensitive cells, but not in resistant cells. Finally, kinase-substrate prediction analysis from our data indicated that substrates of basophilic kinases from, AGC and Calcium and calmodulin-dependent kinase groups, as well as STE group kinases were significantly enriched and those of proline-directed kinases from, CMGC and Casein kinase groups were significantly depleted among substrates that exhibited increased phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation and reduced phosphorylation upon TKI inhibition. This is the first study to date to examine global phosphorylation changes upon erlotinib treatment of lung adenocarcinoma cells and results from this study provide new insights into signaling downstream of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001101 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001101).

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Tki, Phosphoproteomics, Nsclc, Egfr

### Affiliations
Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, NCI, NIH
NCI/NIH

### Submitter
Udayan Guha

### Lab Head
Dr Udayan Guha
Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, NCI, NIH


