### Accession
PXD010614

### Title
Structure-Activity Relationships of ENMs

### Description
Current nano-SARs are often based on univariate assessments and fail to provide tiered views on ENM-induced bio-effects. Here we pioneered a multi-hierarchical nano-SAR assessment for a representative ENM, Fe2O3, by metabolomics and proteomics analyses. The established nano-SAR profile allows visualizing the contributions of 7 basic properties of Fe2O3 to its diverse bio-effects. For instance, while surface reactivity is responsible for Fe2O3-induced cell migration, the inflammatory effects of Fe2O3 are determined by aspect ratio (nanorods) or surface reactivity (nanoplates). These nano-SARs were examined in THP-1 cells and animal lungs, which allowed us to decipher the detailed mechanisms including NLRP3 inflammasome pathway and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 dependent signaling. This study provides new insights for nano-SARs, which may facilitate the tailored design of ENMs to endow them with desired bio-effects.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells (1×107) were exposed to 100 μg/mL Fe2O3 nanoparticles for 24 h, and  cell samples including control and particle treatments were harvested by centrifugation at 4 °C, 500 g for 5 min. Each cell sample was equally divided into two portions. The cell lysate is lysed in 1 mL cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4, 0.1% v/v Triton-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1% dithiothreitol, 8 M urea, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaF, 10% protease inhibitor cocktail)58, and probe sonicated on ice with 6 cycles of 10 sec ON/ OFF at a frequency of 20 kHz. After centrifugation at 20000 g for 10 min, each lysis supernatant was collected and added to 8 mL extraction solute (acetone/ethanol/acetic acid 50:50:0.1) pre-cooled at -20 °C. Protein extracts were collected by centrifugation at 20 000 g for 30 min after 24 h precipitation at -20 °C. After lyophilization and re-dissolution in 8 M urea, the protein concentrations in each sample were determined by a Bradford method. The proteins were denaturalized, digested and desalted according to a reported method58, 59, to prepare peptide samples and stored at -80 °C after lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
The resulted raw files were searched in MaxQuant (Version1.3.0.3) using Integrated Uniprot protein fasta database of human. Peptide searching was constrained using fully tryptic cleavage, allowing less than 2 missed cleavages sites for tryptic digestion. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein N-term (+42.0106 Da), and static modification was set as cysteine carboxamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da). Precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set as 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein were less than 1% and peptide identification required a minimum length of six amino acids.   Label free relative quantification of the proteins was performed in this study. In detail, ion intensities for the peptides constitute each protein were summed to generate a spectral intensity for the protein60. Summed intensities for the same protein obtained between samples were then used for one-way ANOVA analysis. The cell pathways and functions related to the identified differential proteins were explored by KEGG (http://www.kegg.jp/) and UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/help/uniprotkb) database.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing concerns over&#xa0;the possible risks of&#xa0;nanotechnology necessitates breakthroughs in structure-activity relationship (SAR) analyses of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) at nano-bio interfaces. However, current nano-SARs are often based on univariate assessments and fail to provide tiered views on ENM-induced bio-effects. Here we report a multi-hierarchical nano-SAR assessment for a representative ENM, Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>, by metabolomics and proteomics analyses. The established nano-SAR profile allows the&#xa0;visualizing&#xa0;of the contributions of seven basic properties of Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> to its diverse bio-effects. For instance, although surface reactivity is responsible for Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>-induced cell migration, the inflammatory effects of Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> are determined by aspect ratio (nanorods) or surface reactivity (nanoplates). These nano-SARs are examined in THP-1 cells and animal lungs, which allow us to decipher the detailed mechanisms including NLRP3 inflammasome pathway and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1-dependent signaling. This study provides more insights for nano-SARs, and may facilitate the tailored design of ENMs to render them desired bio-effects.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Sar, Proteomics, Enms

### Affiliations
Soochow University

### Submitter
Xiaoming Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoming cai
Soochow University


