### Accession
PXD018763

### Title
Clustering of Tir during E. coli infection affects Ca2+-dependent LPS internalisation leading to activation of pyroptosis in intestinal epithelial cells

### Description
Clustering of the Enteropathogenic (EPEC) Escherichia coli Tir effector, induced by its binding to Intimin, leads to pyroptotic cell death in macrophages. The effect of Tir clustering following EPEC infection of epithelial cells remains unexplored. In this study, we show that EPEC induces pyroptosis in an intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) line, in a Tir-dependent but actin polymerisation-independent manner, which was enhanced by priming with IFNγ. Mechanistically, Tir clustering induces rapid Ca2+ influx, which promotes internalisation of LPS, followed by activation of caspase-4. Chelation of extracellular Ca2+ or knockdown of caspase-4 inhibited cell death upon EPEC infection, whereas ATP-induced extracellular Ca2+ influx had the opposite effect confirming the regulatory role of calcium in the pathway. Additionally, IEC lines with low endogenous expression of caspase-4 were resistant to EPEC-induced cell death. We reveal a novel mechanism of LPS internalisation, following infection with an extracellular pathogen, leading to pyroptosis in IECs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and TMT labelling:  Cell pellets were solubilised in lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Catalog Number 78442), assisted with pulsed probe sonication. The samples were subsequently boiled for 5 min at 90°C, then subjected to a second round of sonication. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomasie Plus assay (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 100 µg of protein were prepared for trypsin digestion. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetymide (IAA). Proteins were then digested by adding trypsin at 75 ng/µl final concentration and incubating the samples for 18 h at room temperature, shaking at 300 rpm. The resultant peptides were diluted up to 100 µl with 100 mM TEAB buffer and labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT11plex) multiplex reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The quenching reaction was performed by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.27% (v/v) and incubating the samples for 15 min at room temperature. Finally, 11 samples per batch were combined in equal amounts to a single tube. Formic acid was added to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,0000 rpm to precipitate SDC. The supernatant containing TMT-labelled peptides was moved to a new tube and dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.   High-pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation and LC-MS analysis:   Offline high-pH reverse-phase (RP) peptide fractionation and de-salting were performed using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 mm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide, and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT-labelled peptides were reconstituted in 100 µl of mobile phase A and fractionated using a multistep gradient elution method at 200 µl/min as follows: 5 min at 5% phase B, for 35 min up to 35% phase B, up to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibration to 5% phase B. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate every 42 s to a total of 65 fractions, then concatenated into 28 fractions and vacuum dried. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 50 μl 0.1% formic acid, and 10 μl were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100Å C18 trapping column at a 10 μl/min flow rate. The sample was then analysed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min was: gradient for 90 min from 5% to 38% phase B and for 10 min up to 95% phase B, isocratic for 5 min at 95% B, re-equilibrated to 5% phase B in 5 min, and isocratic for 10 min at 5% phase B. Precursors between 375 and 1,500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 × 105, and IT (injection time) of 50 ms, with the top speed mode in 3 s, and were isolated for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). Collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 104 and IT at 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65%, and the AGC setting was at 1 × 105 with IT at 105 ms. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100 to 500 m/z with a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectra were searched for protein identification and quantification in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST-HT search engine. The spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum of 2 missed-cleavages, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion mass tolerance. The search considered static carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and TMT6plex modification of peptide N-term and Lys residues, as well as dynamic oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asp and Glu residues. The Percolator node was used to estimate the confidence of peptide identifications at 1% FDR, and was based on the q-value and a decoy database search. The spectra were searched against UniProt annotated reference proteomes of Homo sapiens and Escherichia coli. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT-11-plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at MS3 level. Quantification was performed using unique peptides only, with protein groups considered for peptide uniqueness.   TMT label sample 126 Uninfected 127N EPEC-0 127C EPEC-2 128N EPEC-1 TirAA EspZ 128C EPEC-1 129N EPEC-1 TirAA 129C EPEC-0+IFN 130N EPEC-2+IFN 130C EPEC-1 TirAA EspZ+IFN 131N EPEC-1+IFN 131C EPEC-1 TirAA+IFN

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cell line, Iec, E.coli, Msms, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


