### Accession
PXD031985

### Title
Conformational rearrangements upon start codon recognition in human 48S translation initiation complex

### Description
Selection of the translation start codon is a key step during protein synthesis in human cells. We obtained cryo-EM structures of human 48S initiation complexes and characterized the intermediates of codon recognition by kinetic methods using eIF1A as a reporter. Both approaches capture two distinct ribosome populations formed on an mRNA with a cognate AUG codon in the presence of eIF1A, eIF1, eIF2–GTP–Met-tRNAiMet, eIF3, eIF4A and eIF4B. The ‘open’ 40S subunit conformation differs from the human 48S scanning complex and represents an intermediate preceding the codon recognition step. The ‘closed’ form is similar to reported structures of complexes from yeast and mammals formed upon codon recognition, except for the orientation of eIF1A, which is unique in our structure. Kinetic experiments show how various initiation factors mediate the population distribution of open and closed conformations until 60S subunit docking. Our results provide insights into the timing and structure of human translation initiation intermediates and suggest the differences in the mechanisms of start codon selection between mammals and yeast.

### Sample Protocol
The reconstituted 48S AUG IC was treated with either 2 mM BS3 (ThermoFisherScientific) or 2 mM LC-SDA (ThermoFisherScientific) for 1 h at RT. For LC-SDA crosslinking, the complex was dialyzed against buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 95 mM KOAc, 3.75 mM Mg(OAc)2, 1 mM ATP, 0.5 mM GTP ) via a membrane filter (MF Membrane Filters, 0.025 µm VSWP, Merck) prior to crosslinking. LC-SDA crosslinked samples were irradiated with UV light (365 nm) for 5 min at 4°C. Crosslinking reaction with Bs3 or LC-SDA were quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 15 min. (Crosslinked) proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and subsequently alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide under standard conditions. Proteins were digested with the endoproteinase trypsin in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 in the presence of 1 M urea at 37°C overnight. The reaction was terminated with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v), the peptide mixtures were desalted on MicroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer’s instructions and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac. Peptides were dissolved in 50 µL 30% acetonitrile (v/v) in water /0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and crosslinked peptides were enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography (SuperdexPeptide 3.2/300 column, GE Healthcare) with a flow rate of 50 µl/ min in 30 % (v/v) acetonitrile with water and 0.1 % (v/v) TFA (Gomkale et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2020). Fractions of 50 µL were collected and early eluting fractions that contained crosslinked peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography-coupled -mass spectrometry (LC-MS)) analyses.  LC-MS/MS analyses. LC-MS analyses were performed as described (Gomkale et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2020). In brief, for each crosslinker crosslinked peptides were idenntified as technical duplicates using an Orbitrap QExactive HF Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (both ThermoFisherScientific) that was equipped with an in house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). First mass spectrometer (MS1) full scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an injection time (IT) of 60 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 × 106. Dynamic exclusion (DE) was set to 30 s and only charge states between 3 and 8 were considered for fragmentation. MS2 spectra were acquired of the 30 most abundant precursor ions; the resolution was set to 30,000; the IT to 128 ms and the AGC target to 1 × 105. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by pLink 2.3.5 (Chen et al., 2019) for the identification of crosslinked peptides against the full set of H. sapiens initiation factors and ribosomal proteins of the 40S subunit retrieved from the UniProt database (Bateman et al., 2021). False discovery rate (FDR) was set below 5% on spectrum level; crosslinked peptide spectrum matches (CSMs) were not evaluated manually. For each crosslinker identified crosslinks were first filtered to include only unambiguous crosslinks with ≥ 2 hits and a maximum -log10(E-value) ≥ 3 (from pLink 2.3.9) and then mapped onto our structural models of the open and closed h48S IC states using the software Xlink Analyzer 1.1.4 (Kosinski et al., 2015) and Chimera 1.15 (Pettersen et al., 2004).

### Publication Abstract
Selection of the translation start codon is a key step during protein synthesis in human cells. We obtained cryo-EM structures of human 48S initiation complexes and characterized the intermediates of codon recognition by kinetic methods using eIF1A as a reporter. Both approaches capture two distinct ribosome populations formed on an mRNA with a cognate AUG codon in the presence of eIF1, eIF1A, eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNAiMet&#xa0;and eIF3. The 'open' 40S subunit conformation differs from the human 48S scanning complex and represents an intermediate preceding the codon recognition step. The 'closed' form is similar to reported structures of complexes from yeast and mammals formed upon codon recognition, except for the orientation of eIF1A, which is unique in our structure. Kinetic experiments show how various initiation factors mediate the population distribution of open and closed conformations until 60S subunit docking. Our results provide insights into the timing and structure of human translation initiation intermediates and suggest the differences in the mechanisms of start codon selection between mammals and yeast.

### Keywords
48s initiation comples, Ribosome, Eif1

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass spectroscopy Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass spectroscopy Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


