### Accession
PXD041685

### Title
BioE3 enables the identification of bona fide targets of E3 ligases

### Description
The post-translational modification of proteins by ubiquitination is a highly regulated process that involves a dynamic, three-step enzymatic cascade, where more than 600 E3 ligases play a critical role in recognizing specific substrates for modification. Separating bona fide targets of E3s from E3-interacting proteins remains a major challenge in the field. In this study, we present BioE3, a novel approach for identifying substrates of ubiquitin-like (UbL) E3 ligases of interest. Using BirA-E3 ligase fusion proteins and bioUbLs, the method facilitates site-specific biotinylation of UbL-modified substrates for proteomic identification. We demonstrate that the BioE3 system can identify both known and novel targets of two RING-type ubiquitin E3 ligases: RNF4, known to be involved in DNA damage response and the regulation of PML nuclear bodies, and MIB1, implicated in endocytosis, autophagy, and centrosomal protein homeostasis. We further show the versatility of BioE3 by identifying targets of an organelle-specific E3 (MARCH5) and a relatively uncharacterized E3 (RNF214). Furthermore, we show that BioE3 works with HECT-type E3 ligases and identify novel targets of NEDD4 involved in vesicular trafficking. BioE3 is a powerful tool that enables identification of bona fide substrates of UbL E3 ligases and how they change with chemical perturbations, which may be useful for the emerging applications in targeted protein degradation (TPD). BioE3 may also be applicable for UbLs beyond Ub and SUMO, as well as other E3 ligase classes. The resulting knowledge can shed light on the regulation of cellular processes by the complex UbL network, advancing our understanding of fundamental biological mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE gel and stained with SYPRO-Ruby staning. Each lane was sliced and digested using standard in-gel trypsyn digestion protocol, with reduction and alkylation steps. Digested samples were dried on a speed-vac and resuspended on TFA 0.1%. A final step of ZipTip desalting procedure were done prior to sample injection onto a TIMS-TOF MS spectrometer coupled with a Evosep nano-chromatograph. 44 min (30 sample per day) runs were used.

### Data Protocol
Samples were identified and quantified using MaxQuant 2.0.2. Subsequent statistical analyses were performed using Perseus 2.0.3.1

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of E3 ligases play a critical role in recognizing specific substrates for modification by ubiquitin (Ub). Separating genuine targets of E3s from E3-interactors remains a challenge. We present BioE3, a powerful approach for matching substrates to Ub E3 ligases of interest. Using BirA-E3 ligase fusions and bioUb, site-specific biotinylation of Ub-modified substrates of particular E3s facilitates proteomic identification. We show that BioE3 identifies both known and new targets of two RING-type E3 ligases: RNF4 (DNA damage response, PML bodies), and MIB1 (endocytosis, autophagy, centrosome dynamics). Versatile BioE3 identifies targets of an organelle-specific E3 (MARCH5) and a relatively uncharacterized E3 (RNF214). Furthermore, BioE3 works with NEDD4, a HECT-type E3, identifying new targets linked to vesicular trafficking. BioE3 detects altered specificity in response to chemicals, opening avenues for targeted protein degradation, and may be applicable for other Ub-likes (UbLs, e.g., SUMO) and E3 types. BioE3 applications shed light on cellular regulation by the complex UbL network.

### Keywords
E3-ligases, Ubiquitination, Bioe3, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Technology Park, Building 801A, 48160 Derio, Spain.
CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Ibon Iloro

### Lab Head
Dr James D. Sutherland
Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Technology Park, Building 801A, 48160 Derio, Spain.


