### Accession
PXD009034

### Title
Defective Mitochondrial Lipid Oxidation Results in the Pathological Accumulation of Fat After Rotator Cuff Tear

### Description
Myosteatosis, also known as fatty infiltration, is the pathological accumulation of lipid that occurs in conjunction with atrophy and fibrosis following rotator cuff injury. Little is known about the mechanisms by which lipid accumulates in myosteatosis, but many studies have demonstrated the degree of lipid infiltration negatively correlates with muscle function and regeneration. Identifying how reduced mechanical loading activates molecular pathways that lead to myosteatosis could help to develop targeted therapies to improve functional outcomes after rotator cuff repair. Our objective was to use cutting compare muscle fiber contracility, proteomic, RNA sequencing and shotgun metabolomics along with bioinformatics to identify potential pathways and cellular processes that are dysregulated after rotator cuff teaar.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenised in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM N-ethylmalemide. Samples were desalted using Zeba desalting coloumns. 100ug of protein in 160ul of 25 mM Ammonium Bicaronate, 10ul of 1% (w/v) rapigest added for 10min at 80'C, 10 ul of 100mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride added and samples heated at 60 'C for 10min, 10ul of 100mM d(5) N-ethylmaleimide added and incbated in dark for 30 min. 10ul of 200 ug/ul solution of trypsin added and samples incubated overnight at 37'C. Sample was diluted 1:10 in 97% H2O, 3% MeCN and 0.1% Formic acid. 5ul of sample corresponding to 250ng was loaded onto Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystme coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Sample was resolved on the analytical coloumn over 120min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Data dependent acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full scan MS scan and the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan with an ion selection window of 3m/z and normailised collision energy of 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discovery and resulting files were searched against UniProt Rat sequence database using in house Mascot server. Search parameters used were peptide mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01Da, +1,+2,+3 ions, missed cleavages 1, instrument type ESI-TRAP. Variable modifications included were d(0) NEM, d(5) NEM of Cysteine, Arginine and Lysine, mono-, di-, tri- oxidation of Cys residues. Label free quantification was performed using PEAKS8 studio software, significantly changed proteins had -10LogP>20, at least 3 unique peptides and fold change > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Myosteatosis is the pathologic accumulation of lipid that can occur in conjunction with atrophy and fibrosis following skeletal muscle injury. Little is known about the mechanisms by which lipid accumulates in myosteatosis, but many clinical studies have demonstrated that the degree of lipid infiltration negatively correlates with muscle function and regeneration. Our objective was to determine the pathologic changes that result in lipid accumulation in injured muscle fibers. We used a rat model of rotator cuff injury in this study because the rotator cuff muscle group is particularly prone to the development of myosteatosis after injury. Muscles were collected from uninjured controls or 10, 30, or 60 d after injury and analyzed using a combination of muscle fiber contractility assessments, RNA sequencing, and undirected metabolomics, lipidomics, and proteomics, along with bioinformatics techniques to identify potential pathways and cellular processes that are dysregulated after rotator cuff tear. Bioinformatics analyses indicated that mitochondrial function was likely disrupted after injury. Based on these findings and given the role that mitochondria play in lipid metabolism, we then performed targeted biochemical and imaging studies and determined that mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced fatty acid oxidation likely leads to the accumulation of lipid in myosteatosis.-Gumucio, J. P., Qasawa, A. H., Ferrara, P. J., Malik, A. N., Funai, K., McDonagh, B., Mendias, C. L. Reduced mitochondrial lipid oxidation leads to fat accumulation in myosteatosis.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dysfunction, Lipidomics, Rotator cuff injury, Short chain fatty acids, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
NUI Galway
Physiology, NUI Galway

### Submitter
Brian McDonagh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian McDonagh
Physiology, NUI Galway


