### Accession
PXD041593

### Title
HAPSTR1 localizes HUWE1 to the nucleus to limit stress signaling pathways

### Description
HUWE1 is a large, enigmatic HECT domain ubiquitin ligase implicated in the degradation of numerous substrates and regulating diverse pathways including DNA repair, apoptosis, and differentiation. However, the mechanism by which HUWE1 acts in a pleiotropic manner to regulate a myriad of substrates is unknown. Recent work has established a physical and genetic interaction between HUWE1 and C16orf72/HAPSTR1, suggesting that HAPSTR1 positively regulates HUWE1 function. Here, we show that HAPSTR1 is both a HUWE1 substrate, and is required to localize HUWE1 to the nucleus. Quantitative proteomics across diverse cell types reveals that HUWE1 substrates are largely context specific. Transcriptomics following HUWE1 or HAPSTR1 loss of function reveals a broad transcriptional stress response. We show that nuclear HUWE1 impacts stress signaling pathways, including p53 and NFkB-mediated signaling, and is required for cell proliferation. Together, these data define a critical role for nuclear HUWE1 function that is dependent on HAPSTR1.

### Sample Protocol
Data were collected using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS Pro Interface and coupled with a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Peptides were separated on an Aurora 25 cm x 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (IonOpticks), and using a 60 min gradient of 5 - 25% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Each analysis used a TopN data-dependent method. The FAIMS Pro Interface compensation voltages were set to -50 and -70. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 350 – 1200, resolution 60,000, AGC target 3 × 106, auto maximum injection time, dynamic exclusion of 15 sec, and charge states of 2-6. TopN 20 data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired with a scan range starting at m/z 110, resolution 15,000, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 30%, AGC target 1 x 105 and the automatic maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (January 2021) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). Peptides were quantified using the MS1 Intensity, and peptide abundance values were summed to yield the protein abundance values. Resulting data was filtered to only include proteins that had a minimum of 2 abundance counts in at least two runs. Abundances were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework. Missing values in the dataset were imputed by random selection from a gaussian distribution centered around the mean of the existing data and with the mean relative standard deviation of the dataset. Significant changes comparing the relative protein abundance between samples were assessed by moderated t test as implemented in the limma package within the R framework. A protein was considered a ‘hit’ if it met our predetermined ‘hit’ threshold of P-value < 0.01 and fold change > 2.

### Publication Abstract
HUWE1 is a large, enigmatic HECT-domain ubiquitin ligase implicated in the regulation of diverse pathways, including DNA repair, apoptosis, and differentiation. How HUWE1 engages its structurally diverse substrates and how HUWE1 activity is regulated are unknown. Using unbiased quantitative proteomics, we find that HUWE1 targets substrates in a largely cell-type-specific manner. However, we identify C16orf72/HAPSTR1 as a robust HUWE1 substrate in multiple cell lines. Previously established physical and genetic interactions between HUWE1 and HAPSTR1 suggest that HAPSTR1 positively regulates HUWE1 function. Here, we show that HAPSTR1 is required for HUWE1 nuclear localization and nuclear substrate targeting. Nuclear HUWE1 is required for both cell proliferation and modulation of stress signaling pathways, including p53 and nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B)-mediated signaling. Combined, our results define a role for HAPSTR1 in gating critical nuclear HUWE1 functions.

### Keywords
Hapstr1, Ubiquitin, Ligase, Huwe1, Substrates

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


