### Accession
PXD024569

### Title
Identification of specific proteins and metabolic networks associated with sucrose accumulation in sugarcane

### Description
The rate of improvement of sugar content in sugarcane remains low for decades worldwide. Our previous transcriptome studies provided an atlas of sucrose accumulation-related gene expression but little is known about proteins involved. Here this knowledge gap is addressed by a proteomic analysis of experimentally altered sucrose accumulation in sugarcane. Analysis of stem proteomes of ripener ethephon-treated high- and low-sugar genotypes had identified 2983 proteins of which 139 were significantly differentially expressed (DEPs). These DEPs were found to be involved in sugar metabolism-related processes with 25 of them may have a regulatory role in sucrose accumulation. The key proteins identified include UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase associated with amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism; those involved in carbon fixation; and fructokinase, β-D-glucosidase and α-glucan phosphorylase involved in starch and sucrose metabolism. Distinct genotype- and ethephon-dependent DEP expression was evident providing new insights on one of the most intractable sugarcane traits to breeding.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Plant materials and sample collection  Developing stalk tissues, 20 cm above the node attached to the 2nd youngest fully expanded leaf, which is highly photosynthetically active, were sampled on day 7 following ethylene treatment. They are, namely, RCK and R400 for samples from ROC22 plants treated with water or 400 mg/L Ethephon, respectively; MCK and M400 for samples from GT86-877 plants treated with water or 400 mg/L Ethephon, respectively. Mixture of six single plants was collected as one biological replicate. Samples of three biological replicates were collected from three separate replicates in each treatment and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteome analyisis.  2.2. Sample preparation Sampled tissues (0.5 g per sample) were ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder and mixed with 1.5 ml of pre-cooled 90% acetone solution (containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% dithiothreitol; DTT) and kept the mixture at -20 ℃ for 2 h for protein precipitatation. They were then centrifuged at 10000 g for 30 min at 4 ℃ and the precipitate collected was resuspended in pre-cooled 90% acetone solution (same composition as above). The suspension was incubated at -20 ℃ for 1 h before centrifuging at 10000 g for 30 min at 4 ℃. The resulting precipitate was washed 3 times by following the same procedure described above, i.e. resuspending the precipitate in pre-cooled 90% acetone solution (same composition as above) and recovering the precipitate by centrifugation. The washed precipitate was re-dissolved in 300 μl lysis buffer (500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB) and centrifuged at 10000 g for 5 min at 4 ℃, to obtain a clear protein solution. Protein content of the final preparation was determined by Bradford BCA Protein Assay Kit.  2.3. Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling Aliquots of above protein solution (100 μg protein per sample) were transferred to a new 2 mL Eppendorf tube and the volume was adjusted to 100 μL with 100 mM TEAB. To this solution 11μL 1 M DTT was added and the mixture was incubated at 37℃ for 1 h. After incubation samples were transferred to 10 KDa ultrafiltration tube (Millipore, MA, USA) and centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 min. Samples were then mixed with 120 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 20 min under dark at room temperature. For each sample, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone, and then the precipitated proteins were re-dissolved in 100 μL TEAB, digested with (1:50 v/v) sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled with iTRAQ.  2.4 High pH reverse phase separation The peptide mixture was re-dissovled in the buffer A (buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 μm) (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient. Starting from 5% buffer B to 45% buffer B in 40 min (buffer B: 20 mM ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column was re-equilibrated at 5% buffer B conditions for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 1 mL/min with its temperature set at 30℃. Twelve fractions were collected and each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator.  2.5. Low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis The fractions were resuspended in 30 μl buffer C (buffer C: 0.1% formic acid), separated by nanoLC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiments were performed on a Nano Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactives) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source. Five μl peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm) with a flow of 10 μl/min for 3 min and subsequently separated in the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15 cm) with a linear gradient from 2% buffer D to 40% buffer D in 100 min (buffer D: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions (2% buffer D) for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min with its temperature set at 40℃. The electrospray voltage of 1.9 kV versus the inlet of the massspectrometer was used.

### Data Protocol
2.6. Database searching Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state de-convoluted and de-isotoped by Mascot Distiller version 2.6. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the customized RNA-Seq database (86944 entries) produced in our previous work (Chen et al. 2019). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and iTRAQ8plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the n-terminus and iTRAQ 8-plex of tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  2.7. Criteria for protein identification Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  2.8. Quantitative data analysis and normalization  Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantitate peptide and protein identifications. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA (Oberg et al. 2008). Median values were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 198265 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 171173 (86%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying Mann-Whitney Test with significance level adjusted by Benjamini-Hochberg Correction and fold change over 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sugarcane; proteomics; differential expression; proteins; sucrose accumulation; sugar metabolism

### Affiliations
Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Dong-Liang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Dong-Liang Huang
Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences


