### Accession
PXD029983

### Title
De novo variants of CSNK2B cause a new intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome by disrupting the canonical Wnt signaling pathway

### Description
Main purpose of the project is to delineate the consequences of de novo variants identified in patients manifesting intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome. To this end, we investigated the effects of mutated CK2β by performing phosphor proteome profiling of patient derived LCLs along with the age and gender matched control.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 3 mg of protein lysates obtained from CSNK2B mutated patient (Case 1) LCLs along with wild type (3 biological replicates of both) LCLs were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment (PPE). The isolation of phosphopeptides was carried out by a previously described method with some modifications. Further, the lysates were incubated with DTT and iodoacetamide and digested overnight using trypsin (1:50 w/w ratio). Then, the peptides were desalted and passed through a polysulfoethyl column (4.6 mm ID×20 cm length, 5-μm particle size, 300-Å pore size; PolyLC, Switzerland) for cation exchange fractionation. The gradient being used in this experiment was: solvent A [composition given below] (100%) and solvent B (0%) for 2 min; followed by addition of solvent B (0-20%) for 40 min; increasing the concentration of solvent B (20-100%) for 5 min; finally, 100% solvent B held for 5 min was processed. The composition of solvent A was: 5 mM KH2PO4 25% ACN, pH 2.7 and solvent B was: 5 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, 350 mM KCl, pH 2.7). Based on the number of peptides, the fractions of 5 up to 10 was being collected. PPE was performed using FeNTA-IMAC columns (Pierce). Cleaning of phosphopeptides was performed using ZipTips followed by their submission to nLC-MS/MS analyses on LTQ Orbitrap machine. The fractionation of peptides was carried out via nLC on a 150 mm C18 column (75 µm internal diameter; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using an EASY nLC-II system (Proxeon/Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nl/min flowrate for 90 minutes (5%–7% ACN in 5 minutes; 7%–45% in 60 minutes; 45%–50%in 5minutes; 50%–97% in 5 minutes; wash at 100%). Here the composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid dissolved in H2O and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid diluted in acetonitrile. The survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–2000) of intact peptides was carried out in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 using m/z 445.12003 as a lock mass. The mass spectrometer was used for spectra in data-dependent automatic mode (automatic switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition). Further, dynamic exclusion was enabled for 1 min. The five most intense ions having a charge state, z ≥ 2 were isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap; this was carried out by collision induced dissociation fragmentation. However, the peptides having unknown z value were not being fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda, a peptide search engine, was used for searching the RAW files followed by searching against the UniProtKB database. The identification criteria of peptides were: 2 miscleavages, minimum peptide size of 7 amino acids; variable modifications were methionine oxidation and Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine phosphorylation, protein N-terminal acetylation; fixed modifications were alkylation of Cysteine. Furthermore, up to three post-translational variable modifications were selected. For detecting parent ions, first search mass accuracy was 20 ppm, and second being 4.5 ppm. Fragment ion match was 0.5 Da. Phosphorylation sites with a localization probability > 0.75 (class I phosphorylation sites) and a delta score > 40 were preferably selected and used for further analyses. Other analyses were performed as described elsewhere. To generate the position weighted matrices iceLogo was used. The normal amino acid distribution of the respective species were considered as background. Furthermore, netphorest 2.0 was used in order to predict potential kinase substrates. NCBI HomoloGene groups (CPhos program) was used for identifying the conservation. Gene ontology enrichment was carried out by GORilla using the mouse homologous gene symbols which was taken from CPhos/HomoloGene. P-Value threshold was 10-3, and FDR corrected q-values were reported. Sequences were predicted by using different calculation methods as described elsewhere; predict protein suite https://www.predictprotein.org/, IUPRED http://iupred.enzim.hu/, and FoldIndex http://bip.weizmann.ac.il/fldbin/findex were used in this study. The protein region denominated “intrinsically disordered” in all prediction methods was chosen. For the correlational analyses of phosphorylation site abundance Perseus was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csnk2b, Ck2β and ck2

### Affiliations
Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Sajid Hussain
Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne


