### Accession
PXD011731

### Title
Differential modification of the C. elegans proteome in response to acute and chronic gamma radiation: link with reproduction decline

### Description
Ecosystems are chronically exposed to ionizing radiations. But environmental risk assessment of chronic exposure suffers from a lack of knowledge. Extrapolation of data from acute to chronic exposure is not always relevant, and can lead to uncertainties. In fact, effects could be different between the two irradiation modes, especially regarding reproduction endpoint, which is an ecologically relevant parameter . The free living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is a particularly appropriate model organism to address this proteomic issues. With its fully sequenced genome and its short life cycle, C. elegans has been successfully used to study acute and chronic irradiation effects and their consequences on germline development and hatching. Results showed that a decrease of the number of progeny associated with a decrease of hatching success occurred from and above 30 Gy of acute irradiation.. In the present study, we decided to refine the understanding of molecular mechanisms of acute and chronic irradiation by a global proteome analysis. To do so, C. elegans were exposed to 3 common cumulated doses between acute and chronic exposure. These 3 doses, lower than the doses for which an effect on the reproduction was shown, were susceptible to allow us to find early and sensitive biomarkers of a reproduction decline. After exposure, global modification of the proteome expression was studied using a label free LC-MS/MS proteomic approach. Our objectives were to test the following hypotheses: (1) whether or not proteome expression varied with the dose, and with the irradiation mode; (2) if proteome expression modification was associated with effects on reproduction, with potential direct implications for ecological risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans maintenance and age synchronization The wild-type N2 strain of C. elegans was used in this study. Populations were maintained at 19°C and 80% of humidity on 9cm petri dishes poured with NGM Medium and seeded with Escherichia Coli OP50  as food source. 100 gravid worms were randomly selected from the stock population and placed on 9 cm petri dishes. 96 h later, eggs were separated from adult worms by a bleaching procedure and collected embryos were allowed to grow in a control incubator for 96 h. The gravid worms were separated from eggs already laid by a sucrose gradient (3 – 7 %), and then re-synchronized by a bleaching procedure in order to collect the eggs in utero synchronized over 3 h.   Irradiation Irradiations were performed in control incubators (19 °C and 80 % humidity). Nematode plates were placed perpendicularly to the cesium-137 source to obtain a homogeneous dose rate at the surface of the plate. Radio Photo Luminescent dosimeters were placed on each experimental unit in order to measure the delivered cumulated dose. At the end of each irradiation, worms were collected, rinsed with M9 medium to ensure bacteria removal, centrifuged and the pellets were snap frozen. Acute - For acute irradiation, 3000 age-synchronized embryos were transferred to fresh 6 cm plates and allowed to reach L4-YA stage in a control incubator. Nematodes were then irradiated with a cesium-137 source (200 TBq) using the GSR-D1 apparatus from RadExpe platform. L4-YA C. elegans were irradiated at 1 Gy.min-1 during different times in order to test 3 cumulated doses (excluding control): 0.5, 1 and 3.3Gy. Chronic - For chronic irradiation, nematodes were exposed to cesium-137 source using the platforms MIRE (1.6 GBq) from embryo stage to L4-YA adult stage to cover the complete lifecycle (65 h). Three dose rates (excluding controls): 7, 14, 50mGy.h-1 corresponding to three cumulated doses (0.5, 1 and 3.3Gy) were tested.   Sample preparation After irradiation, 3000 C. elegans per replicate were subjected to protein extraction. 300 µl of 0.5-mm diameter zirconium beads and an equal amount of lysis buffer (30 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1.0%(v/v) Igepal CA-630 (NP-40), 1%(v/v) TritonX-100, 0.5% (w/v) sodiumdeoxycholate, 0.1%(w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 2%(v/v) glycerol, 2 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mg.ml-1 leupeptin, 1 mg.ml-1 aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid (EDTA)) were added on top of worm pellets and incubated for 15 min on ice. C. elegans were then homogenized by three 6800-rpm cycles in the Precellys grinder system. After 1 h incubation on ice, lysates were centrifuged (13500 g) at 4°C for 15 min. Supernatant was sampled, and quick)frozen with liquid nitrogen.  15 µg of proteins per replicate were loaded on a NuPAGE gel 4-12%. Samples were then subjected to stacking electrophoresis before proceeding to coomassie blue staining. Protein bands were then excised with a scalpel and digested with trypsin.  Mass spectrometry analysis Each condition was injected in 3 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates in LC-MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate and 40°C. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 220 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 375-1500 at a FWHM resolution of 60 000 measured. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision induced dissociation fragmentation at 35% was performed and analyzed in the ion trap using the “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable time” option with a maximum injection time of 105 ms and an AGC target of 1.0e5. Charge state screening was enabled to include precursors with 2 and 7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60s.

### Data Protocol
For data processing we used the free suite MaxQuant version 15.3.8. The relative intensities based on label-free quantification were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm. In addition, the intensity able to estimate the amount of protein was also calculated with the iBAQ algorithm. The 48 LC-MS raw acquisitions were processed by the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant. The identification of the precursor ions present in the mass spectra was performed by comparison with the protein database of C. elegans extracted from Uniprot on the 17th of January, 2017 and containing 28,794 entries. This database was supplemented with a set of 245 proteins that are commonly found as contaminants. The following parameters were used for this search: (i) trypsin cleavage authorization before prolines; (ii) authorization of two failed cleavages; (iii) fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) and variable modification of methionines by oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal proteins by acetylation (+42.0116); (iv) authorization of 5 modifications per peptide; and (v) minimum peptides length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. Spectra alignment was performed in two dimensions; the elution time of the precursor ions (min) and the mass range parameterized on the mass spectrometer (e-g, m / z 300-1700). The "Match between runs" option has been enabled to allow the transfer of identifications between LC-MS/MS based on the mass and the retention time using the default settings. The false positive rate on identification was set at 1%. The statistical analysis was carried out with the Perseus program (version 1.6.0.7) of the MaxQuant environment. The normalized intensity LFQ was transformed by a base logarithm 2 to obtain a normal distribution. Differential proteins were evidenced by the application of a multiple ANOVA t-test or student t-test performed by controlling the false positive rate at 1% using 250 permutations. Proteins differently expressed between samples were analyzed based on the log2 difference of the LFQ intensity of the protein between controls and the different doses (0.5Gy vs. control, 1Gy vs. control and 3.3Gy vs. control) and log10 of the associated p. value. The differential proteomics analysis was carried out on identified proteins after removal of proteins only identified with a modified peptides, peptides shared with other proteins, proteins from contaminant database and proteins which are only represented in 2 replicates of 6 of the same condition.

### Publication Abstract
Emission of ionizing radiation (IR) in the environment is a natural phenomenon which can be enhanced by human activities. Ecosystems are then chronically exposed to IR. But environmental risk assessment of chronic exposure suffers from a lack of knowledge. Extrapolation of data from acute to chronic exposure is not always relevant, and can lead to uncertainties as effects could be different between the two irradiation modes, especially regarding reproduction endpoint, which is an ecologically relevant parameter. In the present study, we decided to refine the understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in response to acute and chronic &#x3b3;-irradiation by a global proteome label free LC-MS/MS analysis. C. elegans were exposed to 3 common cumulated radiation doses for acute or chronic exposure condition and global modification of the proteome was studied. This analysis of protein expression has demonstrated the modulation of proteins involved in regulatory biological processes such as lipid transport, DNA replication, germ cell development, apoptosis, ion transport, cuticle development, and aging at lower doses than those for which individual effects on reproduction have been previously observed. Thus, these proteins could constitute early and sensitive markers of radio-induced reprotoxicity; more specifically HAT-1, RPS-19 in acute and VIT-3 for chronic conditions that are expressed in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, to focus on reproduction process, this analysis showed either repression or overexpression of 12 common proteins in organisms exposed to acute or chronic irradiation, respectively. These proteins include the vitellogenin cluster notably involved in lipid transport and oocyte maturation and proteins involved in cuticle development and molting i.e. COL-14, GLF-1, NOAH-1, NOAH-2, ACN-1. These results show that protein expression modulation is a sensitive and predictive marker of radio-induced reproductive effects, but also highlight limitation of data extrapolation from acute to chronic exposure for environmental risk assessment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Caenorhabditis elegans, Gamma radiation, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Proteomics, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Marseille Proteomics, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes


