### Accession
PXD042294

### Title
The COG1-OsSERL2 complex senses cold to trigger signaling network for chilling tolerance in japonica rice

### Description
Improvement of chilling tolerance is a key strategy to face potential menace from abnormal temperature in rice production, which depends on the signaling network triggered by receptors. However, little is known about the QTL genes encoding membrane complexes for sensing cold. Here, Chilling-tolerance in Gengdao/japonica rice 1 (COG1) was isolated from a chromosome segment substitution line containing a QTL (qCS11-jap) for chilling sensitivity. The major gene COG1 was found to confer chilling tolerance in japonica rice. In natural rice populations, only the haplogroup1 encoded a functional COG1. Evolutionary analysis showed that COG1 originated from Chinese O. Rufipogon and was fixed in japonica rice during domestication. COG1, a membrane-localized LRR-RLP, targeted and activated the kinase OsSERL2 in a cold-induced manner, promoting chilling tolerance. Furthermore, the cold signal transmitted by COG1-OsSERL2 activates OsMAPK3 in the cytoplasm. Our findings reveal a cold-sensing complex, which mediates signaling network for the chilling defense in rice.

### Sample Protocol
The 14-day-old rice seedlings of ZH11 were treated at 4 °C for 0, 24 hours, then proteins were extracted following previously described70. The protein concentration was determined by a BCA kit (Beyotime). Proteins were digested using trypsin (Promega) following the manufacturer’s instruction.

### Data Protocol
For TMT labelling, trypsin-hydrolyzed peptides were desalted with strata XC18 (phenomenex) and freeze-dried under a vacuum. The peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled following the manufacturer’s instructions of the TMT-6plex kit (Thermo Fisher, Cat#90068). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a TiO2 affinity technique (PTM BIO) following the manufacturer’s instruction. The LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as described in our previous report using EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system and Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher)70. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Oryza_sativa_subsp._japonica_39947_PR_20200603.fasta database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and up to two missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.02 Da. TMT-6plex quantification was performed. The false discovery rate was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score threshold for peptides was > 40. For statistical analysis, the mean intensities at 24 h were divided by the mean intensities at 0h to obtain the phosphorylation intensity ratios of ZH11-24h vs ZH11-0h. Significant differences were assessed with Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Improvement of chilling tolerance is a key strategy to face potential menace from abnormal temperature in rice production, which depends on the signaling network triggered by receptors. However, little is known about the QTL genes encoding membrane complexes for sensing cold. Here, Chilling-tolerance in Gengdao/japonica rice 1 (COG1) is isolated from a chromosome segment substitution line containing a QTL (qCS11-jap) for chilling sensitivity. The major gene COG1 is found to confer chilling tolerance in japonica rice. In natural rice populations, only the haplogroup1 encodes a functional COG1. Evolutionary analysis show that COG1 originates from Chinese O. Rufipogon and is fixed in japonica rice during domestication. COG1, a membrane-localized LRR-RLP, targets and activates the kinase OsSERL2 in a cold-induced manner, promoting chilling tolerance. Furthermore, the cold signal transmitted by COG1-OsSERL2 activates OsMAPK3 in the cytoplasm. Our findings reveal a cold-sensing complex, which mediates signaling network for the chilling defense in rice.

### Keywords
Rice chilling

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
The Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
changxuan xia

### Lab Head
Dr Yunyuan Xu
The Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


