### Accession
PXD035689

### Title
A rare human centenarian variant of SIRT6 enhances genome stability and interaction with Lamin A

### Description
Sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) is a deacylase and mono-ADP ribosyl transferase (mADPr) enzyme involved in multiple cellular pathways implicated in the regulation of aging and metabolism. Targeted sequencing identified a SIRT6 allele containing two linked substitutions (N308K/A313S) as enriched in Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) centenarians as compared to AJ control individuals. Characterization of this SIRT6 (centSIRT6) allele demonstrated it to be a stronger suppressor of LINE1 retrotransposons, confer enhanced stimulation of DNA double strand break repair, and more robust cancer cell killing compared to the wild type.  Surprisingly, centSIRT6 displayed weaker deacetylase activity, but stronger mADPr activity, over a range of NAD+ concentrations and substrates. Additionally, centSIRT6 displayed a stronger interaction with Lamin A/C (LMNA), which correlated with enhanced ribosylation of LMNA. Our results suggest that enhanced SIRT6 function contributes to human longevity by improving genome maintenance via increased mADPr activity and enhanced interaction with LMNA.

### Sample Protocol
Cumate SIRT6 fibroblasts were used to compare interactomes for centSIRT6 and the wild type SIRT6.  Nuclear extracts were prepared using hypotonic lysis buffer.  Nuclei isolated from approximately 2.5x107 cells were resuspended in one ml of extraction buffer (50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM DTT, 0.25%NP-40, 1x Roche Complete protease inhibitors, as well as kinase/phosphatase inhibitors- 1 mM NaVO4, 10mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM NaF) and nuclei were disrupted by passage through a 27 gauge needle followed by sonication (3 pulses at constant 20% power) with a Branson Sonifier on ice.  Next, samples were filtered through 0.2 m MWCO filter to remove any insoluble material (and reduce non-specific binding). Proteins were quantified using the BCA assay and equal amount of wild type SIRT6 and centSIRT6 derived extract were divided into 5 replicates each.  Three replicates of extract received 4 μg of anti-SIRT6 antibody (Cell Signaling #1248) or anti-Lamin A (Lamin A/C-Millipore 05-714) and 75 μl of Miltenyi protein G μMACS magnetic particles.  Two of the replicates were mixed with normal rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling #2729) as controls for non-specific binding to the particles. Samples were rotated at 4oC for 6 h followed by separation by the magnet. Samples were washed with 3 additional ml of extraction buffer and eluted with 100 μl of boiling elution buffer (5% SDS with 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5). After removal of SDS with S-columns (Protifi; Huntington, NY) and trypsin digestion, peptides were resuspended in MS-grade water and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex; Thermo Fisher). Samples were resolved by nano-electrospray ionization on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instrument (Thermo) in positive ion mode using a 30 cm home-made column packed with 1.8 μm C-18 beads to resolve the peptides.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 100% acetonitrile (CAN) with 0.1% formic acid.  The length of the run was 2 h with a 90 min gradient.  CID (35% collision energy) was used for MS2 fragmentation.  HCD (60% collision energy) was used for MS3 detection of TMT groups.

### Data Protocol
Peptide assignments were made using Proteome Discoverer and Sequest and MS3 ions were used for quantitation.  False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using a Decoy Database Search with Target FDR (strict) set to 0.01 and Target FDR (relaxed) set to 0.05. Validation was based on q-value.   In the consensus step, ions with a co-isolation threshold above 30% were excluded. Normalization between replicates was achieved using the total protein approach (Wisniewski, 2017)  where peptide counts for a single protein were divided by the sum of all proteins in the lane.  Proteins appearing in specific antibodies (either anti-SIRT6 or anti-Lamin A) compared to normal IgG serum with Student t-test p <0.05) were considered as interactions. Similarly, proteins showing higher levels in centSIRT6 versus wild type SIRT6 were based upon p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) is a deacylase and mono-ADP ribosyl transferase (mADPr) enzyme involved in multiple cellular pathways implicated in aging and metabolism regulation. Targeted sequencing of SIRT6 locus in a population of 450 Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) centenarians and 550 AJ individuals without a family history of exceptional longevity identified enrichment of a SIRT6 allele containing two linked substitutions (N308K/A313S) in centenarians compared with AJ control individuals. Characterization of this SIRT6 allele (centSIRT6) demonstrated it to be a stronger suppressor of LINE1 retrotransposons, confer enhanced stimulation of DNA double-strand break repair, and more robustly kill cancer cells compared with wild-type SIRT6. Surprisingly, centSIRT6 displayed weaker deacetylase activity, but stronger mADPr activity, over a range of NAD<sup>+</sup> concentrations and substrates. Additionally, centSIRT6 displayed a stronger interaction with Lamin A/C (LMNA), which was correlated with enhanced ribosylation of LMNA. Our results suggest that enhanced SIRT6 function contributes to human longevity by improving genome maintenance via increased mADPr activity and enhanced interaction with LMNA.

### Keywords
Lmna, Adp-ribosylation, Aging, Longevity, Sirt6, Centenarian

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
Department of Biology University of Rochester Rochester, NY , USA

### Submitter
Gregory Tombline

### Lab Head
Dr Vera Gorbunova
Department of Biology University of Rochester Rochester, NY , USA


