### Accession
PXD031478

### Title
MYC-driven mouse HCC proteomics

### Description
To identify proteomic signatures associated with hepatocellular carcinoma driven by MYC overexpression, proteomics was performed on the LAP-tTA/tetO-MYC mouse conditional liver cancer model. Upon MYC activation, mice form liver cancer. Differential proteomics was performed in "MYC on" (MYC-HCC) mouse liver tumors versus mouse control normal liver tissue (where MYC was not overexpressed to drive tumorigenesis -- "MYC off").

### Sample Protocol
Frozen  MYC-HCC (n=3) and  liver  tissue  (n=3) samples  were  used. The tissue was homogenized and lysed. Three   technical  replicates were used for each biological sample. Liquid  chromatography  (LC)  with  tandem  mass  spectrometry  (MS/MS)  runs  were  performed  on  each  sample.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were searched using Byonic software (version 2.11.0; Protein Metrics, Cupertino,  CA)  with  a  Swiss-Prot  database  referencing mouse proteome (2017). AUC quantitative measurements were used to determine protein abundances from spectra.

### Publication Abstract
MYC is a transcription factor frequently overexpressed in cancer. To determine how MYC drives the neoplastic phenotype, we performed transcriptomic analysis using a panel of MYC-driven autochthonous transgenic mouse models. We found that MYC elicited gene expression changes mostly in a tissue- and lineage-specific manner across B-cell lymphoma, T-cell acute lymphoblastic lymphoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, and lung adenocarcinoma. However, despite these gene expression changes being mostly tissue-specific, we uncovered a convergence on a common pattern of upregulation of embryonic stem cell gene programs and downregulation of tissue-of-origin gene programs across MYC-driven cancers. These changes are representative of lineage dedifferentiation, that may be facilitated by epigenetic alterations that occur during tumorigenesis. Moreover, while several cellular processes are represented among embryonic stem cell genes, ribosome biogenesis is most specifically associated with MYC expression in human primary cancers. Altogether, MYC's capability to drive tumorigenesis in diverse tissue types appears to be related to its ability to both drive a core signature of embryonic genes that includes ribosomal biogenesis genes as well as promote tissue and lineage specific dedifferentiation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Myc, Liver, Hcc, Tumor, Cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection
Caltech

### Submitter
Delaney Sullivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Stanford University Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection


