### Accession
PXD038582

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Fasciola gigantica excretory and secretory products (FgESPs) co-immunoprecipitated using a time course of infected buffalo sera

### Description
Widespread Fasciola gigantica infection in buffaloes has caused great economic losses in buffalo farming. Studies on F. gigantica excretory and secretory products (FgESP) have highlighted their importance in F. gigantica parasitism and their potential in vaccine development. Identifying FgESP components involved in F. gigantica-buffalo interactions during different periods is important for developing effective strategies against fasciolosis. Buffaloes were assigned to non-infection (n = 3, as control group) and infection (n = 3) groups. The infection group was orally administrated 250 metacercariae. Sera were collected at 3, 10, and 16 weeks post-infection (wpi) for the non-infection group and at 0 (pre-infection), 1, 3, 6, 8, 10, 13, and 16 wpi for the infection group. FgESP components interacting with sera from the non-infection and infection groups assay were pulled down by co-IP and identified using LC-MS/MS. Interacting FgESP components in infection group were subjected to Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) metabolic pathway and gene ontology (GO) functional annotation to infer their potential functions. Proteins of FgESP components identified in the non-infection group at 3, 10, and 16 wpi accounted for 80.5%, 84.3%, and 82.1% of all proteins identified in these 3 time points, respectively, indicating surroundings did not affect buffalo immune response during maintenance. 490 proteins were identified in the infection group, of which 87 were consistently identified at 7 time points. Following GO analysis showed that most of these 87 proteins were in biological processes, while KEGG analysis showed they mainly functioned in metabolism and cellular processing, some of which were thought to functions throughout the infection process. The numbers of specific interactors identified for each week were 1 (n = 12), 3 (n = 5), 6 (n = 8), 8 (n = 15), 10 (n = 23), 13 (n = 22), and 16 (n = 14) wpi, some of which were thought to functions in specific infection precess. This study screened the antigenic targets in FgESP during a dense time course over a long period. These findings may enhance the understanding of molecular F. gigantica-buffalo interactions and help identify new potential vaccine and drug target candidates.

### Sample Protocol
1.Preparation of buffalo serum representing different infection periods F. gigantica metacercariae were collected from Galba pervia experimentally infected with miracidia. Six 6-month-old buffaloes of Murrah, Nili-Ravi, Mediterranean, and their crossbreds with indigenous buffaloes in Guangxi (China) were randomly assigned to non-infection (A1, A2, and A3) and infection (B1, B2, and B3) groups, with three in each group . They were confirmed free from fluke infection through indirect FgESP ELISA and coprological examination. In week 0, the infection group was given a gelatine capsule containing 250 viable F. gigantica metacercariae, while the non-infection group were mock-inoculated with 0.85% sodium chloride solution without metacercariae, the mean numbers of flukes recovered were 55.5 ± 14.1 (22.2 ± 5.6 of infection dose) in infection group (Wang et al., 2022b). Whole blood was collected from the non-infection (3, 10, and 16 wpi) and infection (0, 1, 3, 6, 8, 10, 13 and 16 wpi) groups for serum preparation and stored at −80°C until needed.  2.FgESP preparation FgESPs were prepared as previously described (Novobilský et al., 2007).  3. Co-IP of FgESP-antibody binding proteins For the non-infection group, 5 mg of FgESPs was incubated with 1 mL of serum (A1, A2, and A3 at 3, 10, and 16 wpi) and 20 μL of Protein A/G Plus-Agarose Beads. For the infection group, 5 mg of FgESPs was precleared (negative serum and FgESP pull down non-specific interaction proteins through Co-IP) by incubation with 1 mL of negative (week 0) serum and 20 μL of Protein A/G Plus-Agarose Beads at 4°C for 2 h.Other procedures were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions of The Protein A/G Plus-Agarose Immunoprecipitation Kit (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA).  4. In-solution trypsin digestion Liquid mass spectrometry (LMS) was performed by gel chromatography, and the protein solution was conducted to SDS-PAGE, then the targets band was extracted from the gel and cut into 0.5 mm cubes. Next, the decolorized gel was washed three times with acetonitrile solution until gelatinous particles were completely white. Then, 500 μL of 10 mM dithiothreitol was added and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. Next, 500 μL of a decolorizing solution was added and mixed at room temperature for 10 min. Then, the gelatinous particles were centrifuged at 3,000 g to remove the supernatant. Next, 500 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for a further 30 min at room temperature before being centrifuged at 3,000 g. Then, 500 μL of decolorizing solution was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature before being centrifuged at 3,000 g to remove the supernatant. Next, 500 μL of acetonitrile was added until the micelles were completely whitened and then vacuum-dried for 5 min. Then, trypsin was added according to the gel volume and incubated in an ice bath for 30 min. Next, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) was added and incubated at 37°C overnight. Then, 300 μL of extraction solution (60% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid) was added and sonicated for 10 min. Finally, the solution was centrifuged at 3,000 g, and the supernatant was collected and vacuum-dried. 5. LC-MS/MS analysis  The sample was dissolved with 20 μL of 0.2% trifluoroacetate, centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 20 min, and dried with a vacuum concentrator (LaboGene, SCAN SPEED 40, Denmark). Samples were then adjusted to 1 μg/μL using the machine’s buffer. The sample volume was set to 5 μL, and the collection scan mode was set to 60 min. In the sample, we scanned for peptides with a mass-to-charge ratio of 350–1200. The mass spectrometry data was collected using the Triple TOF 5600 + LC/MS system (AB SCIEX, USA). The peptide samples were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using the Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC system (AB SCIEX, USA). The peptide solution was added to the C18 capture (3 μm; 350 μm × 0.5 mm; AB Sciex, USA) and C18 analytical (3 μm; 75 μm × 150) columns with a 60 min time gradient and a 300 nL/min flow rate for gradient elution. The two mobile phases were buffers A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and 98% water) and B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 2% water). For information-dependent acquisition, the MS spectrum was scanned with a 250 ms ion accumulation time, and the MS spectrums of 30 precursor ions were acquired with a 50 ms ion accumulation time. The MS1 spectrum was

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS files were submitted to ProteinPilot (https://sciex.com.cn/products/software/proteinpilot-software; version 4.5, SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA) for analysis. ProteinPilot’s Paragon algorithm was used to search the UniProtKB-A1E5T4 (A1E5T4_FASGI) database (access time is 2021/11/19) and identify proteins using the following parameters: TripleTOF 5600, cysteine modification with iodoacetamide, and biological modification as the ID focus. The identified protein results were subject to certain filtering criteria. Peptides with an unused score >1.3 (credibility of >95%) were considered credible, and proteins containing at ≥1 unique peptide were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fasciola gigantica; co-immunoprecipitation; excretory and secretory products; interaction; lc-ms/ms; screening

### Affiliations
Guangxi university
College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning,China

### Submitter
Xinping Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Wenda Di
College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning,China


