### Accession
PXD043253

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa MipA-MipB envelope proteins are new sensors of polymyxin

### Description
Due to the rising incidence of antibiotic resistant infections, last-line antibiotics polymyxins have resurged in the clinics together with the appearance of new bacterial strategies of escape. The Gram-negative opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa develops resistance to colistin/polymyxin by distinct molecular mechanisms, mostly involving the modification of the lipid A component of the LPS by proteins encoded within the arnBCDATEF-ugD (called arn) operon. We characterized a polymyxin-induced operon, named mipBA, present in P. aeruginosa group of strains devoid of the arn operon. Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics showed that the absence of MipBA modifies the membrane proteome, notably impacting ParRS-regulated proteins, in response to polymyxin.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures (30mL LB) were inoculated at an OD600nm of 0.1 and grown to OD600nm ~ 0.6. PMB was added when needed (0.25µg/mL) for 90min (UT: untreated, T: treated). Wild-type (WT) or mipBA-deleted mutant (Mut) bacteria were harvested and resuspended in 1mL of 20mM Tris pH8, 20% sucrose supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Bacteria were lyzed by sonication during 5 min (40% intensity, 10s ON/10 s OFF) and bacterial debris were eliminated by a centrifugation step of 15 min at 6,000xg at 4°C. Supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 200,000 xg for 45 min at 4°C and soluble fraction was removed. Membranes pellet were washed, resuspended in 100µL of 20mM Tris pH8, 20mM MgCl2, before addition of loading buffer and boiling for 10 min. Three replicates of membrane fraction were prepared for each analysed strain. The proteins were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using modified trypsin (sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermofisher Scientific) using a 180 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the NCBI database (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain: IHMA879472 taxonomy, March 2021 download) and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and three missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software version 2.2.0 was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% , and minimum of one specific peptide per protein group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Antibiotics, Nanolc-ms/ms, Mipba operon, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Polymyxins

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


