### Accession
PXD024020

### Title
Intramolecular synergism and proteolytic control of bacteriophage endolysin PlySK1249

### Description
Endolysins are peptidoglycan hydrolases produced at the end of the bacteriophage (phage) replication cycle to lyse the host cell. Gram-positive phages endolysins come in a variety of multi-modular forms that combine different catalytic domains and may have evolved to adapt to their bacterial hosts. However, the reason why phage can adopt endolysin with such complex multidomain architecture is for the moment not well understood.  We used the Streptococcus dysgalactiae phage endolysin PlySK1249 as a model to study the implication of multi-domain architecture in phage-induced bacterial lysis and lysis regulation. The activity of the enzyme relied on a bacteriolytic amidase (Ami), a non-bacteriolytic L-Ala-D-Ala endopeptidase (CHAP) acting as a de-chaining enzyme and central LysM cell wall binding domain (CBD).  Ami and CHAP synergized for peptidoglycan digestion and bacteriolysis in the native enzyme or when expressed individually and reunified in vitro. This cooperation could be modulated by bacterial cell wall-associated proteases, which specifically cleaved the two linkers connecting the different domains. While both catalytic domains were observed to act coordinately to optimize bacterial lysis, the CBD is expected to delay diffusion of the enzyme until proteolytic inactivation is achieved.   As for certain autolysins, PlySK1249 cleavage by bacterial cell wall associated proteases might be an example of dual phage-bacterial regulation and mutual coevolution.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analyses of peptidoglycan digestion. After cell wall peptidoglycan extraction and digestion, samples were boiled at 100°C to stop enzymatic reaction, filtered through a 5000 MW cut-off column and desalted using C18 cartridge. Peptidoglycan fragments were eluted with an 80% MeCN + 0.1% TFA solution and dried with a SpeedVac, before being redissolved in a loading buffer (2% MeCN + 0.1% TFA). Samples were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high resolution mass spectrometer QExactive Plus (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptidoglycan fragments were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase analytical nanocolumn at a flowrate of 0.25 μl/min. Q-Exactive Plus instrument was interfaced with an Easy Spray C18 PepMap nanocolumn (50cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Dionex) using a 37 min gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for separation (total time: 65min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software 3.1 (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (250-2000 m/z window) were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 35’000 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 10s from further analysis.  Mass spectrometry analyses of PlySK1249 proteolytic degradation. Gel bands were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses on a QExactive Plus instrument as described above, but with the following changes: full MS survey with a 395-2000 m/z window, MS/MS scans at 17’500 resolution and a dynamic time exclusion of 60s.  Mass spectrometry analyses of proteases responsible for PlySK1249 degradation. Size exclusion chromatography fractions were digested by trypsin with a FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) protocol. Peptide were resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and injected on an Ultimate RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Scientific) before separation on a reversed-phase custom packed nanocolumn (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch). A flowrate of 0.25 μl/min was used with a gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (total time: 65 min). Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 1.5s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a 15’000 resolution in the orbitrap cell. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s.  Mass spectrometry analyses of endolysin proteolysis during in vivo prophage induction. Protein samples were loaded on a 15 % mini polyacrylamide gel and migrated about 2 cm. After Coomassie staining, gel lanes between 10-250 kDa were excised into 6 pieces, and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on Ultimate RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high resolution mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Scientific) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase custom-packed column (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch), using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide separation at a flowrate of 0.25 μl/min (total time: 95 min).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analyses of peptidoglycan digestion. MS raw files were processed with PEAKS software (version 8.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) for peptide identification by de novo sequencing and database search. The set of Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis SK1249 proteome sequences downloaded from UniProt database (February 2016 version, 2’309 sequences) was used for database search of sample contamination by proteins from Streptococcus dysgalactiae, while peptidoglycan peptides were identified by de novo sequencing. Database search and de novo sequencing parameters were: no enzyme used as the enzyme definition, N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da.  Mass spectrometry analyses of PlySK1249 proteolytic degradation. MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search the Streptococcus dysgalactiae proteome in the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, reference proteome of Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis (strain SK1249), August 2016 version: 2’309 sequences) and a custom database containing usual contaminants (digestion enzymes, keratins, etc.). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R, excepted before P) was used as the enzyme definition with semi-specific cleavage, and allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. MsViz software was used to compare sequence coverage of PlySK1249 between samples.  Mass spectrometry analyses of proteases responsible for PlySK1249 degradation. MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search the Streptococcus dysgalactiae proteome in the UniProt database as described above. Scaffold software (version 4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based protein and peptide identifications from Mascot searches, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm, while protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Protein Prophet algorithm and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony, and proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.  Mass spectrometry analyses of endolysin proteolysis during in vivo prophage induction. MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search the Streptococcus agalactia proteome in the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, reference proteome of Streptococcus agalactia (FSL S3-026 strain), June 2018 version: 2’218 sequences). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R, excepted before P) was used as the enzyme definition with semi-specific cleavage, and allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software was used to validate MS/MS based protein and peptide identifications from Mascot searches, as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Endolysins are peptidoglycan hydrolases produced at the end of the bacteriophage (phage) replication cycle to lyse the host cell. Endolysins in Gram-positive phages come in a variety of multimodular forms that combine different catalytic and cell wall binding domains. However, the reason why phages adopt endolysins with such complex multidomain architecture is not well understood. In this study, we used the Streptococcus dysgalactiae phage endolysin PlySK1249 as a model to investigate the role of multidomain architecture in phage-induced bacterial lysis and lysis regulation. PlySK1249 consists of an amidase (Ami) domain that lyses bacterial cells, a nonbacteriolytic endopeptidase (CHAP) domain that acts as a dechaining enzyme, and a central LysM cell wall binding domain. We observed that the Ami and CHAP domains synergized for peptidoglycan digestion and bacteriolysis in the native enzyme or when expressed individually and reunified. The CHAP endopeptidase resolved complex polymers of stem-peptides to dimers and helped the Ami domain to digest peptidoglycan to completion. We also found that PlySK1249 was subject to proteolytic cleavage by host cell wall proteases both in&#xa0;vitro and after phage induction. Cleavage disconnected the different domains by hydrolyzing their linker regions, thus hindering their bacteriolytic cooperation and possibly modulating the lytic activity of the enzyme. PlySK1249 cleavage by cell-wall-associated proteases may represent another example of phage adaptation toward the use of existing bacterial regulation mechanism for their own advantage. In addition, understanding more thoroughly the multidomain interplay of PlySK1249 broadens our knowledge on the ideal architecture of therapeutic antibacterial endolysins.

### Keywords
Endolysin, Proteolysis, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteriophage

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Fundamental Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Oechslin
Department of Fundamental Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.


