### Accession
PXD039928

### Title
Short-term UVB irradiation leads to persistent DNA damage in limbal epithelial stem cells, partially reversed by DNA repairing enzymes

### Description
Proteomic analysis of cell lysates: Our primary goal is to repair UV damage in human corneal epithelial cells using the T4N5 enzyme and to know if what the inflammatory outcomes of irradiation and/or T4 enzyme treatment are

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative proteomics, the harvested cell pellets were dissolved in 5% SDS in 1x PBS and nucleic acid in the samples was degraded with Benzonase HC (25 Units per 5x105 cells). Next, Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a concentration of 5mM was added and the the samples were incubated for 30min at 55 °C. Then, Chloroacetamide (CAA) mto a concentration of 40mM was added and the samples were left to incubate in the dark at room temperature for 30min. Protein yields were estimated with A280 method measurements performed on a Nanodrop 2000c. Samples from two treatment groups were selected for analysis: UV-irradiated HLE, as controls, and UV-irradiated HLE that received T4 endonuclease V treatment.  Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 5 µm PepMap Trap cartridge precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical pulled-tip column (30 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 2% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 6& in 1 min, up to 32% B in 72 min, up to 55% B within 7.0 min and up to 95% solvent B within 2.0 min, followed by a 6 min column wash with 95% solvent B. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50 compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were demultiplexed and transformed to mzML files using the msconvert module in Proteowizard. A Human canonical Swissprot fasta file (downloaded 26.6.2020) was converted to a Prosit upload file with the convert tool in encyclopedia 0.9.0 (Searle 2018) using default settings: Trypsin, up to 1 missed cleavage, range 396 m/z – 1004 m/z, charge states 2+ and 3+, default charge state 3 and NCE 33. The csv file was uploaded to the Prosit webserver and converted to a spectrum library in generic text format (Gessulat 2019). The resulting library (20374 protein isoforms, 28307 protein groups and 1626266 precursors) was used in DIA-NN 1.7.16 (Demichev 2020) to create a library directly from acquired sample data using the MBR function. The applied settings were: Output will be filtered at 0.01 FDR, N-terminal methionine excision enabled, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, min peptide length set to 7, max peptide length set to 30, min precursor m/z set to 400, Max precursor m/z set to 1000, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification, double pass search enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cornea; uv; dna damage; limbal stem cells; proteomics

### Affiliations
Clinic of General Ophthalmology, Kerpener Str. 62, 50931 Cologne
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Notara
Clinic of General Ophthalmology, Kerpener Str. 62, 50931 Cologne


