### Accession
PXD005768

### Title
Proteogenomic characterization of developmental defects in the forebrain resulting from hyperactivated mTOR signaling

### Description
Hyperactivated mTOR signaling in the developing brain by mutation of TSC1 genes has multiple forms of pathology including tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). To examine the downstream networks affected in the developing brain by hyperactivated mTOR signaling, we performed an integrated analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of forebrain of wild-type and TSC1/Emx1-Cre mouse. Our results provide novel and fundamental molecular bases for understanding hyperactivaed mTOR signaling-induced brain defects which can in turn facilitate identification of potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for mTOR signaling-related neurological disorders.

### Sample Protocol
The telencephalon tissues of Tsc1/Emx1-cre CKO and control mice were dried and then homogenized with the lysis buffer and a Complete Mini Protease inhibitor tablet. The lysate was ultracentrifuged at 45,000 g at 4 °C for an hour. Protein concentration was determined from the resulting supernatant by DC protein assay. The protein sample was then reduced in 0.5 M DTT (100 µl) for 50 minutes at 37 °C, followed by addition of 1.5 µl of 1M iodoacetamide and incubation in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature for alkylation. The resulting sample was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion [1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio (w/w)] with incubation at 37 °C overnight. The peptide samples were centrifuged at 2,500 g for 10 minutes at room temperature, and the resulting aqueous solution was desalted using solid-phase extraction with a reverse-phase tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridge. Finally, peptides were eluted with 50% ACN 0.5% HAcO and then dried in a Speed-Vac with resuspension in 0.1% formic acid. The samples were stored at -20 °C before LC-MS/MS analysis.  All peptide samples were separated on a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 equipped with an analytical column and a trap column. The operation temperature of the analytical column was at 50 °C. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The solvents A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water and 0.1% formic acid and 2% water in acetonitrile, respectively. For the global proteome analysis, 120 min gradient was used. The eluted peptides from LC were analyzed using Q-Exactive™ hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. For the ionization of the eluted peptides, the electric potential of electrospray ionization was kept at 1.7 kV, and the temperature of desolvation capillary was set to 270 °C. Q-Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode with survey scans acquired for the mass range of 450-2000 Thomsons (Th) at a resolution of 70,000. Up to the top 10 most abundant ions from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25 and the exclusion duration of 10 s. The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Maximum ion injection times were 100 ms and 50 ms for full MS and MS/MS scan, respectively. Automated gain control (AGC) target value was set to 1.0 × 106 and 1.0 × 105 for full MS and MS/MS scan, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification: The fragmentation spectra were created based on mzXML file using msconvert (ProteoWizard release: 3.0.4323). MS data were first analyzed using post-experiment monoisotopic mass refinement (PE-MMR) to assign accurate precursor mass to tandem MS data. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database containing Swiss-Prot entries of the  mouse reference proteome (UniProtKB release 2016_02, 25,010 entries) and 179 common contaminants in the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ Beta (v10089) search engine under the following parameters: semi-tryptic, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The search results of 24 LC-MS/MS datasets were all combined, and the target-decoy analysis was performed on the combined dataset to obtain peptides with the false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01. Label-free peptide quantification: To assign MS intensity to peptide identification, an MS intensity-based label-free quantification method was applied to 24 LC-MS/MS datasets. Briefly, through PE-MMR analysis, MS features of a peptide that appeared over a period of LC elution time in an LC-MS/MS experiment were grouped into a unique mass class (UMC). Ideally, each UMC corresponds to a peptide and contains the ions corresponding to the peptide, together with their mass spectral features, such as charge states, abundances (intensity), scan numbers, and measured monoisotopic masses. For each UMC, we obtained the mass by calculating the intensity-weighted average of the monoisotopic masses of all the ions in the UMC. For the peptide corresponding to the UMC, its abundance was estimated as the summation of the abundances of all the ions in the UMC (UMC intensity). The refined precursor masses of the MS/MS spectra by PE-MMR were matched to the UMC masses and then were replaced with those of UMCs. In this process, MS/MS spectra information was linked to the matched UMC. The linked MS/MS spectra were assigned with a peptide sequence (peptide ID) with a FDR ≤ 0.01 after MS-GF+ searching and target-decoy analysis. The peptide ID was assigned to the UMC, and the UMC intensity was assigned to the peptide ID. Assignment of UMCs by master AMT database: To assign the peptide IDs to unidentified UMCs, the master accurate mass and time tag (AMT) database (DB) was constructed and utilized. Briefly, the information about UMCs with peptide IDs from 24 LC-MS/MS data (triplicate LC-MS/MS experiments of 8 samples) was compiled into the master AMT-DB. The AMTs are unique peptide sequences whose monoisotopic masses and normalized elution times (NETs) are experimentally determined. For each AMT whose corresponding peptides were measured multiple times, the average mass and the median NET were recorded. We then mapped unidentified UMCs to AMTs in the master AMT DB with ±10 ppm of mass and ±0.02 of NET tolerances, and 3.0 of Excorr threshold. For each unidentified UMC matched to an AMT, the peptide ID for the AMT was assigned together with all information for the AMT (UMC mass, NET and Excorr). Alignment of the identified peptides: After the assignment of unidentified UMCs using the master AMT DB, we combined the assigned and identified UMCs from LC-MS/MS datasets into an n×m alignment table (peptide IDs for n UMCs and UMC intensities in m samples). The missing value in the alignment table means that the peptide was not identified in the corresponding datasets. For the missing values in each row of the table, we further searched for the UMCs that could be matched to the aligned UMCs based on their UMC masses and NETs with the following tolerance: ±10 ppm and ±0.01 across the technical replicates, and ±10 ppm and ±0.02 across the biological replicates. Quantile normalization was performed for UMC intensities in the alignment table to correct systematic variations of peptide abundance across datasets. To evaluate reproducibility of LC-MS/MS analysis, two types of similarity scores between LC-MS/MS datasets were calculated by measuring the overlap of detected peptides and their intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperactivated mTOR signaling in the developing brain has been implicated in multiple forms of pathology including tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). To date, various phenotypic defects such as cortical lamination irregularity, subependymal nodule formation, dysmorphic astrocyte differentiation and dendritic malformation have been described for patients and animal models. However, downstream networks affected in the developing brain by hyperactivated mTOR signaling have yet to be characterized. Here, we present an integrated analysis of transcriptomes and proteomes generated from wild-type and Tsc1/Emx1-Cre forebrains. This led to comprehensive lists of genes and proteins whose expression levels were altered by hyperactivated mTOR signaling. Further incorporation of TSC patient data followed by functional enrichment and network analyses pointed to changes in molecular components and cellular processes associated with neuronal differentiation and morphogenesis as the key downstream events underlying developmental and morphological defects in TSC. Our results provide novel and fundamental molecular bases for understanding hyperactivated mTOR signaling-induced brain defects which can in turn facilitate identification of potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for mTOR signaling-related neurological disorders.

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Mouse, Forebrain

### Affiliations
Center for Plant Aging Research, Institute for Basic Science, and Department of New Biology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea
Postech

### Submitter
Minhyung Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Daehee Hwang
Center for Plant Aging Research, Institute for Basic Science, and Department of New Biology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea


