### Accession
PXD016296

### Title
The STRIPAK dependent phosphorylation of distinct residues of GUL1 controls hyphal morphology and sexual fertility

### Description
STRIPAK is a highly conserved eukaryotic signalling complex controlling a wide range of developmental processes in microorganisms as well as humans. This study uses iTRAQ-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to expand the identification of differentially phosphorylated proteins, comparing the wildtype proteome of the model fungus S. macorspora to those from three STRIPAK single- and double deletion mutants. Among the differentially phosphorylated proteins, we detected Gul1, a homolog of GUL-1 from N. crassa and SSD1 from yeast. In this study, we further provide a functional analysis of Gul1, showing it controls sexual development and hyphal morphology in a phosphorylation dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, S. macrospora strains were precultured in petri dishes with 20 ml liquid BMM with two biological replicates per strain at 27 °C for two days. Three standardized inoculates of each BMM preculture were transferred in petri dishes with 20 ml liquid BMM and grown at 27 °C and 40 rpm for three days. For cell wall lysis and protein extraction, mycelium was harvested and freezed within 60 s. The frozen mycelium was ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in FLAG extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 10 % glycerol, 0.05 %NP-40,1 mM PMSF, 0.2 % protease inhibitor cocktail IV, 1,3 mM benzamidine, 1 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktails II and III). Afterwards, the samples were centrifuged at 4°C and 15,000 rpm for 30 min. The protein extract was applied to proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses. First carbamidomethylation was performed by reduction of free cysteine residues by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation for 30 min at 56°C followed by alkylation with 30 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess of IAA was quenched by further addition of 10 mM fresh DTT. Samples were purified prior to digestion by ethanol precipitation. After trypsin digestion, 150 μg of tryptic peptide per sample were then labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents (AB Sciex) following the manufacturers protocol. After pooling and quenching an aliquot corresponding to 70 μg of total peptide amount was taken for global proteome analysis. 35 μg were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a C18 column (BioBasic-18, 5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size, 150 x 0.5 mm). The remaining multiplexed sample (1,130 μg) was dried under vacuum and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment protocol using titanium dioxide followed by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatrography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Both fractions from global proteome analysis and phosphopeptide enrichment were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific), incorporating the search algorithms Mascot (Version 2.4.1, Matrix Science), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. The searches were conducted in a target/decoy manner against a S. macrospora protein sequence database (10,091 target sequences) with the same settings for all three algorithms: Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Cleavage specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 allowed missed cleavages. iTRAQ-8plex on peptide N-termini and lysines as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation (only phosphoproteome data) of serine, threonine or tyrosine was allowed as variable modifications. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphoRS (version 3.1) node was used to determine modification site confidence. Percolator was used to filter the results to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on the PSM level and only rank 1 hits were allowed. For global proteome data, a minimum of 2 uniquely identified peptides per protein were required, while of phosphoproteome data, only quantified PSMs with identified phosphorylations and a phosphoRS site probability ≥ 90% were exported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Sordaria macrospora, Lc-msms, Itraq, Stripak

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


