### Accession
PXD006581

### Title
Repurposing tofacitinib as an anti-myeloma therapeutic to reverse growth-promoting effects of the bone marrow microenvironment

### Description
The myeloma bone marrow microenvironment drives proliferation of malignant plasma cells and promotes resistance to therapy. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and downstream JAK/STAT signaling are thought to be central components of these microenvironment-induced phenotypes. In a prior drug repurposing screen, we identified tofacitinib, a pan-JAK inhibitor FDA-approved for rheumatoid arthritis, as an agent that may reverse the tumor-stimulating effects of bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells.Here, we validated both in vitro, in stromal-responsive human myeloma cell lines, and in vivo, in orthotopic disseminated murine xenograft models of myeloma, that tofacitinib showed both single-agent and combination therapeutic efficacy in myeloma models.  Surprisingly, we found that ruxolitinib, an FDA-approved agent targeting JAK1 and JAK2, did not lead to the same anti-myeloma effects.  Combination with a novel irreversible JAK3-selective inhibitor also did not rescue ruxolitinib effects. RNA-seq and unbiased phosphoproteomics revealed that marrow stromal cells drive a JAK/STAT-mediated proliferative program in myeloma plasma cells, and tofacitinib reversed the large majority of these pro-growth signals. Taken together, our results suggest that tofacitinib specifically reverses the growth-promoting effects of the tumor microenvironment through blocking an IL-6-mediated signaling axis. As tofacitinib is already FDA-approved, these results can be rapidly translated into potential clinical benefits for myeloma patients.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed in 8M urea. 1 mg of total protein was then reduced in TCEP and free cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested at room temperature for 18 hours with trypsin. Peptides were desalted, lyophilized, and enriched for phosphopeptides using immobilized-metal affinity column (IMAC) with Fe-NTA loaded beads. Phosphopeptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC liquid chromatography instrument with 3.5 linear gradient. Spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode at 70,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data for two biological replicates were processed using Maxquant versus the Swissprot human proteome, with phospho (STY) selected as a fixed modification and match between runs enabled. Median intensity normalization of all samples was performed prior to all presented analysis

### Publication Abstract
The myeloma bone marrow microenvironment promotes proliferation of malignant plasma cells and resistance to therapy. Activation of JAK/STAT signaling is thought to be a central component of these microenvironment-induced phenotypes. In a prior drug repurposing screen, we identified tofacitinib, a pan-JAK inhibitor Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for rheumatoid arthritis, as an agent that may reverse the tumor-stimulating effects of bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells. Herein, we validated <i>in vitro</i>, in stromal-responsive human myeloma cell lines, and <i>in vivo</i>, in orthotopic disseminated xenograft models of myeloma, that tofacitinib showed efficacy in myeloma models. Furthermore, tofacitinib strongly synergized with venetoclax in coculture with bone marrow stromal cells but not in monoculture. Surprisingly, we found that ruxolitinib, an FDA approved agent targeting JAK1 and JAK2, did not lead to the same anti-myeloma effects. Combination with a novel irreversible JAK3-selective inhibitor also did not enhance ruxolitinib effects. Transcriptome analysis and unbiased phosphoproteomics revealed that bone marrow stromal cells stimulate a JAK/STAT-mediated proliferative program in myeloma cells, and tofacitinib reversed the large majority of these pro-growth signals. Taken together, our results suggest that tofacitinib reverses the growth-promoting effects of the tumor microenvironment. As tofacitinib is already FDA approved, these results can be rapidly translated into potential clinical benefits for myeloma patients.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Tofacitinib, Lfq, Bone marrow microenvironment, Myeloma

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Christine Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Paul Wiita
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California San Francisco


