### Accession
PXD009659

### Title
A survival mechanism controlled by cadherins and Dlg1 polarity complex inhibits Fas cell death receptor signaling

### Description
A fine regulation of epithelia cell death is required to maintain tissue integrity and homeostasis. At a cellular level, this life and death decision is controlled by environmental stimuli including death receptors activation. Here, we show that establishment of cell polarity and AJ formation control the pro-apoptotic signaling emanating from the death receptor Fas. We demonstrate that in colon epithelia Fas concentrates at cell-cell junctions together with the E-cadherin, which protects cells from FasL-induced cell death. The Fas-cadherin association requires the C terminal PDZ binding site of Fas and, using a proteomic approach, we showed that this domain allows the association with the polarity molecule Dlg1. We proved that the interaction of Fas with this scaffold molecule participate to this cell death protection. Therefore inhibition of FasL-induced cell death by Fas-cadherin-Dlg1 complex is a double-edged sword mechanism that helps to maintain epithelial homeostasis by (i) protecting normal polarized epithelia from apoptosis (ii) promoting the elimination of compromised non-polarized cells.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides corresponding to carboxyl terminals of human Fas (aa’s 316-335 (Fas) or 316-332 (FasSLV)) were synthesized (GenScript, Piscataway, USA) and cross-linked to NHS-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare). Pull-down experiments were performed using HCT15 cell lysates and interacting proteins were identified by LCMSMS. Briefly, beads containing peptides or control beads were added to cell lysates and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 0,2 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 10 mM NaF, 20mM -glycero-phosphate and a mix of proteases inhibitors). For mass spectrometry analysis, protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionisation in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available pararallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. . The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm2 from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.3.83. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine4. Spectra were searched against the human subset of the swisssprot database database (date 2018.01; 20244 entries).The following parameters were used for searches : (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level and protein level were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.5.6.0) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 100% of samples in at least one condition. Protein LFQ intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). In this way, imputation of missing values in the controls allows statistical comparison of protein abundances that are present only in the inhibitors samples. To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 15

### Publication Abstract
Finely tuned regulation of epithelial cell death maintains tissue integrity and homeostasis. At the cellular level, life and death decisions are controlled by environmental stimuli such as the activation of death receptors. We show that cell polarity and adherens junction formation prevent proapoptotic signals emanating from the Fas death receptor. Fas is sequestered in E-cadherin actin-based adhesion structures that are less able to induce downstream apoptosis signaling. Using a proteomic-based approach, we find that the polarity molecule Dlg1 interacts with the C-terminal PDZ-binding site in Fas and that this interaction decreases formation of the death-inducing complex upon engagement with Fas ligand (FasL), thus acting as an additional cell death protection mechanism. We propose that E-cadherin and Dlg1 inhibit FasL-induced cell death by two complementary but partially independent mechanisms that help to maintain epithelial homeostasis by protecting normal polarized epithelia from apoptosis. When polarity is lost, the Fas-cadherin-Dlg1 antiapoptotic complex is disrupted, and FasL can promote the elimination of compromised nonpolarized cells.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Cell death, Death receptor, Pdz, Cell polarity, Epithelia

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Audebert Stephane
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


