### Accession
PXD012038

### Title
Molecular characterization of Histomonas meleagridis exoproteome with emphasis on protease secretion and parasite-bacteria interaction - SWATH dataset

### Description
Exoproteome from parasitic protists constitutes of extracellular proteins which play a fundamental role in multifactorial host-parasite interactions. Lytic factors, especially secreted proteases in extracellular milieu, are capable to modulate tissue invasion, thereby aggravating host susceptibility. Despite the important role of exoproteins during infection, exoproteomic data on Histomonas meleagridis are non-existent. The present study employed traditional 1D-in-gel-zymography (1D-IGZ) and micro-LC-ESI-MS/MS (shotgun proteomics), to scrutinize H. meleagridis exoproteomes, obtained from a clonal virulent and attenuated strains. Both strains were maintained as mono-eukaryotic monoxenic culture with Escherichia coli. We demonstrated active in vitro secretion kinetics of proteases by both parasites, with widespread proteolytic activity ranging from 17 kDa to 120 kDa. Based on protease inhibitor-susceptibility tests, a predominant repertoire of cysteine proteolysis was present in the parasite exoproteomes, with stronger activity from virulent H. meleagridis. Shotgun proteomics, aided by customized database, identified 176 proteins including actin, potential moonlighting glycolytic enzymes, lytic molecules such as pore-forming proteins (PFPs) and proteases like cathepsin-L like cysteine protease. To quantify the exoproteomic differences between the virulent and the attenuated H. meleagridis cultures, a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra mass spectrometric (SWATH-MS) approach was applied. Surprisingly results showed most of the exoproteomic differences to be of bacterial origin, involving metabolism and locomotion. By deciphering such molecular signatures, novel insights into an inherent complex in vitro protozoan- bacteria relationship was elucidated.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The H. meleagridis exoproteomes were obtained following 6h serum-free incubation of each of three virulent and three attenuated H. meleagridis cultures. Concentrated cell-free filtrates were submitted to on-filter digestion to remove excess reagents, detergents and salts. This was followed by HPLC interfaced with micro electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). Briefly, the exoproteomes were treated with protease inhibitors (1000 μM TLCK, E-64, PMSF, EDTA, and cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany)). Following this, 20µg protein from each samples were digested according to the standard eFASP protocol (enhanced filter-aided sample preparation) using Amicon Ultra 0.5mL Ultracel 10 K centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Burlington MA, USA) . In brief, after washing, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide. On-filter digestion was performed with trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using 4% sodium deoxycholate for 14 hours at 37°C. Afterwards, digested peptides were recovered from the filter with three changes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Removal of sodium deoxycholate was achieved by phase transfer with ethyl acetate according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Extracted peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, a C18 cleanup step using Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific; Waltham, MA; USA) was performed according to the manufacturer’s manual. Dried peptides were redissolved in 5% acetonitril (ACN), 0.5% triflouroacetic acid (TFA) for sample loading. Washing was performed using 5% ACN with 0.5% TFA. Finally, peptide elution was accomplished with 70%ACN with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Dried peptides were redissolved in 0.1% aqueous TFA prior to LC-MS injection (4.5 µg protein absolute in 9 µl injection volume). All samples were spiked with standardized indexed retention time reference peptides (iRT-Kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for facilitation of retention time alignment (0.8 µl iRTs added to 40 µl sample). Acquisition of SWATH data Peptides were separated on an Eksigent NanoLC 425 system using a microflow pump module (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Sample pre-concentration and desalting were accomplished with a 5 mm YMC-Triart C18 precolumn (500 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, and 12 nm pore size) (YMC, Dinslaken, Germany). For sample loading and desalting ultra pure LC-MS grade H2O with 0.1% formic acid (FA) was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Separation of peptides was performed on a 15 cm YMC-Triart C18 column (300 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, and 12 nm pore size; YMC, Dinslaken, Germany) with a flow rate of 5 µl/min. The gradient started with 3% B (ACN with 0.1% FA) and increased in two steps to 25% B (38 min) and 35% (43min). For information independent data acquisition (SWATH runs) MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400-1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms. Product ion spectra were collected in 70 windows in the range of 400-1250 m/z with a width of 4.8 to 323.9 Da depending on the density of precursor masses in the mass segment. For each window ions were accumulated for 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The database consisted of translated amino acid sequences originating from the 3356 non-redundant contigs of the H. meleagridis transcriptome [translated: 12.10.2017], (study accession number PRJEB19109; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB19109), E. coli proteins (n=219107) (UniPort taxonomy ID: 562, EcolX https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/562) [downloaded: 18.10.2017] and proteins from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) (n= 117) (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) [downloaded: 18.10.2017]. Acquired raw data were processed with ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) for re-calibration and database searches. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. Parameters for database search were: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Global false discovery rate was set to <1% on protein level. Statistical evaluation using R programming language Statistical evaluation was performed using R programming language. cRAP proteins and proteins quantified with just one peptide were removed from Marker View raw protein list before further processing. Raw peak areas after normalization to total area sums were log2-transformed to approach a normal distribution. On a logarithmic scale, technical replicates were aggregated by arithmetic mean before application of statistical tests. Differential expression of proteins was assessed using two-tailed t-Test for independent samples for each protein. To adjust for multiple testing, the method of Benjamini and Hochberg was used to control the FDR. Protein expression was considered differential if the adjusted p-value was below α=0.05 and the absolute fold change was at least two (fold change < −2 or > +2).

### Publication Abstract
The exoproteome of parasitic protists constitutes extracellular proteins that play a fundamental role in host-parasite interactions. Lytic factors, especially secreted proteases, are capable of modulating tissue invasion, thereby aggravating host susceptibility. Despite the important role of exoproteins during infection, the exoproteomic data on Histomonas meleagridis are non-existent. The present study employed traditional 1D-in-gel-zymography (1D-IGZ) and micro-LC-ESI-MS/MS (shotgun proteomics), to investigate H. meleagridis exoproteomes, obtained from a clonal virulent and an attenuated strain. Both strains were maintained as mono-eukaryotic monoxenic cultures with Escherichia coli. We demonstrated active in vitro secretion kinetics of proteases by both parasite strains, with a widespread proteolytic activity ranging from 17 kDa to 120 kDa. Based on protease inhibitor susceptibility assay, the majority of proteases present in both exoproteomes belonged to the family of cysteine proteases and showed stronger activity in the exoproteome of a virulent H. meleagridis. Shotgun proteomics, aided by customized database search, identified 176 proteins including actin, potential moonlighting glycolytic enzymes, lytic molecules such as pore-forming proteins (PFPs) and proteases like cathepsin-L like cysteine protease. To quantify the exoproteomic differences between the virulent and the attenuated H. meleagridis cultures, a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra mass spectrometric (SWATH-MS) approach was applied. Surprisingly, results showed most of the exoproteomic differences to be of bacterial origin, especially targeting metabolism and locomotion. By deciphering such molecular signatures, novel insights into a complex in vitro protozoan- bacteria relationship were elucidated.

### Keywords
Histomonas meleagridis; exoproteome profiling; protein secretion; shotgun exoproteomics; proteases; protease inhibitor; protozoa; microbial microenvironment; pathogenesis; virulence factors

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


