### Accession
PXD043706

### Title
Identification of OsSGS3a-FLAG-interacting proteins by IP-MS/MS

### Description
OsSGS3a-FLAG and its interacting proteins were enriched by immunoprecipitation using Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads. Then, OsSGS3a-FLAG-interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrum.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from leaves of two-week-old seedlings of OsSGS3a-FLAG OE with the IP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail). Protein extracted from NIP seedlings was used as a negative control. The OsSGS3a-FLAG proteins were enriched by immunoprecipitation using Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads, washed for four times with IP lysis buffer, eluted with 0.1 M glycine (pH = 2.5). The supernatant was collected and separated by SDS-PAGE, and protein bands were digested into peptides by trypsin and recovered.

### Data Protocol
Peptides mixtures were analyzed by Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) and mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). The data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (1.6.17.0) for protein identification and quantification, using the Rice Annotation Project (RAP) database (http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/).

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent heat stress and pathogen invasion seriously threaten crop production, and abiotic stress often antagonizes biotic stress response against pathogens. However, the molecular mechanisms of trade-offs between thermotolerance and defense remain obscure. Here, we identify a rice thermo-sensitive mutant that displays a defect in floret development under high temperature with a mutation in SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING 3a (OsSGS3a). OsSGS3a interacts with its homolog OsSGS3b and modulates the biogenesis of trans-acting small interfering RNA (tasiRNA) targeting AUXIN RESPONSE FACTORS (ARFs). We find that OsSGS3a/b positively, while OsARF3a/b and OsARF3la/lb negatively modulate thermotolerance. Moreover, OsSGS3a negatively, while OsARF3a/b and OsARF3la/lb positively regulate disease resistance to the bacterial pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) and the fungal pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae (M. oryzae). Taken together, our study uncovers a previously unknown trade-off mechanism that regulates distinct immunity and thermotolerance through the OsSGS3-tasiRNA-OsARF3 module, highlighting the regulation of abiotic-biotic stress response trade-off in plants.

### Keywords
Ossgs3a; ip-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Life Science center, Life Science college, Yunnan University
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in Yunnan, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China.

### Submitter
Xuna Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Junzhong Liu
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in Yunnan, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China.


