### Accession
PXD021751

### Title
An unbiased approach to mapping the signaling network of the pseudorabies virus US3 protein

### Description
The US3 serine/threonine protein kinase is conserved among the alphaherpesvirus family and represents an important virulence factor. US3 plays a role in viral nuclear egress, induces dramatic alterations of the cytoskeleton, represses apoptosis, enhances gene expression and modulates the immune response. Although several substrates of US3 have been identified, an unbiased screen to identify US3 phosphorylation targets has not yet been described. Here we perform a shotgun and phosphoproteomics analysis of cells expressing the US3 protein of pseudorabies virus (PRV) to identify US3 phosphorylation targets in an unbiased way. These results provide new insight in the signaling network of the US3 protein kinase and may serve as a basis for future research into the role of the US3 protein in the viral replication cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a urea lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 1 tablet/10 ml buffer). The samples were sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 2 mg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 8 µg LysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 20 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (500 mg, Agilent). Columns were first washed with 5 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 15 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 5 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 700 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)). The eluted peptides were divided in two parts: 100 µl was dried completely in a speedvac vacuum concentrator for shotgun analysis, while the remainder was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched with MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads following the protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, 200 µl MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads (per sample) were washed twice with 70% EtOH, once with 1% NH4OH and three times with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (14:80:6, v/v/v). Next, the digested sample was incubated with the washed beads for 30 min at room temperature, the beads were washed once with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (14:80:6, v/v/v) and three times with a mixture of water/ACN/TFA (19:80:1, v/v/v). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by adding three times 80 µl 1% NH4OH. 60 µl 10% formic acid (FA) was added to the combined eluate and the samples were dried completely in a speedvac vacuum concentrator.  Purified peptides for shotgun analysis were re-dissolved in 100 µl solvent A and the peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Peptides resulting from phosphopeptide enrichment were re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on the same system. Trapping of peptides was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on an analytical column packed in the needle (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min and a constant temperature of 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation), followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 (shotgun) or 13,000 (phospho) were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms (shotgun) or 80 ms (phospho). MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and >6 charge states from fragmentation selection. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the shotgun and phosphoproteomics data was performed in two separate MaxQuant searches (version 1.5.6.5) with identical, mainly default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1 % on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the Sus scrofa proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of November 2016 containing 26,101 pig protein sequences, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the sequences of the kinase active/inactive US3 Pseudorabies virus (NIA3 strain). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 4,743 proteins in the shotgun samples and 5,583 phosphorylation sites in the phosphopeptide enriched samples. Proteins identified in the shotgun samples were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits and proteins that were only identified by site were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 3,109 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and s0=1) to compare wild type and mutant samples and a volcano plot was generated. Three proteins were found to be significantly regulated. For further analysis of the phosphoproteomics data, the phospho(STY)sites file was loaded in the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3). Reverse hits were removed, the site table was expanded and the intensity values were log2 transformed. Replicate samples were grouped, phosphosites with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 2,971 quantified phosphopeptides that was used for further data analysis. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR = 0.05 and s0 = 1) to compare control and KO samples and a volcano plot was generated. 81 phosphopeptides were significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
The US3 serine/threonine protein kinase is conserved among the alphaherpesvirus family and represents an important virulence factor. US3 plays a role in viral nuclear egress, induces dramatic alterations of the cytoskeleton, represses apoptosis, enhances gene expression and modulates the immune response. Although several substrates of US3 have been identified, an unbiased screen to identify US3 phosphorylation targets has not yet been described. Here, we perform a shotgun and phosphoproteomics analysis of cells expressing the US3 protein of pseudorabies virus (PRV) to identify US3 phosphorylation targets in an unbiased way. We identified several cellular proteins that are differentially phosphorylated upon US3 expression and validated the phosphorylation of lamin A/C at serine 404, both in US3-transfected and PRV-infected cells. These results provide new insights into the signaling network of the US3 protein kinase and may serve as a basis for future research into the role of the US3 protein in the viral replication cycle.

### Keywords
Pseudorabies virus, Us3, Kinase, Prv, Alphaherpesvirus, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Herman Favoreel
Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium


