### Accession
PXD003764

### Title
Tyrosine 601 of Bacillus subtilis DnaK undergoes phosphorylation and is crucial for chaperone activity and heat shock survival

### Description
In order to screen for cellular substrates of the Bacillus subtilis BY-kinase PtkA, and its cognate phosphotyrosine-protein phosphatase PtpZ, we performed a triple SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteome analysis. Detected tyrosine phosphorylation sites for which the phosphorylation level decreased in the ΔptkA strain and increased in the ΔptpZ strain, compared to the wild type, were considered as potential substrates of PtkA/PtpZ. One of those sites was the residue tyrosine 601 of the molecular chaperone DnaK. We confirmed that DnaK is a substrate of PtkA and PtpZ by in vitro phosphorylation and dephosphorylation assays. In vitro, the non-phosphorylatable mutant DnaK Y601F exhibited impaired interaction with its co-chaperones DnaJ and GrpE, along with diminished capacity to hydrolyze ATP and assist the re-folding of denatured proteins. In vivo, loss of DnaK phosphorylation in the mutant strain dnaK Y601F, or in the strain overexpressing the phosphatase PtpZ, led to diminished survival upon heat shock, consistent with the in vitro results. The decreased survival of the mutant dnaK Y601F at an elevated temperature could be rescued by complementing with the wild type dnaK allele expressed ectopically. We concluded that the residue tyrosine 601 of DnaK can be phosphorylated and dephosphorylated by PtkA and PtpZ, respectively. Furthermore, Y601 is important for DnaK chaperone activity and heat shock survival of B. subtilis.

### Sample Protocol
lysA knock-out strain of Bacillus subtilis was constructed to make the bacterium auxotrophic for lysine. All phosphoproteomics experiments were carried out with this strain. Additionally strains carrying the knock-out of the tyrosine kinase PtkA and phosphatase PtpZ were also constructed. SILAC labeling of bacterial cells was done by adding the respective labelled lysine in the media. Cells were grown to an optimum density, after which they were lysed and proteins were extracted. Digestion was carried out with the endoprotease LysC. Part of the lysate was taken for whole proteome analysis by Offgel and GelC while the rest was taken for phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 chromatography. All samples were then analyzed on the mass spectrometer and data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite.  Additionally PtkA, PtpZ, DnaK and DnaK_Y601F were overexpressed and purified using an affinity-tag. Circular dichroism spectroscopy was carried out with purified DnaK and DnaK_Y601F to prove the presence of similar secondary structures of both proteins. In vitro phosphorylation and dephosphorylation assays were carried out to show phosphorylation of DnaK by PtkA and dephosphorylation by PtpZ. ATP hydrolysis activity measurement was carried out coupled with NADH oxidation to measure the activity of DnaK. Immunoprecipitation of DnaK with GrpE was performed using the Pierce Classic IP Kit. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) refolding assay was carried out to show refolding of denatured lactate by DnaK. In vivo heat-shock and heat-resistance assay was carried out to show resistance of cells to heat in the presence of DnaK.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.1.0 integrated with the Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of B. subtilis 168 obtained from Uniprot (taxonomy ID 1423), containing 4,195 B. subtilis protein entries and 248 commonly observed laboratory contaminant proteins. Endoprotease Lys-C was specified as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Three isotopic forms of lysine (light, medium and heavy) were specified in the search space. Oxidation of methionines, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was specified as a variable modification. Initial maximum allowance for mass tolerance was set to six ppm for the survey scan and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Re-quantify was enabled. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide, protein and phosphorylated site level individually. Fragments with a minimum length of seven amino acids were used for SILAC peptide quantification. Phosphorylation events with a localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were considered localized on the respective S/T/Y residue. A posterior error probability (PEP) score filter of ≤ 0.001 was applied for the modified peptides. MS/MS spectra of phosphorylated peptides were manually validated for good b- and y- ion series coverage using MaxQuant Viewer (version 1.5.1.0). Ratios from each SILAC experiment are relative to the Light labeled WT (control) strain. The SILAC ratios of the phosphorylation sites were further normalized to the respective protein ratios in order to eliminate a bias due to changing protein abundance. Phosphorylation sites were considered as differentially regulated based on “Significance B” (p = 0.05) calculated after normalization with the corresponding protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
In order to screen for cellular substrates of the Bacillus subtilis BY-kinase PtkA, and its cognate phosphotyrosine-protein phosphatase PtpZ, we performed a triple Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture-based quantitative phosphoproteome analysis. Detected tyrosine phosphorylation sites for which the phosphorylation level decreased in the &#x394;ptkA strain and increased in the &#x394;ptpZ strain, compared to the wild type (WT), were considered as potential substrates of PtkA/PtpZ. One of those sites was the residue tyrosine 601 of the molecular chaperone DnaK. We confirmed that DnaK is a substrate of PtkA and PtpZ by in vitro phosphorylation and dephosphorylation assays. In vitro, DnaK Y601F mutant exhibited impaired interaction with its co-chaperones DnaJ and GrpE, along with diminished capacity to hydrolyze ATP and assist the re-folding of denatured proteins. In vivo, loss of DnaK phosphorylation in the mutant strain dnaK Y601F, or in the strain overexpressing the phosphatase PtpZ, led to diminished survival upon heat shock, consistent with the in vitro results. The decreased survival of the mutant dnaK Y601F at an elevated temperature could be rescued by complementing with the WT dnaK allele expressed ectopically. We concluded that the residue tyrosine 601 of DnaK can be phosphorylated and dephosphorylated by PtkA and PtpZ, respectively. Furthermore, Y601 is important for DnaK chaperone activity and heat shock survival of B. subtilis.

### Keywords
Protein folding, Molecular chaperons, Silac, Protein phosphorylation, Quantitative phosphoproteomics, Bacterial protein-tyrosine kinases

### Affiliations
Professor of Systems Microbiology Director of Chalmers Area of Advance Life Science Engineering  Systems and Synthetic Biology  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Mijakovic
Professor of Systems Microbiology Director of Chalmers Area of Advance Life Science Engineering  Systems and Synthetic Biology  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN


