### Accession
PXD006156

### Title
RNF8 mediates NONO degradation following UV-induced DNA damage to properly terminate ATR-CHK1 checkpoint signaling

### Description
RNF8 is a key E3 ubiquitin ligase functioning in both DSB- and UV-induced DDR, identification of additional substrates will help further elucidate its role in DNA damage signaling. To identify substrates of ubiquitin ligases, we have recently devised a method based on proximity-dependent biotin labeling. In this method, an E3 ubiquitin ligase of interest is expressed as a fusion to Escherichia coli biotin ligase BirA together with a biotin acceptor peptide (AP)-tagged ubiquitin. The BirA-directed biotin labeling of AP depends on the proximity of the two fusion proteins in the cell, which leads to preferential labeling of ubiquitinated E3 substrates. In this study, we applied this procedure to RNF8 and identified its substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of biotinylated proteins HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids encoding FLAG-BirA-RNF8 and AP-HA-Ub; 24 h post-transfection, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4), boiled at 95°C for 10 min and centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min. The obtained supernatant was diluted 10-fold in dilution buffer (250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4) and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG M2 agarose (Sigma) overnight at 4°C. The beads were separated from the lysate by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 3 min. The lysates containing biotinylated proteins were incubated with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen) overnight at room temperature. Dynabeads were sequentially washed with Buffer 1 (2% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4), Buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), Buffer 3 (0.5% deoxycholic acid, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0), and Buffer 4 (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4). Finally, the beads were washed with and resuspended in 200 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8).   Protein digestion and affinity purification of ubiquitinated peptides Purified proteins immobilized on Dynabeads were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was separated from Dynabeads by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 5 min. The collected supernatant was dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. The peptides were dissolved in immunoaffinity purification buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH, pH 7.2, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with Ubiquitin Branch Motif (K-ε-GG) Immunoaffinity Beads (Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with immunoaffinity purification buffer and three times with deionized water, and peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid and lyophilized. Protein identification and quantitation by mass spectrometry Lyophilized peptides were analyzed by nanoelectrospray LC–MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA). The peptides were separated on a 75 μm × 15 cm reversed-phase column (EASY-Spray PepMap, C18, 3 μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. San Jose, CA) with a gradient of 5% to 50% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid over 120 min.

### Data Protocol
The 20 most intense peaks from each full MS scan acquired in the Orbitrap were selected for MS/MS in the linear ion trap. The MS-MS spectra were used to search the National Center for Biotechnology Information nonredundant and expressed-sequence-tag databases using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science). The MS/MS scan range was m/z 200–2000.

### Publication Abstract
RNF8 plays a critical role in DNA damage response (DDR) to initiate ubiquitination-dependent signaling. To better characterize the role of RNF8 in UV-induced DDR, we searched for novel substrates of RNF8 and identified NONO as one intriguing substrate. We found that: (i) RNF8 ubiquitinates NONO and (ii) UV radiation triggers NONO ubiquitination and its subsequent degradation. Depletion of RNF8 inhibited UV-induced degradation of NONO, suggesting that RNF8 targets NONO for degradation in response to UV damage. In addition, we found that 3 NONO lysine residues (positions 279, 290 and 295) are important for conferring its instability in UV-DDR. Depletion of RNF8 or expression of NONO with lysine to arginine substitutions at positions 279, 290 and 295 prolonged CHK1 phosphorylation over an extended period of time. Furthermore, expression of the stable mutant, but not wild-type NONO, induced a prolonged S phase following UV exposure. Stable cell lines expressing the stable NONO mutant showed increased UV sensitivity in a clonogenic survival assay. Since RNF8 recruitment to the UV-damaged sites is dependent on ATR, we propose that RNF8-mediated NONO degradation and subsequent inhibition of NONO-dependent chromatin loading of TOPBP1, a key activator of ATR, function as a negative feedback loop critical for turning off ATR-CHK1 checkpoint signaling in UV-DDR.

### Keywords
Substrate identification, E3 ligase, Rnf8, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science & Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 262                      Seongsanno, Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea. Tel.: +82-2-2123-2704; Fax: 82-2-362-                     9897
The Catholic University of Korea

### Submitter
Rakesh Deshar

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Bok Yoon
Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science & Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 262                      Seongsanno, Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea. Tel.: +82-2-2123-2704; Fax: 82-2-362-                     9897


