### Accession
PXD007283

### Title
Endogenous brain ARC complexes

### Description
Arc is an activity regulated neuronal protein yet little is known about its protein interactions, assembly into multiprotein complexes, role in human disease and cognition. We applied an integrated proteomic and genetic strategy using targeted tagging of a Tandem Affinity Purification (TAP) tag and Venus fluorescent protein into the endogenous Arc gene in mice, biochemical and proteomic characterization of native complexes in wild type and knockout mice, and human genetic analyses of disease and intelligence. TAP tagging enabled efficient purification of complexes and identification of many novel Arcinteracting proteins, of which PSD95 was the most abundant. PSD95 was essential for Arc assembly into 1.5 MDa complexes and activity-dependent recruitment to excitatory synapses. Integrating human genetic data with proteomic data showed postsynaptic Arc- PSD95 complexes are enriched in schizophrenia, intellectual disability, autism and epilepsy mutations and normal variants in intelligence. Arc-PSD95 postsynaptic complexes are a molecular substrate for the convergence of normal and pathological genetic variants impacting on human cognitive function.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Affinity Purification Tandem Affinity Purification (TAP) was perfomed as in (Fernandez et al., 2009). Briefly, mouse forebrain was homogenized on ice in 1% DOC buffer (50 mM Tris pH9.0, 1% Sodium Deoxycholate, 50 mM NaF, 20μM ZnCl2, 1mM Na3VO4), 2 mM Pefabloc SC 20 (Roche) and 1 tablet/10ml protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche) at 0.38 g wet weight per 7 ml cold buffer with a glass Teflon Douncer homogenizer. The homogenate was incubated for 1h at 4ºC and clarified at 50,000 g for 30 min at 4ºC. Isolation of Arc TAP tagged complexes was performed as described (Fernandez et al., 2009). The gel was fixed, stained with Colloidal Coomassie and lanes were cut into slices, destained and digested overnight with trypsin (Roche, Trypsin modified, sequencing grade) as described previously (Fernandez et al., 2009). Summary of one-step purifications Two sets of one-step purifications: 3 replicates of ARCTAP/TAP and WT (as control) purifications dimethyl labelled for quantification by MaxQuant). 2 replicates of ARCTAP/TAP and 1 control (MaxQuant intensity-based label free quantification) Proteins were considered enriched if they had a ratio of enrichment of 2.5 (ARCTAP/TAP/Control purification) in two out of 5 one-step purifications. Summary of tandem purifications Three replicates of ARCTAP/TAP and control purifications (MaxQuant intensity-based label free quantification). Proteins were considered enriched if they had a ratio of enrichment of 2.5 (ARCTAP/TAP/Control purification) in two out of three two-step purifications. The total set of 107 ARC complex components was assembled from the combined set of enriched proteins from one step and tandem purifications. 11 Summary of purification from ARCTAP/TAP/PSD95-/- mice Arc binding partners were captured from lysed forebrain from ArcTAP/TAPxPSD95-/-. In order to isolate similar amounts of Arc-associated protein complexes from WT and PSD95-/-, TAP tagged Arc was captured from heterozygous ArcTAP/+ mice. The TAP procedure, concentration of the eluted samples and gel staining were performed as described in Experimental procedures. The amount of protein lysed, captured and eluted was monitored by semiquantitative immunoblotting before LC-MS/MS (Figure S7). Three replicate one-step purifications of ARC complexes from ARCTAP/+, ARCTAP/TAP/PSD95-/- and control mice were dimethyl labelled for quantification by MaxQuant. Given that ARC expression is down-regulated in PSD-95 mutant mice, all protein ratios were normalized to that determined for ARC by MaxQuant. 77 out of the total set of 107 ARC complex proteins were quantified in dimethyl labelled PSD95 mutant versus wild type experiments and 59 of these proteins could be quantified in at least 2 out of 3 replicates. Of these, 24 were decreased by 1.5-fold in the PSD-95 mutant (Ratio < 0.67) and 11 showed a 1.5 fold increase in abundance in the PSD95 mutant (Ratio >1.5).

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed data using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008). MaxQuant processed data was searched against a UniProt mouse proteome sequence database (Mar, 2012) using the following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 7 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut offs. Protein quantification was performed using razor and unique peptides and using only unmodified and carbamidomethylated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Complexes

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Science Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD) Firth Court, Western Bank The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
Department of Biomedical Science Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD) Firth Court, Western Bank The University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN United Kingdom


