### Accession
PXD020447

### Title
Plasmodium PKG interacts with ICM1, a multi-pass membrane protein, in both asexual and sexual stages

### Description
In malaria parasites, all cGMP-dependent signalling is mediated through a single cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG). A major function of PKG is to control calcium signals essential for the parasite to exit red blood cells or for transmission to the mosquito vector. However, how PKG controls these signals in the absence of known second messenger-dependent calcium channels or scaffolding proteins remains a mystery. Here we identify a tightly-associated PKG partner protein in Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages. Named ICM1, the partner is a polytopic membrane protein with homology to transporters and calcium channels, raising the possibility of a direct functional link between PKG and calcium homeostasis

### Sample Protocol
To identify potential PKG interacting partners in P. falciparum, we used a previously established transgenic parasite line expressing PKG fused at its C-terminus to a triple HA tag(PfPKG-HA). PfPKG-HA was immunoprecipitated from extracts of mature schizonts using anti-HA-conjugated magnetic beads and the eluates analysed by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry analysis. To corroborate these findings, we generated a second transgenic P. falciparum line expressing a GFP-tagged form of PKG (PKG-GFP and enriched using anti-GFP nanobodies. Enriched parasite extracts were eluted from beads in sample loading buffer and run for 1cm on 12% SDS–PAGE gels and stained with colloidal coomassie blue.  Gel lanes were diced, washed, alkylated and digested prior to LC-MS/MS using a nanoHLPC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap LC-MS/MS raw data was searched against a recent copy of the Plasmodium Falciparum FASTA protein database from PlasmoDB, using Maxquant and the results processed and visualise using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell signalling, Plasmodium falciparum, Lc-msms, Malaria, Protein kinase g, Orbitrap, Calcium homeostasis

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Head Of Proteomics STP, Francis Crick Institute, London

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head Of Proteomics STP, Francis Crick Institute, London


