### Accession
PXD024219

### Title
Network analysis of the CSF proteome characterises convergent pathways of cellular dysfunction in ALS

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a clinical syndrome with complex biological determinants, but which in most cases is characterised by TDP-43 pathology. The identification in CSF of a protein signature of TDP-43 network dysfunction would have the potential to inform the identification of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets. We compared CSF proteomic data from patients with ALS (n=41), Parkinson's disease (n=19) and healthy control participants (n=20).  Weighted correlation network analysis was used to identify modules within the CSF protein network and combined with gene ontology enrichment analysis to functionally annotate module proteins.  Analysis of module eigenproteins and differential correlation analysis of the CSF protein network was used to compare ALS and Parkinson's disease protein co-correlation with healthy controls.  In order to monitor temporal changes in the CSF proteome, we performed longitudinal analysis of the CSF proteome in a subset of ALS patients. Alterations in the co-correlation network in CSF samples identified a set of pathways known to be associated with TDP-43 dysfunction in the pathogenesis of ALS, with important implications for therapeutic targeting and biomarker development.

### Sample Protocol
The study included 43 patients with ALS, 20 patients with Parkinson's disease, and 20 healthy control subjects.  Patients with ALS were recruited from the Oxford ALS Centre, Oxford, UK and patients with Parkinson's disease were recruited through the Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, Oxford UK. CSF was collected at baseline and, in ALS patients, every six months when available.  Clinical data was ascertained on the same day.  CSF samples were processed in accordance with consensus guidelines for biomarker development within one hour of sampling and stored at -80ÂºC until use.  Symptom onset was defined as first weakness reported by patients.  Disease progression rate was calculated per-visit using the revised ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R) by [48 - ALSFRS-R] / [months from symptom onset]. Samples of CSF were thawed on ice and digested using heat stable immobilized trypsin as per the manufacturer's instructions (SMART digest, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). 50 µL of CSF was mixed with 150 µL SMART digest buffer and added to SMART digest plates.  Samples were incubated at 70ºC with shaking at 1400 rpm for 60 minutes. Digested samples were desalted using SOLAµ plates and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were resuspended in 20 µL buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) and kept at -20ºC until analysis.  Peptide concentrations were assayed using a Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions.  A pooled sample was produced by combining equal quantities of digested peptide from each individual sample and injected after every tenth sample for use in quality control analysis. Peptides were analysed by nano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nUHPLC LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). 500 nL of peptides from each sample were injected and analysed using a 60-minute linear gradient at a 250 nL/minute flow rate. The gradient used to elute the peptides started at 3 minutes with 2 % buffer B (0.1% TFA and 5% DMSO in CH3CN) increasing to 5% by 6 minutes followed by an increase up to 35% by 63 minutes. The data were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 full-width at half maximum ion intensity with a mass/charge ratio of 400 and a lockmass enabled at 445.120025 m/z. The 12 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 28 followed by exclusion for 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens Reference proteome (retrieved 01/06/2017) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) allowing for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da. Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine and oxidation on methionine were included as variable modifications. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% and all peptides with an ion score higher than 20 into were imported into Progenesis QIP. Proteins that were defined with at least one unique peptide were included in the protein data set for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Network analysis, Motor neuron disease, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Proteome, Cerebrospinal fluid, Wgcna

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Turner
Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, UK


