### Accession
PXD031934

### Title
The role of IRAKM in IL-1β-treated adipocytes

### Description
Toll-like receptors/Interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R) signaling plays an important role in High-fat diet (HFD)-induced adipose tissue dysfunction contributing to obesity-associated metabolic syndromes. Here, we show an unconventional IL-1R-IRAKM (IL-1R-associated kinase M)-Slc25a1 signaling axis in adipocytes that reprograms lipogenesis to promote diet-induced obesity. Adipocyte-specific deficiency of IRAKM reduced HFD-induced body weight gain, increased whole body energy expenditure and improved insulin resistance, associated with decreased lipid accumulation and adipocyte cell sizes. IL-1β stimulation induced the translocation of IRAKM Myddosome to mitochondria to promote de novo lipogenesis in adipocytes. Mechanistically, IRAKM interacts with and phosphorylates mitochondrial citrate carrier Slc25a1 to promote IL-1β-induced mitochondrial citrate transport to cytosol and de novo lipogenesis. Moreover, IRAKM-Slc25a1 axis mediates IL-1β induced Pgc1a acetylation to regulate thermogenic gene expression in adipocytes. IRAKM kinase-inactivation also attenuated HFD-induced obesity. Taken together, our study suggests that the IL-1R-IRAKM-Slc25a1 signaling axis tightly links inflammation and adipocyte metabolism, indicating a novel therapeutic target for obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Primary adipocytes were stimulated with IL-1β for 1 hour, and then immunoprecipitated using an anti-IRAKM antibody for proteomic analysis. The sample was filtered using a 3K Amicon Ultra 0.5 mL centrifugal filter, dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 50 μL of 6M urea buffer. The protein sample was reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The sample was digested by adding Trypsin to the sample at a 25:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w). The sample was mixed and incubated for 3–4 hours at 37°C. The sample was then diluted 6-fold with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) to reduce urea concentration to 1M or below. Digestion was continued overnight at 37°C. The digestion was terminated by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5-1%. The sample was desalted using a PepClean C18 spin column and resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides were analyzed on a ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a ThermoFisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was performed prior to MS/MS analysis for peptide separation. The HPLC column used is a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. 5 μL volumes of the peptide extract were injected and peptides eluted from the column by a 110-minute acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min and introduced to the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. Nano electrospray ion source was operated at 2.3 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra using a Fourier Transform (FT) orbitrap analyzer to determine peptide molecular weights and collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS product ion spectra with an ion-trap analyzer to determine the amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The MS method used in this study was a data-dependent acquisition (DIA) with 3 second duty cycle. It includes one full scan at a resolution of 120,000 followed by as many MS/MS scans as possible on the most abundant ions in that full scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and ions within 10 ppm of the fragmented mass were excluded for 60 seconds. The data was analyzed using Sequest bundled into Proteome Discoverer V2.3. The database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the SwissProtKB mouse protein database containing 16986 entries with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences).  The search was performed looking for fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Toll-like receptors/Interleukin-1 receptor signaling plays an important role in high-fat diet-induced adipose tissue dysfunction contributing to obesity-associated metabolic syndromes. Here, we show an unconventional IL-1R-IRAKM-Slc25a1 signaling axis in adipocytes that reprograms &#xfeff;lipogenesis to promote diet-induced obesity. Adipocyte-specific deficiency of IRAKM reduces high-fat diet-induced body weight gain, increases whole body energy expenditure and improves insulin resistance, associated with decreased lipid accumulation and adipocyte cell sizes. IL-1&#x3b2; stimulation induces the translocation of IRAKM Myddosome to mitochondria to promote de novo lipogenesis in adipocytes. Mechanistically, IRAKM interacts with and phosphorylates mitochondrial citrate carrier Slc25a1 to promote IL-1&#x3b2;-induced mitochondrial citrate transport to cytosol and de novo lipogenesis. &#xfeff;Moreover, IRAKM-Slc25a1 axis mediates IL-1&#x3b2; induced Pgc1a &#xfeff;acetylation to regulate thermogenic gene expression in adipocytes. IRAKM kinase-inactivation also attenuates high-fat diet-induced obesity. &#xfeff;Taken together, our study suggests that the IL-1R-IRAKM-Slc25a1 signaling axis tightly links inflammation and adipocyte metabolism, indicating a potential therapeutic target for obesity.

### Keywords
Irakm, Pgc1a acetylation, Slc25a1, Adipocytes, Fatty acid synthesis

### Affiliations
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxia Li
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA


