### Accession
PXD039984

### Title
Mining the human gut microbiome identifies mycobacterial D-arabinan degrading enzymes

### Description
Division and degradation of bacterial cell walls requires coordinated action of a myriad of enzymes. This particularly applies to the elaborate cell walls of acid-fast organisms such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which consist of a multi-layered cell wall that contains an unusual glycan called arabinogalactan. Enzymes that cleave the D-arabinan core of this structure have not previously been identified in any organism. We have interrogated the diverse carbohydrate degrading enzymes expressed by the human gut microbiota and uncovered four families of glycoside hydrolases with activity against the D-arabinan or D-galactan components of arabinogalactan. Using novel exo-D-galactofuranosidases from gut bacteria we generated enriched D-arabinan and used it to identify Dysgonomonas gadei as a D-arabinan degrader. This enabled the discovery of endo- and exo- acting enzymes that cleave D-arabinan. We have identified new members of the DUF2961 family (GH172), and a novel family of glycoside hydrolases (DUF4185) that display endo-ᴅ-arabinofuranase activity. The DUF4185 enzymes are conserved in mycobacteria and found in many microbes, suggesting that the ability to cleave these mycobacterial glycans plays an important role in the biology of diverse organisms. All mycobacteria encode two conserved endo-D-arabinanases that display different preferences for the D-arabinan-containing cell wall components arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan, suggesting they are important for cell wall modification and/or degradation. The discovery of these enzymes will support future studies into the structure and function of the mycobacterial cell wall.

### Sample Protocol
Dysgonomonas gadei cells were suspended in 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.5. The samples were subsequently sonicated using an ultrasonic homogenizer (Hielscher) for 1 minute. The whole-cell lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min to remove cellular debris. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Scientific). A total of 20 µg protein was used for further processing. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 15 min at 47 °C, and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteomic sample preparation was performed using the suspension trapping (S-Trap) sample preparation method 51, as recommended by the supplier (ProtiFi™, Huntington NY). Briefly, 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid was added to each sample, followed by the addition of 165 µl S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1). The acidified samples were added, separately, to S-Trap micro-spin columns and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 min until the solution has passed through the filter. Each S-Trap micro-spin column was washed with 150 µl S-trap binding buffer by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 1 min. This process was repeated for a total of five washes. Twenty-five µl of 50 mM TEAB containing trypsin (1:10 ratio of trypsin:protein) was added to each sample, followed by proteolytic digestion for 2 h at 47 °C using a thermomixer (Eppendorf). Peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Elution steps were repeated using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, respectively. The three eluates from each sample were combined and dried using a speed-vac before storage at -80 °C. Mass Spectrometry Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and each sample was independently analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 2% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 2 to 35% B in 120 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 2% for 10 min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1,600 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 × 105 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (IT) using Rapid scan mode after high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. An HCD collision energy of 30% was used, the AGC target was set to 1 × 104 and dynamic injection time mode was allowed. The number of MS/MS events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3 s fixed duty cycle. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ± 10 ppm m/z window was implemented using a 35 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.12.052, and searched against the Dysgonomonas gadei ATCC BAA-286 proteome database downloaded from Uniprot (accessed 09.01.2020). Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine53. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site modifications were removed before downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Carbohydrate-active enzymes (cazymes); glycoside hydrolase (gh); tuberculosis(tb); gh172; duf4185

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK


