### Accession
PXD006072

### Title
Varroa destructor LC-MSMS crossing developmental stages and sexes

### Description
Varroa destructor is one of the most prevalent and economically damaging honey bee pests worldwide, weakening colonies by simultaneously parasitizing and transmitting damaging viruses. Despite these impacts on honey bee health, surprisingly little is known about its fundamental molecular biology. Here we present a high-resolution V. destructor protein atlas crossing all major developmental stages (egg, protonymph, deutonymph and adult) for both male and female mites as a web-based interactive tool. In a proteogenomic effort, we identified 1,464 unique peptides corresponding to 419 proteins which were previously unannotated and we included these in all subsequent analyses. In order to use mass spectrometry-based peptide sequencing to augment the genome annotation of non-model species, we analyzed their amino acid and nucleotide composition as well as orthology to other species to suggest reasons why they may have been missed initially. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we found that 1,433 proteins were differentially regulated across developmental stages, including proteins belonging to deformed wing virus and V. destructor virus. One other virus – the bee macula-like virus – was also detected, along with the protein generated by its short 3’ overlapping reading frame. In addition, we found that 101 proteins are sexually regulated and functional enrichment analysis suggests how they may contribute to sex-specific phenotypes and behaviour. Overall, this work provides a first of its kind interrogation of the patterns of gene expression that govern the Varroa life cycle and the tools we have developed will support further research on this threatening honey bee pest.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted by homogenizing with ceramic beads as previously described (McAfee et al. 2016 (BioRxiv)). Clarified lysate was precipitated overnight with 4 volumes of 100% ice cold acetone and the pellet was washed twice with 80% ice cold acetone. After allowing residual acetone to evaporate (~15 min) the protein pellet was solubilized in urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8) and ~30 µg (determined via the Bradford Assay) was reduced, alkylated and digested as previously described (Foster et al. 2003). Peptides were acidified (1 volume 1% TFA), desalted on a high capacity C18 STAGE tip (Rappsilber et al. 2003), solubilized in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and quantified in technical triplicate using a peptide fluorimetric assay (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
Two µg of peptides per sample were analyzed on an EasynLC-1000 chromatography system (Thermo) coupled to a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer. The LC C18 columns included a fritted trap column and pulled-tip 50 cm analytical column which were produced in-house as previously described (McAfee et al. 2016, Journal of proteome research; Beck et al. 2015). Peptides were separated using a 165 min linear gradient of increasing Buffer B as specified in the LCParms.txt file embedded within the Bruker data folders. Buffers A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile, respectively. The instrument was set to the same parameters as described in our previous publication under “Analysis of PTMs” (McAfee et al. 2016, Journal of proteome research), except the scanned mass range was 200-2,000 m/z, the top 20 precursors were fragmented at a 5 Hz spectral rate and the lower precursor intensity threshold was 300 cts.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Varroa destructor</i> is the most economically damaging honey bee pest, weakening colonies by simultaneously parasitizing bees and transmitting harmful viruses. Despite these impacts on honey bee health, surprisingly little is known about its fundamental molecular biology. Here, we present a <i>Varroa</i> protein atlas crossing all major developmental stages (egg, protonymph, deutonymph, and adult) for both male and female mites as a web-based interactive tool (http://foster.nce.ubc.ca/varroa/index.html). We used intensity-based label-free quantitation to find 1,433 differentially expressed proteins across developmental stages. Enzymes for processing carbohydrates and amino acids were among many of these differences as well as proteins involved in cuticle formation. Lipid transport involving vitellogenin was the most significantly enriched biological process in the foundress (reproductive female) and young mites. In addition, we found that 101 proteins were sexually regulated and functional enrichment analysis suggests that chromatin remodeling may be a key feature of sex determination. In a proteogenomic effort, we identified 519 protein-coding regions, 301 of which were supported by two or more peptides and 169 of which were differentially expressed. Overall, this work provides a first-of-its-kind interrogation of the patterns of protein expression that govern the <i>Varroa</i> life cycle and the tools we have developed will support further research on this threatening honey bee pest.

### Keywords
Protein atlas, Lc-msms, Development, Varroa destructor

### Affiliations
UBC
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z4

### Submitter
Alison McAfee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Leonard Foster
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z4


