### Accession
PXD012629

### Title
VEGFR N-glycosylation

### Description
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) is a highly N-glycosylated receptor tyrosine kinase involved in pro-angiogenic signaling in physiological and pathological contexts, including cancer. VEGFR2 post-translational modifications (PTMs) and their roles in receptor function and signaling have been extensively studied. However, until recently, co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of RTKs has been regarded as decorative rather than functional. N-glycosylation is a non-template based process that generates heterogeneously modified proteins. Emerging evidence suggests that the tumor microenvironment modulates expression of glycosyltransferases involved in the trimming and remodeling of nascent N-linked glycans into their heterogeneous mature forms, and that these changes alter the functions of modified proteins and thereby impact cellular signaling and adhesion. We sought to understand the consequences of altered glycosylation on VEGFR2 signaling. We used multiple strategies, including: enzymatic removal of N-linked glycans from the receptor, site-directed mutagenesis of specific N-glycosylation sites near the VEGF ligand binding site of VEGFR2, mass spectrometry of VEGFR2 glycopeptides, and concurrent measurement of receptor activation, signaling, and dimerization to interrogate how N-glycosylation modulates VEGFR2 ligand-dependent pro-angiogenic signaling. We demonstrate that VEGFR2 glycosylation at site N247 regulates ligand-dependent receptor activation and signaling. Complex N-glycans with α2-6 linked sialic acid residues at site N247 hinder receptor activation, while asialo-glycans favor VEGFR2 ligand-mediated activation and signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Surface Biotinylation, Immunoprecipitation and Mass Spectrometry Analysis of VEGFR2. To isolate surface and non-surface fractions of VEGFR2, VEGFR2/PAE cells were grown to 70% confluence, washed, labeled with membrane-impermeable EZ-Link sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin, and lysed. Biotinylated and unlabeled fractions were separated using NeutrAvidin Agarose, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Western blots were performed to confirm the successful separation of labeled and unlabeled fractions, and VEGFR2 was immunoprecipitated from the unused portion of each fraction. Separately, VEGFR2 was immunoprecipitated from unlabeled lysates and the high and low molecular weight bands were resolved on a 7.5% SDS-PAGE gel. All VEGFR2 samples were subsequently treated with trypsin and analyzed via nUPLC-MS/MS to assess VEGFR2 site-specific N-glycosylation, as previously described43, 71. Briefly, VEGFR2 glycopeptides were enriched, separated, and analyzed using a 6550 Q-TOF MS with a 1200 series nanoflow HPLC-Chip-ESI source fitted with a custom HPLC-Chip with a 360 nL TSK Gel Amide-80 5-μm trapping and enrichment column and a 150 mM × 75 μm Polaris C18-A 3-μm analytical column (all from Agilent Corp., Santa Clara, CA). The 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using the high-resolution, extended dynamic range (2 GHz) setting. Spectra were collected in profile mode. Targeted analyses of VEGFR2 glycopeptides using HCD fragmentation were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). For glycopeptide quantification, "MS only" aanalyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
To assign glycopeptide tandem mass spectra, nUPLC-MS/MS data were processed using Byonic v2.13.17 (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA), with the murine VEGFR2 sequence from the Reviewed UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein sequence database (last modified March 13, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
The tumor microenvironment and proinflammatory signals significantly alter glycosylation of cell-surface proteins on endothelial cells. By altering the <i>N</i>-glycosylation machinery in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, proinflammatory cytokines promote the modification of endothelial glycoproteins such as vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) with sialic acid-capped <i>N</i>-glycans. VEGFR2 is a highly <i>N-</i>glycosylated receptor tyrosine kinase involved in pro-angiogenic signaling in physiological and pathological contexts, including cancer. Here, using glycoside hydrolase and kinase assays and immunoprecipitation and MS-based analyses, we demonstrate that <i>N</i>-linked glycans at the Asn-247 site in VEGFR2 hinder VEGF ligand-mediated receptor activation and signaling in endothelial cells. We provide evidence that cell surface-associated VEGFR2 displays sialylated <i>N</i>-glycans at Asn-247 and, in contrast, that the nearby sites Asn-145 and Asn-160 contain lower levels of sialylated <i>N</i>-glycans and higher levels of high-mannose <i>N</i>-glycans, respectively. Furthermore, we report that VEGFR2 Asn-247-linked glycans capped with sialic acid oppose ligand-mediated VEGFR2 activation, whereas the uncapped asialo-glycans favor activation of this receptor. We propose that <i>N</i>-glycosylation, specifically the capping of <i>N-</i>glycans at Asn-247 by sialic acid, tunes ligand-dependent activation and signaling of VEGFR2 in endothelial cells.

### Keywords
Mouse, Nlc-ms/ms, Rtk, N-glycosylation, Glycopeptides, Vegfr2

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Kevin Chandler

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E Costello
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA


