### Accession
PXD031563

### Title
Investigating the upstream signaling of Imh1 phosphorylation under ER stress in yeast

### Description
The accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induces the unfolded protein response (UPR), which acts through various mechanisms to reduce ER stress. We previously found ER stress induced by tunicamycin (TM) treatment promotes the activation of small GTPase Arl1 and thereby increasing the recruitment of downstream effector golgin Imh1 to the late-Golgi. However, the role of Imh1 under ER stress remains unknown. In this study, we found Imh1 is required for the recycling of two SNAREs, Snc1 and Tlg1, upon TM-induced ER stress and phosphorylation of Imh1 is required for this regulation. Since Ire1 is the sensor of UPR in yeast and we previous found that Ire1 is required for Arl1-Imh1 activation, we wonder whether Ire1 signaling is also responsible for the TM-induced phosphorylation of Imh1 and the subsequent SNARE transport. We compared the phosphorylation signal of Imh1 in WT with that in the absence of Ire1 and further performed SILAC method in a label swap replication. Collectively, this study illustrates the mechanism of how signaling under ER stress promotes Imh1 in cooperation with another tether factor in regulating the SNARE transport to alleviate ER stress in yeast cells.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast control strain BY4742 arg4Δ (MATα his3, leu2, lys2, arg4::KanMX6), a lysine and arginine auxotrophic strain, was used for MS analysis. For SILAC, Imh1-transformed yeast cells were grown in SDM with 2% (w/v) glucose. After preculture for 8 h in 3 ml SDM with light L-lysine and light L-arginine, the yeast cells were transferred to one of two flasks containing 25 ml medium with light L-lysine/L-arginine or medium with heavy L-lysine-13C6 hydrochloride/L-arginine-13C6 hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and incubated for 20 h. After treatment with TM for 2 h, 2 A600 units of yeast cells were collected, lysed, and precipitated by TCA. To identify proteins and phosphopeptides, one-dimensional SDS-PAGE combined with TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was applied. Briefly, yeast cell lysates were separated on SDS-PAGE, the Imh1-containing gel band was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. The peptide mixtures were extracted for whole proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, respectively. For phosphopeptide enrichment, the peptide mixtures were loaded onto an in-house packed TiO2 trap column (GL Sciences, 10 μm, 0.3 × 5 mm), washed with 10 μL of wash buffer containing 2% formic acid/40% acetonitrile, and followed by 10 μL of wash buffer containing 2% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. The online TiO2 LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Hybrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350–2,000 Da. Neutral loss scanning (98 for +1, 49 for +2, and 32.7 for +3 charged ions) was used to detect phosphopeptide, and a third stage MS was used to improve backbone fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2.04). To quantify the identified protein and phosphopeptide, the raw spectrometry data, including the precursor ion quantifier node for SILAC, were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Publication Abstract
The accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induces the unfolded protein response (UPR), which acts through various mechanisms to reduce ER stress. While the UPR has been well studied for its effects on the ER, its impact on the Golgi is less understood. The Golgi complex receives transport vesicles from the endosome through two types of tethering factors: long coiled-coil golgin and the multisubunit Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complex. Here, we report that ER stress increases the phosphorylation of golgin Imh1 to maintain the GARP-mediated recycling of the SNAREs Snc1 and Tlg1. We also identify a specific function of the Golgi affected by ER stress and elucidate a homeostatic response to restore this function, which involves both an Ire1-dependent and a MAP kinase Slt2/ERK2-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, our findings advance a general understanding of how two different types of tethers act cooperatively to mediate a transport pathway.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Er stress, Ire1, Gtpase arl1, Snare transport, Imh1

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Jung Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Jung Yu
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan


