### Accession
PXD018208

### Title
Glycopeptide Relative Retention Time Prediction

### Description
A re-analysis of published data-dependent acquisition glycoproteomics datasets to demonstrate relative retention time prediction on glycopeptide identification and disambiguation of adduct states.

### Sample Protocol
This work re-analyzed previously existing data with different sample preparation protocols. See PXD003498 and PXD009654 for their respective sample preparation methods.

### Data Protocol
We centroided, deisotoped, and charge state deconvlved glycopeptide LC-MS/MS datasets using GlycReSoft using a glycopeptide MS1 averagine and a peptide MSn averagine, averaging each MS1 spectrum with the preceeding and proceeding MS1 spectra.  For PXD003498, we created a glycan composition database using 3-10 Hex, 2-9 HexNAc, 0-4 Fuc, 0-5 NeuAc and 0-1 sulfate, subject to the constraints that NeuAc < HexNAc - 1 and Fuc < HexNAc. We combined this with a database of 10 protein sequences of IAV hemagglutinin proteins from Philippines 1982 and 1982-BS strains, as well as reference sequences for other IAV proteins, adding constant carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable deamidation on asparagine. For PXD009654, we created an N-glycan database of 448 compositions through biosynthetic simulation, which we combined with the UniProt Human Reference Proteome UP000005640, adding constant carbamidomethylation on cysteine and variable oxidation on methionine.  We used GlycReSoft to identify glycopeptides using a multi-part FDR estimation strategy to control the joint peptide and glycan FDR. In PXD009654 we considered each spectrum with and without ammonium adduction (+17.026 Da). In PXD003498 we also considered sodium adduction (+21.98) and potassium adduction (+37.95). Ammonium adducted glycopeptides fragmented as unmodified glycopeptides, but metallic cation adducts persisted through fragmentation. We selected all identifications with 5% or less total FDR for MS1 feature extraction and  1% or less for downstream modeling.  We used the extracted glycopeptide MS1 features to model the influence of the glycan composition on the chromatographic peak apex retention time, within and across peptide backbone groups. We applied these models to dismabiguate near-isobaric structures and to identify glycopeptides with incomplete fragmentation.

### Publication Abstract
Glycopeptides identified by tandem mass spectrometry rely on the identification of the peptide backbone sequence and the attached glycan(s) by the incomplete fragmentation of both moieties. This may lead to ambiguous identifications where multiple structures could explain the same spectrum equally well due to missing information in the mass spectrum or incorrect precursor mass determination. To date, approaches to solving these problems have been limited, and few inroads have been made to address these issues. We present a technique to address some of these challenges and demonstrate it on previously published data sets. We use a linear modeling approach to learn the influence of the glycan composition on the retention time of a glycopeptide and use these models to validate glycopeptides within the same experiment, detecting over 400 incorrect cases during the MS/MS search and correcting 75 cases that could not be identified based on mass alone. We make this technique available as a command line executable program, written in Python and C, freely available at https://github.com/mobiusklein/glycresoft in source form, with precompiled binaries for Windows.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Boston University
Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical School

### Submitter
Joshua Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical School


