### Accession
PXD010115

### Title
Quantification of the Soluble Receptor of Advanced Glycation End-Products (sRAGE) by LC-MS Without the Use of Affinity Enrichment

### Description
The study of low abundant proteins contributes to increasing our knowledge about (patho)physiological processes of ageing and disease onset and development and may lead to the identification and clinical application of disease markers. However, studying these proteins is challenging as high-abundant proteins complicate their analysis. Antibodies are often used to enrich proteins from biological matrices prior to their analysis, though antibody-free approaches have been described for some proteins as well. Here we report an antibody-free workflow on the basis of strong cation exchange (SCX) enrichment and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) for quantification of the soluble Receptor of Advanced Glycation End-products (sRAGE), a promising biomarker in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). sRAGE was quantified in serum at clinically relevant low to sub ng/mL levels. The method was validated according to U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) guidelines and was compared to an antibody-based LC-MS sRAGE method. The SCX-based method builds upon on the bipolar charge distribution of sRAGE, which has a highly basic N-terminal part and an acidic C-terminal part resulting in an overall neutral isoelectric point (pI). The highly basic N-terminal part (pIcalculated = 10.3) allowed sRAGE to be enriched by SCX at pH 10, a pH at which most serum proteins do not bind. This study shows that ion exchange-based enrichment is a viable approach for the LC-MS analysis of several low abundant proteins following a thorough analysis of their physical-chemical properties.

### Sample Protocol
Serum Samples. Pooled human serum from Seralab (West Sussex, U.K.) was used directly as QC-low sample or was fortified with rh-sRAGE at two levels to obtain the QC-medium and QC-high samples. Recovery and spike recovery experiments as well as shotgun proteomics experiments were carried out using six different sources of human serum from healthy subjects (all from Seralab). SCX-Based sRAGE Enrichment. The supplied suspension of the SCX resin was homogenized by agitation and 100 µL of this suspension was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube. The resin was washed with 800 µL ethanol and then with 800 µL 20 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10 (SCX buffer) by gentle vortex-mixing after which the resin was pelleted by centrifugation (3,000 × g; 2 min), and the washing solution was discarded. Next, the resin was resuspended in 750 µL SCX buffer and 50 µL of serum (or calibrant) was added. After 15 minutes of incubation on a rotating wheel, the sample was briefly centrifuged to spin down droplets from the lid, and the resin was loaded into an empty SPE reservoir which was placed in a Varian CerexTM SPE processor and which had been rinsed with 1 mL water. The resin was subsequently washed with 1 mL SCX buffer, and sRAGE was eluted with 250 µL of a 1% aqueous ammonia solution and then collected in low binding tubes (Eppendorf; Cat. No. 525-0133) containing 50 µL of a 15% aqueous acetic acid solution. After drying the eluate in a vacuum centrifuge at 60 °C, the residue was reconstituted in 50 μL Digestion Buffer (100 fmol/mL SIL-peptides in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)). Next, disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; 5 μL 110 mM DTT in ABC) for 30 min (60 °C; 600 RPM), and thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; 5 μL 240 mM IAM in ABC) for 30 min in the dark (room temperature). After quenching the excess of IAM with a 0.5 molar excess of DTT (5.5 μL of 110 mM DTT), 100 ng trypsin was added to each sample, and proteins were digested overnight (37 °C; 600 RPM). Shotgun proteomics. Proteins enriched by SAX at pH 4 (loading and washing with 20 mM ammonium acetate, pH 4; elution with 250 µL 3% aqueous acetic acid; and eluate collection in 50 µL 5% aqueous ammonia) or SCX at pH 10 (see ‘SCX-Based sRAGE Enrichment’ paragraph above) were identified on the basis of six serum samples. For these experiments, TSKgel SuperQ-5PW (Cat. No. 0043283) SAX and TSKgel SP-5PW (Cat. No. 0043282) SCX resins were used, and a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation step was included after SPE-enrichment to concentrate the samples. Briefly, the SPE eluates were mixed 1:1 (v:v) with a 12% aqueous TCA solution, incubated for 5 minutes at 60 °C, placed on ice for at least 30 minutes, vortexed-mixed, and centrifuged (10 min; 20,000 × g; 4 °C). After discarding (most of) the supernatant, 400 µL ice-cold acetone was added, the samples were vortex-mixed and centrifuged (5 min; 20,000 × g; 4 °C), and (most of) the supernatant was removed after which the pellets were left to dry air. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system connected to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A sample volume of 6 µL was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (see above) using μL-pickup with 0.1% FA in H2O at 20 μL/min. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm × 500 mm; Cat. No. 164540) at 40 °C using a 60 min linear gradient from 3 to 50% eluent B (0.1% FA in ACN) in eluent A (0.1% FA in H2O) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. For DDA, survey scans from 300 to 1650 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 3 × 106 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. From the survey scan, a maximum number of 10 of the most abundant precursor ions with a charge state of 2+ to 6+ were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Fragment ion spectra were acquired between 200 and 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 1 × 105, a maximum ion injection time of 110 ms, a normalized collision energy of 28%, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, an intensity threshold of 1 × 104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter set at 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomics data were processed using PEAKS Studio software (version 8.5)18, and peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB homo sapiens ‘UP000005640’ reference proteome (canonical; 70956 entries) with trypsin selected as protease (≤ 3 missed cleavages), cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and allowing ≤6 modifications per peptide, ≤10.0 ppm precursor mass deviation (using monoisotopic mass), ≤0.2 Da fragment ion mass deviation, and ≤0.1% false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins, as well as requiring at least two unique peptides for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The study of low abundant proteins contributes to increasing our knowledge about (patho)physiological processes and may lead to the identification and clinical application of disease markers. However, studying these proteins is challenging as high-abundant proteins complicate their analysis. Antibodies are often used to enrich proteins from biological matrices prior to their analysis, though antibody-free approaches have been described for some proteins as well. Here we report an antibody-free workflow on the basis of strong cation exchange (SCX) enrichment and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) for quantification of the soluble Receptor of Advanced Glycation End-products (sRAGE), a promising biomarker in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). sRAGE was quantified in serum at clinically relevant low to sub ng mL<sup>-1</sup> levels. The method was validated according to U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) guidelines and was compared to an antibody-based LC-MS sRAGE method. The SCX-based method builds upon the bipolar charge distribution of sRAGE, which has a highly basic N-terminal part and an acidic C-terminal part resulting in an overall neutral isoelectric point (pI). The highly basic N-terminal part (pI<sub>calculated</sub>&#x202f;=&#x202f;10.3) allowed for sRAGE to be enriched by SCX at pH 10, a pH at which most serum proteins do not bind. This study shows that ion exchange-based enrichment is a viable approach for the LC-MS analysis of several low abundant proteins following a thorough analysis of their physical-chemical properties.

### Keywords
Human serum, Srage, Lc-ms/ms, Scx fractionation

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Horvatovich
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands


