### Accession
PXD019329

### Title
Separation and Paired Proteome Profiling of Plant Chloroplast and Cytoplasmic Ribosomes

### Description
Conventional preparation methods of plant ribosomes fail to resolve non-translating chloroplast or cytoplasmic ribosome subunits from translating fractions. We established preparation of these ribosome complexes from Arabidopsis thaliana leaf, root, and seed tissues by optimized sucrose density gradient centrifugation of protease protected plant extracts. The method co-purified non-translating 30S and 40S ribosome subunits, separated non-translating 50S from 60S subunits, and resolved assembled monosomes from low oligomeric polysomes. Combining ribosome fractionation with microfluidic rRNA analysis and proteomics, we characterized the rRNA and ribosomal protein (RP) composition. The identity of cytoplasmic and chloroplast ribosome complexes and the presence of ribosome biogenesis factors in the 60S - 80S sedimentation interval were verified. In vivo cross-linking of leaf tissue stabilized ribosome biogenesis complexes but induced polysome run-off. Omitting cross-linking, the established paired fractionation and proteome analysis monitored relative abundances of plant chloroplast and cytoplasmic ribosome fractions and enabled analysis of RP composition and ribosome associated proteins including transiently associated biogenesis factors.

### Sample Protocol
Measurements were performed by a Q Exactive HF Quadrupol-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). 8 μL samples were loaded onto an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 column, 75 μm inner diameter, 20 cm length, 1.8 µm bead size (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 0.4 μL min-1 in a solution consisting of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid. Peptide elution was facilitated by increasing the acetonitrile gradient from 3% to 24% (v/v) over 90 min, from 24% to 36% for the next 30 min and from 36% to 85% for the last 6 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1. Peptide ions were detected in full scan mode, with range of mass-to-charge ratios from 300 to 1600 at a resolution of 120,000, instrument settings AGC target 3e6 and maximum IT of 100 ms. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in a profile mode at a resolution of 15,000 with AGC target 1e5 isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 1.2 m/z and maximum IT of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 30 seconds. Raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software for protein identification and quantification [47]. Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 protein sequences (35,386 entries) were used by the search engine Andromeda [48] for identification of peptides. The settings used for the search were the following: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. False discovery rate of both peptides and proteins was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and the minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was used. The “label-free quantification” (LFQ) option was selected for quantification. The quantification was performed of proteins with minimum of one unique and one razor peptide. Known contaminants, such as keratins, were removed from further analysis. Ribosomal proteins, biogenesis and translation related factors were annotated using the Majority.protein.ID read out of the MaxQuant analysis. Annotation of these proteins identifiers was supported by a list of gene identifiers, gene names, subunit memberships and gene model descriptions that were compiled and collated from a set of reference publications that combined genome annotation with proteomic analyses of purified or enriched plant ribosome complexes.

### Publication Abstract
Conventional preparation methods of plant ribosomes fail to resolve non-translating chloroplast or cytoplasmic ribosome subunits from translating fractions. We established preparation of these ribosome complexes from <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaf, root, and seed tissues by optimized sucrose density gradient centrifugation of protease protected plant extracts. The method co-purified non-translating 30S and 40S ribosome subunits separated non-translating 50S from 60S subunits, and resolved assembled monosomes from low oligomeric polysomes. Combining ribosome fractionation with microfluidic rRNA analysis and proteomics, we characterized the rRNA and ribosomal protein (RP) composition. The identity of cytoplasmic and chloroplast ribosome complexes and the presence of ribosome biogenesis factors in the 60S-80S sedimentation interval were verified. In vivo cross-linking of leaf tissue stabilized ribosome biogenesis complexes, but induced polysome run-off. Omitting cross-linking, the established paired fractionation and proteome analysis monitored relative abundances of plant chloroplast and cytoplasmic ribosome fractions and enabled analysis of RP composition and ribosome associated proteins including transiently associated biogenesis factors.

### Keywords
Tissue specific separation, Ribo-proteome, Plant proteomics, Ribosome complexes, In vivo protein complex stabilization

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Joachim Kopka Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Potsdam Science Park Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, German
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Kopka
Prof. Dr. Joachim Kopka Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Potsdam Science Park Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, German


