### Accession
PXD017583

### Title
Effect of salinity on the proteome profile of guard cells from the salt-tolerant plant species Beta vulgaris (sugar beet)

### Description
Soil salinity is a major environmental constraint affecting crop growth and threatening global food security. Plants adapt to salinity by optimizing performance of stomata, the microscopic sphincters inserted into the wax-covered epidermis of the shoot, which balance CO2 intake for photosynthetic carbon gain and concomitant water loss. Stomata are formed by two guard cells (GCs) that are morphologically and functionally distinct from the other leaf cells. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying stomatal function under saline conditions we used proteomics approach to study isolated GCs from the salt-tolerant sugar beet species.

### Sample Protocol
GC-enriched epidermal peels were prepared from fully-expanded leaves of well-watered 3-4-week-old sugar beet. The leaves were ground in a chilled Grindomix blender by 3 pulses of 20 Seconds on 10,000 power. The leaf mixture was passed through a 210 µm Nylon mesh (ELKO, Filtering co. USA) and rinsed with ice-cold distilled water and small dark green tissue fragments were removed using clean forceps (three times). Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and were kept in -80 °C freezer until used for protein extraction. GC samples from the control and salt treatments were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen (five biological replicates per treatment). 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in pre-chilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2- mercaptoethanol was used to precipitate total proteins. The homogenate was kept at −20 °C overnight.  Then the samples were centrifuged at 20,000×g at 4 °C for 20 min and the pellets were washed in 100 % pre-chilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. This wash step was repeated until all visible traces of chlorophyll were removed. After a final wash in 80% prechilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol protein pellets were centrifuged then air-dried at room temperature.  Proteins were then solubilized in 1ml solubilization buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 40 mM Tris) at 20 °C for 1 h then clarified by centrifugation. Protein extracts were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone and resuspended in 50 μl of solubilization buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM Tris. Protein concentrations were measured using Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Reagent.  Proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested (1ug enzyme: 50ug protein) then peptides (~1ug/sample) analysed by nanoLC/MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF) using a Top15 DDA method and 90 minute gradients.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against the NCBI Beta vulgaris protein sequence database using standard MaxQuant parameters including the match-between-runs function and Perseus software used for statistical analysis of the LFQ data.

### Publication Abstract
Soil salinity is a major environmental constraint affecting crop growth and threatening global food security. Plants adapt to salinity by optimizing the performance of stomata. Stomata are formed by two guard cells (GCs) that are morphologically and functionally distinct from the other leaf cells. These microscopic sphincters inserted into the wax-covered epidermis of the shoot balance CO<sub>2</sub> intake for photosynthetic carbon gain and concomitant water loss. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying stomatal function under saline conditions, we used proteomics approach to study isolated GCs from the salt-tolerant sugar beet species. Of the 2088 proteins identified in sugar beet GCs, 82 were differentially regulated by salt treatment. According to bioinformatics analysis (GO enrichment analysis and protein classification), these proteins were involved in lipid metabolism, cell wall modification, ATP biosynthesis, and signaling. Among the significant differentially abundant proteins, several proteins classified as "stress proteins" were upregulated, including non-specific lipid transfer protein, chaperone proteins, heat shock proteins, inorganic pyrophosphatase 2, responsible for energized vacuole membrane for ion transportation. Moreover, several antioxidant enzymes (peroxide, superoxidase dismutase) were highly upregulated. Furthermore, cell wall proteins detected in GCs provided some evidence that GC walls were more flexible in response to salt stress. Proteins such as L-ascorbate oxidase that were constitutively high under both control and high salinity conditions may contribute to the ability of sugar beet GCs to adapt to salinity by mitigating salinity-induced oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Salinity stress, Guard cells, Stomata

### Affiliations
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


