### Accession
PXD037732

### Title
DICAR+/- mouse heart Label free LC-MS

### Description
The level of ubiquitin protein of the heart of DICAR+/- compared with wild type

### Sample Protocol
The tissue was lysed in a urea-containing buffer, the cellular proteins were digested with protease, and the resultant peptides were purified through reversed-phase solid-phase extraction. The peptides were then subjected to immune affinity purification using the PTMScan® ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) antibody. The antibody was incubated with protein A agarose beads. Unbound peptides were removed through washing, and the captured ubiquitin-containing peptides were eluted with dilute acid. Reversed-phase purification was performed on microtips to desalt and separate the peptides from antibodies before concentrating the enriched peptides for LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were converted into a single *.mgf format file containing the persist by proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters independent *.mgf files for each sample were searched against a merged database composed of reviewed entries of Human Uniprof database (version 20120711; 20.225 entries) and Streptococcus pneumoniae reference.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we identified that a conserved circular RNA (circRNA) DICAR, which was downregulated in diabetic mouse hearts. DICAR had an inhibitory effect on diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM), as the spontaneous cardiac dysfunction, cardiac cell hypertrophy, and cardiac fibrosis occurred in DICAR deficiency (DICAR<sup>+/-</sup>) mice, whereas the DCM was alleviated in DICAR-overexpressed DICAR<sup>Tg</sup> mice. At the cellular level, we found that overexpression of DICAR inhibited, but knockdown of DICAR enhanced the diabetic cardiomyocyte pyroptosis. At the molecular level, we identified that DICAR-VCP-Med12 degradation could be the underlying molecular mechanism in DICAR-mediated effects. The synthesized DICAR junction part (DICAR-JP) exhibited a similar effect to the entire DICAR. In addition, the expression of DICAR in circulating blood cells and plasma from diabetic patients was lower than that from health controls, which was consistent with the decreased DICAR expression in diabetic hearts. DICAR and the synthesized DICAR-JP may be drug candidates for DCM.

### Keywords
Heart, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Wuhan Univerisity of Science and Technology
Southwest Medical University

### Submitter
Qiong Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Qiong Yuan
Wuhan Univerisity of Science and Technology


