### Accession
PXD005544

### Title
Downregulation of antigen presentation-associated pathway proteins in poor outcome triple-negative breast cancer patient tumors

### Description
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous subtype with varying disease outcomes. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are frequent in TNBC and have been shown to correlate with outcome, suggesting an immunogenic component in this subtype. However, other factors, intrinsic to the cancer cells, may also influence outcome. To identify proteins and molecular pathways associated with recurrence in TNBC, 34 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary TNBC tumors were investigated by global proteomic profiling using TMT-HILIC-LC-MS/MS. Approximately half of the patients were lymph node-negative and remained free of local or distant metastasis within 10 years follow-up, while the other half developed distant metastasis. Proteomic profiling identified >4000 proteins, of which 63 exhibited altered expression in primary tumors of recurrence versus recurrence-free patients. Importantly, down-regulation of proteins in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen presentation pathways were enriched, including TAP1, TAP2, CALR, HLA-A, ERAP1 and TAPBP, and were associated with significantly shorter recurrence-free and overall survival. In addition, proteins involved in cancer cell proliferation and growth, including GBP1, RAD23B, WARS and STAT1, also exhibited altered expression in primary tumors of recurrence versus recurrence-free patients. The association between the antigen-presentation pathway and outcome were validated in a second sample set of 10 primary TNBC tumors and corresponding metastases using proteomics and in a large public gene expression database of 249 TNBC and 580 basal-like breast cancer cases. Our study demonstrates that down-regulation of antigen presentation is a key mechanism for TNBC cells to avoid immune surveillance, allowing continued growth and spread.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE breast cancer samples were sliced on a microtome (7 µm sections), mounted on 1.5 µm PEN membrane slides and air dried. Slides were deparaffinized in xylene (3 x 5 min) followed by hydration in three alcohol gradients (100%, 96% and 70%) and H2O for 3, 2, 1 and 1 min, respectively. Sections were stained with Mayer’s hematoxylin and Eosin for 15 and 5 seconds, respectively, rinsed with water, 96% -and absolute ethanol and air-dried. Dissection was carried out on a Cell Cut Plus instrument. Areas of interest for laser capture microdissection (LCM) were marked on a touchscreen using a 10x objective and dissected under optimized cutting conditions. Dissected tissue was collected on adhesive IsolationCaps. Microdissected tissue was lysed in a buffer consisting of 80 µL 0.1 M NH4HCO3, pH 7.63 and 20% ACN at 95 °C in a heating block for 1 h. followed by heating at 65 °C for 2 h with agitation (650 rpm). Porcine sequencing grade trypsin was added to the samples at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Thereafter, samples were frozen at -80 °C and lyophilized on a vacuum centrifuge until dry. Samples were stored at -80 °C until further processing.   Lyophilized peptide samples were resuspended in 30 µL 100 mM TEAB. Five µL was extracted for protein concentration measurement by BCA according to the manufacturer’s protocol. TMT labeling reagent was equilibrated to room temperature and 41 µL anhydrous acetonitrile was added, followed by brief vortexing. An internal standard master mix was created by combining proteins from each patient sample. Briefly, equal amounts of protein was taken out from each sample and transferred to an Eppendorf-tube. Labeling reagent (8 µL) was added to each of the peptide samples followed by incubation for 1 hr. at ambient temperature. The internal standard mix was labeled with the TMT-126 reporter-ion. Reaction was quenched by addition of 2 µL, 5 % hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Samples were combined in a 1:1 ratio, frozen at -80 °C and lyophilized to completion.   Samples were re-dissolved in 0.4 μL of 10% TFA, followed by addition of 3.6 μL of H2O and subsequently 36 μL of ACN (final volume of 40 μL peptides in 90% ACN, 0.1% TFA). The samples were injected onto an in-house-packed TSKgel Amide-80 HILIC 320 μm × 170 mm capillary HPLC column using an Agilent 1200 capillary HPLC system. The peptides were eluted using a 54 min gradient from 90% ACN, 0.1% TFA to 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The fractions were automatically collected in a micro-well plate at 1 min intervals after UV detection at 210 nm, and the fractions were pooled according to UV detection to a total of 7 fractions. The fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation.   HILIC fractions were resuspended in 30 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS on a nanoflow LC system  coupled online with a Q-Exactive MS. Samples were resolved on a 100 μm I.D. × 360 μm O.D. × 20 cm long capillary column, which was slurry packed in house with 5 μm, 100Å pore size C-18 silica-bonded stationary phase. Following pre- and analytical column equilibration, each sample was loaded onto a 2-cm reversed-phase (C-18) pre-column at 3 µL/min at 3x the injection volume with mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min by development of a linear gradient of 0.33% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) per min for 80 min and then to 95% mobile phase B for an additional 10 min. The columns were washed for 15 min at 95% mobile phase B and then quickly brought to 100% mobile phase A for the next sample injection. The MS was configured to collect broadband mass spectra (m/z 375-1800) in profile mode using the lock mass feature for the polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) ion generated in the electrospray process (m/z 445.12003). MS conditions were set as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.7 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; capillary temperature, 250°C; S-Lens RF level, 60%; resolution, 70,000 at m/z 200. The ion selection threshold for the broadband scan was set at 1E6 with a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms. The 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS with the following settings: ion threshold, 1E6; intensity threshold, 5E3; maximum ion accumulation time, 200 ms; resolution, 17,500 at m/z 200; isolation window, 3 m/z; and dynamic exclusion, 40 s. Data for the TMT labeled samples were collected in profile mode and also had the following settings: fixed first mass,  m/z 115; normalized collision energy (NCE), 30.

### Data Protocol
All Q-Exactive raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest and Mascot search algorithms (v. 2.2.3), both integrated with Proteome Discoverer, were used to search the data with the following criteria: SwissProt protein database (downloaded 5th October 2012, 452768 entries) and restricted to humans. Fixed search parameters included trypsin, two missed cleavages allowed, and TMT labeling at lysine and N-terminal amines, while methionine oxidation and deamidation were set as dynamic. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 8 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Peptide data were extracted using Mascot significance threshold 0.05 and minimum peptide length 6. A minimum of 2 peptides were used for protein identification, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (FDR < 1 %) were included. Protein expression data was log2 transformed and quantile normalized. Fold changes between recurrence and recurrence-free patients were determined by taking the difference (x = recurrence/recurrence-free) and raising this to the power of two (2x).  We used a previously established Kaplan-Meier (KM) plotter analysis platform68 to analyze significant (p < 0.05) proteins from the MS data in published gene expression datasets. The online tool (http://www.kmplotter.com/breast) contains 4142 breast cancer patients curated from 26 GEO gene expression datasets, of which 3557 have recurrence-free survival data (RFS). Of the 3557 breast cancer patients, 249 are confirmed TNBC patients by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Each percentile between the lower and upper quartiles was computed for each analyzed gene expression and the best performing threshold was used as cutoff in the Cox regression analysis.69 KMplotter then generated survival plots with hazard ratios, 95% confidence intervals and log rank P value for each selected gene probe (the best JetSet gene probe was always selected). Basal-like breast cancer patients in the database were identified by low expression of ER and HER2 using Affymetrix HGU133A or HGU133plus2 arrays with cutoff values of 500 and 4800 respectively.  RNA from frozen TNBC patient tumors was isolated using TRIzol® followed by reverse transcription to cDNA using random hexamer oligonucleotide primers (Thermo Scientific). Relative quantification of TAP1 gene expression was performed in duplicate using QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen; Applied Biosystems StepOnePlus) and primers: TAP1: QT00057288, PUM1: QT00029421, ACTB: QT0009531 (Qiagen). The relative median expression was normalized using PUM1 and ACTB as reference genes. Expression was shown as fold change relative to a random recurrence-free patient.  RStudio 3.2.0 and GraphPad Prism 5.01 were used for statistical analysis. All p-value calculations were two-sided and homoscedastic and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Network analysis was performed in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity, Qiagen). Disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) curves were generated by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis in GraphPad Prism 5. Hazard ratio (HR) and p-values were calculated via log-rank tests. Unsupervised cluster analysis was performed in RStudio 3.2.0 using the Heatmap.2 function in the gplots 3.0.1 package.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous subtype with varying disease outcomes. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are frequent in TNBC and have been shown to correlate with outcome, suggesting an immunogenic component in this subtype. However, other factors intrinsic to the cancer cells may also influence outcome. To identify proteins and molecular pathways associated with recurrence in TNBC, 34 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary TNBC tumors were investigated by global proteomic profiling using mass spectrometry. Approximately, half of the patients were lymph node-negative and remained free of local or distant metastasis within 10 y follow-up, while the other half developed distant metastasis. Proteomic profiling identified &gt;4,000 proteins, of which 63 exhibited altered expression in primary tumors of recurrence versus recurrence-free patients. Importantly, downregulation of proteins in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen presentation pathways were enriched, including TAP1, TAP2, CALR, HLA-A, ERAP1 and TAPBP, and were associated with significantly shorter recurrence-free and overall survival. In addition, proteins involved in cancer cell proliferation and growth, including GBP1, RAD23B, WARS and STAT1, also exhibited altered expression in primary tumors of recurrence versus recurrence-free patients. The association between the antigen-presentation pathway and outcome were validated in a second sample set of 10 primary TNBC tumors and corresponding metastases using proteomics and in a large public gene expression database of 249 TNBC and 580 basal-like breast cancer cases. Our study demonstrates that downregulation of antigen presentation is a key mechanism for TNBC cells to avoid immune surveillance, allowing continued growth and spread.

### Keywords
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded, Mhc class i antigen presentation pathway, Biomarker, Major histocompatibility complex, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Basal-like breast cancer, Triple-negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Professor, Head of Cancer Research, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Martin Haar Pedersen

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Ditzel
Professor, Head of Cancer Research, University of Southern Denmark


