### Accession
PXD030775

### Title
Exploring post-genomic biomarker signatures based on pathomechanisms of ulcerative colitis

### Description
Objective: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic disease with rising incidence and unclear etiology. The application of mass spectrometry-based post-genomic analysis methods shall support the development of molecular biomarker signatures providing status information with regard to UC pathomechanisms.  Design: Pathomechanisms characteristic for UC were assessed by proteome profiling of human tissue specimen, obtained from five distinct colon locations each of 12 patients. Systemic disease-associated alterations were investigated by mass spectrometry-based multi-omics analyses comprising proteins, metabolites and eicosanoids of plasma obtained from UC patients during disease and upon remission in comparison to healthy controls. Results: Proteome profiling results identified colitis-associated activation of neutrophils, macrophages, B- and T-cells, platelets, fibroblasts and endothelial cells and indicated hypoxic stress, as well as a general reduction of mitochondrial proteins accompanying the establishment of apparent healing-promoting activities as well as scar formation. While the immune cells mainly contributed pro-inflammatory proteins, the colitis-associated epithelial cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and platelets predominantly formed anti-inflammatory and healing-promoting proteins. Blood plasma proteomics indicated chronic inflammation and platelet activation, whereas plasma metabolomics identified disease-associated deregulation of bile acids, eicosanoids and gut microbiome-derived metabolites. Upon remission, several, but not all, molecular candidate biomarker levels recovered to normal levels. These findings may indicate that pathomechanisms related to gut functions, gut microbiome status, microvascular damage and metabolic dysregulation associated with hypoxia may do not resolve uniformly upon remission.  Conclusions: The establishment of disease-associated biomarker profiles related to molecular UC pathomechanisms may support the establishment of bioassays with improved prognostic power aiding individualized therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50mM TEAB, 5% SDS) was added to EDTA plasma at a ratio of 1:10 and to tissue samples (100µL) which were lysed via ultrasonic rod. Protein concentrations were determined via BCA-assay and 20µg of protein were used for further processing. For protein digestion, a ProtiFi S-trap protocol was employed as described previously. In short, proteins were reduced and alkylated using DTT and IAA, respectively, followed by addition of trapping buffer. Samples were loaded onto S-trap cartridges and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C for 2h at 37°C. Supernatants containing the peptides were eluted, dried, reconstituted in 5µL formic acid containing 10fmol of 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µL mobile phase A. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) hyphenated with a Dionex UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Parameters for analyses were an adapted version of a previously published method. 0.5µL and 5µL of plasma and tissue proteomic samples, respectively, were loaded onto an AcclaimTM PepMapTM C18 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10µL/min using mobile phase A and eluted onto an Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks) applying a flow rate of 300nL/min. Separation was achieved by applying a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B over 55min and 90min for plasma and tissue samples, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) employing the Andromeda search engine for protein identification against the UniProt database (12/2019, 20380 entries). Search parameters were set as previously described. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation was set as variable modification. For the data evaluation in Perseus, data was grouped and filtered according to missing values. A total of 5 or 3 valid values had to be present in at least one cohort in tissue or plasma samples, respectively, to be considered a valid identification. Data was log2 transformed and imputation was performed according normal distribution with a down-shift of 1.8 sigma and a width of 0.3 sigma. For the group wise comparison, two-sided t-tests were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Remission signature, Tissue proteomics, Chronic inflammation, Plasma proteomics, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Joint Metabolome Facility, University of Vienna & Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Univ.-Prof. Dr. Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Joint Metabolome Facility, University of Vienna & Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


