### Accession
PXD004321

### Title
TCUP: Typing and characterization of bacteria using bottom-up tandem mass spectrometry proteomics

### Description
Methods for rapid and reliable microbial identification are essential in modern healthcare. The ability to detect and correctly identify pathogenic species and their resistance phenotype is necessary for accurate diagnosis and efficient treatment of infectious diseases. Bottom-up tandem mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics enables rapid characterization of large parts of the expressed genes of microorganisms. The generated data is however highly fragmented, making down-stream analyses complex. Here we present TCUP, a new computational method for typing and characterizing bacteria using proteomics data from bottom-up tandem MS. TCUP compares the generated protein sequence data to reference databases and automatically finds peptides suitable for characterization of taxonomic composition and identification of expressed antimicrobial resistance genes. TCUP was evaluated using four clinically relevant bacterial species (Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae), using both simulated data generated by in silico peptide digestion and experimental proteomics data generated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). The results showed that TCUP performs correct peptide classifications at rates between 90.3% and 98.5% at the species level. The method was also able to accurately estimate the relative abundances of individual species in mixed cultures. Furthermore, TCUP could identify expressed beta-lactamases in an ESBL-producing E. coli strain, even when the strain was cultivated in the absence of antibiotics on non-selective media. Finally, TCUP is computationally efficient, easy to integrate in existing bioinformatics workflows and freely available under an open source license for both Windows and Linux environments.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial lysates were injected into the LPI Hexalane FlowCell (Nanoxis Consulting AB, www.nanoxisconsulting.com; Patent Application No. WO2006068619), using a pipette to add 70 μl to ﬁll the FlowCell channel. Bacterial proteins in cell lysates were immobilized to the FlowCell membrane, with a 1 hour incubation at room temperature, to allow attachment. The FlowCell channels with bound proteins were washed with 400 µL of ammonium bicarbonate, using a syringe pump at a ﬂow rate of 100 μl/min. Enzymatic digestions of the membrane-bound bacterial proteins were performed by injecting 80 μl of trypsin (2 μg/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH ~8) into the FlowCell channels and incubating for 1 h at room temperature. The generated peptides were eluted by injecting 200 µL ammonium bicarbonate buffer (20 mM, pH ~8) into the FlowCell channels. The eluted peptides were collected at the outlet ports, using a pipette, and transferred into Axygen tubes (2.0 mL). The peptide solutions were incubated at room temperature overnight and subsequently frozen at −20 °C until pending MS analyses. For the detection of antibiotic resistance markers, an in-solution digestion protocol was employed. The samples were incubated at 95 °C (10 min) to inactivate the bacteria and subsequently the suspension was transferred to 200 µL vials containing Sigma-Aldrig G1145 glass beads for LC MS/MS analysis. The bead beater used was a TissueLyser from Qiagen. Settings: Frequency 1/25 s and continuous shaking for a total time of 5 min. The bead beaten samples were frozen until analysis. The samples were thawed and the bead beating procedure was repeated. For the in-solution digestion, trypsin was added to the suspension (2 µg/ml in ammonium bicarbonate 20 mM pH 8, 80 µl) and the proteins were allowed to be digested for 7 h at 37 °C. The supernatant was removed from the glass beads and centrifuged at 13000 rpm (18000g) for 15 min to pellet biomass/debris. The pellet was discarded and supernatant containing peptides was kept frozen until analysis. The tryptic peptides were desalted on PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, dried and reconstituted with 15 μl of 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO) in 3% gradient grade acetonitrile (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). A 2.0 μl sample was injected, with an Easy-nLC autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), and analyzed, using an interfaced Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were trapped on a pre-column (45 x 0.075 mm i.d.) and separated on a reversed-phase column, 200 x 0.075 mm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The nanoLC (liquid chromatography) gradient was running at 200 nl/min, starting at 7% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% formic acid, increased to 27% ACN for 25 min, then increased to 40% ACN for 5 min and finally to 80% ACN for 5 min and held at 80% ACN for 10 min. Electrospray ionization was applied under a voltage of 1.8 kV and capillary temperature of 320 oC in data-dependent positive ion mode. Full scan (MS1) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the m/z range 400-1,600, with a charge range of 2-6, at a resolution of 70,000, until reaching an AGC target value of 1e6 at a maximum of 250 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired, using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), at 30% from m/z 110 for the ten most abundant parent ions, at a resolution of 35,000, using a precursor isolation window of 2 Da until reaching an AGC target value of 1e5 during an injection time of 110 ms. Dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds after selection for MS/MS was enabled to allow for detection of as many precursors as possible. The LC-MS/MS output was converted from the proprietary Thermo/XCalibur RAW format to the open source mzXML format (34), using ReAdW (35) (version 201411.xcalibur), with command line arguments: “--nocompress --gzip". The X! Tandem spectrum search engine (version VENGEANCE 2015.12.15) (36,37), was used to identify peptides from the mass spectra (see [Supplementary file 1 X!Tandem settings]). The reference database used in this step was a customized database consisting of non-redundant proteins from the NCBI Genbank NR (38) and peptide sequences from the reference genomes archived within the Human Microbiome Project (39). All sequences containing unidentified peptides (“X”) were removed. The resulting database contained a total of 63,288,687 protein sequences.

### Data Protocol
Please refer to the description and manual of TCUP: http://tcup.readthedocs.org http://bitbucket.org/chalmersmathbioinformatics/tcup

### Publication Abstract
Methods for rapid and reliable microbial identification are essential in modern healthcare. The ability to detect and correctly identify pathogenic species and their resistance phenotype is necessary for accurate diagnosis and efficient treatment of infectious diseases. Bottom-up tandem mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics enables rapid characterization of large parts of the expressed genes of microorganisms. However, the generated data are highly fragmented, making downstream analyses complex. Here we present TCUP, a new computational method for typing and characterizing bacteria using proteomics data from bottom-up tandem MS. TCUP compares the generated protein sequence data to reference databases and automatically finds peptides suitable for characterization of taxonomic composition and identification of expressed antimicrobial resistance genes. TCUP was evaluated using several clinically relevant bacterial species (<i>Escherichia coli</i>, <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>, <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis,</i> and <i>Haemophilus influenzae</i>), using both simulated data generated by <i>in silico</i> peptide digestion and experimental proteomics data generated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). The results showed that TCUP performs correct peptide classifications at rates between 90.3 and 98.5% at the species level. The method was also able to estimate the relative abundances of individual species in mixed cultures. Furthermore, TCUP could identify expressed &#x3b2;-lactamases in an extended spectrum &#x3b2;-lactamase-producing (ESBL) <i>E. coli</i> strain, even when the strain was cultivated in the absence of antibiotics. Finally, TCUP is computationally efficient, easy to integrate in existing bioinformatics workflows, and freely available under an open source license for both Windows and Linux environments.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Bottom-up, Proteotyping

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, SE-41346 Gothenburg, Sweden
Center for Translational Microbiome Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Fredrik Boulund

### Lab Head
Dr Edward, R. B. Moore
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, SE-41346 Gothenburg, Sweden


