### Accession
PXD028952

### Title
Migraine-associated mutation in the Na,K-ATPase leads to disturbances in cardiac metabolism and reduced cardiac function

### Description
Background. Mutations in ATP1A2 gene encoding the Na,K-ATPase α2 isoform is associated with familial hemiplegic migraine type 2 (FHM2). Migraine with aura is a known risk factor for heart disease. The Na,K-ATPase is important for cardiac function but its role for heart disease remains unknown. We hypothesized that ATP1A2 is a susceptibility gene for heart disease and aimed to assess the underlying disease mechanism. Methods and Results. Mice heterozygous for the FHM2-associated G301R mutation in the Atp1a2 gene (α2+/G301R mice) and matching wild type (WT) controls were compared. Reduced expression of the Na,K-ATPase α2 isoform and increased expression of the α1 isoform was observed in hearts from α2+/G301R mice (Western blot). Left ventricular dilation and reduced ejection fraction was shown in hearts from 8-month-old α2+/G301R mice (cardiac magnetic resonance imaging) and this was associated with reduced nocturnal blood pressure (radiotelemetry). Cardiac function and blood pressure of 3-month-old α2+/G301R mice were similar to WT mice. Amplified Na,K-ATPase-dependent Src/Ras/Erk1/2 signaling was observed in hearts from 8-month-old α2+/G301R mice and this was associated with mitochondrial uncoupling (respirometry), increased oxidative stress (malonedialdehyde measurements), and a heart failure-associated metabolic shift (hyperpolarized magnetic resonance). Mitochondrial membrane potential was similar between the groups (JC-1 dye assay). Proteomics of heart tissue further suggested amplified Src/Ras/Erk1/2 signaling and increased oxidative stress and provided the molecular basis for systolic dysfunction in 8-month-old α2+/G301R mice. Conclusions. Our findings suggest that ATP1A2 mutation leads to disturbed cardiac metabolism and reduced cardiac function mediated via Na,K-ATPase-dependent ROS signaling through the Src/Ras/Erk1/2 pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and the hearts were dissected into ice-cold physiological salt solution (in mM: NaCl 115.8, KCl 2.82, KH2PO4 1.18, MgSO4 1.2, NaHCO3 25, CaCl2 1.6, EDTA 0.03, glucose 5.5, gassed with 5 % CO2 in air and adjusted to pH 7.4) and blotted dry and weighted. Left ventricles were snap-frozen in liquid N2 for later storage at -80°C. Left ventricles were lysed in lysis buffer (in mM: Tris-HCl 10, sucrose 250, EDTA 1, EGTA 1, Triton X-100 2%, pH 7.4; and 1 tablet protease inhibitor per 10 ml) and centrifuged at 10,000 g. Total protein concentrations in the supernatants were measured using BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA. Proteins were isolated by acetone precipitation, re-dissolved in 0.2 M TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) followed by reduction by dithiothretiol (DTT, 5 mM for 30 min at 50° C), alkylation by iodoacetamide (IAA, 15 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness), and proteolytic cleavage by the addition of trypsin in a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio and overnight incubation at 37° C. The resulting peptide samples were labelled with 2 sets of tandem mass tags from a 10-plex TMT set using the mass tags 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, and 129C. A pool of all samples was labelled with mass tag 131and served as reference channel. Tagged peptide samples were mixed in two sets of tagged peptide mixture which each were subsequently fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) and analyzed by reversed phase nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-nanoLC-MSMS). In brief, the peptides were dissolved in HILIC buffer B (90% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA) fractionated into 24 fractions using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC using a 42 min linear gradient and a TSK gelamide-80 HILIC column. Each fraction was then analyzed by RP nano-LC-MSMS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC coupled to a Q-exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All Q-Exactive raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest search engine and Mascot search Engine (v. 2.2.3) both integrated with Proteome Discoverer software were used to search the data with the following criteria; protein database: Uniprot/ Swissprot and restricted to mouse. Fixed search parameters included trypsin, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation at cysteines, and tandem mass tag labeling at lysine and N-terminal amines in case of the discovery experiment. Methionine oxidation and deamidation were set as dynamic. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 8 PPM, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Peptide data were extracted using a Mascot significance threshold of 0.05 and a minimum peptide length of 6. A minimum of 2 peptides were used for protein identification and for protein quantification for the tandem mass tag experiment. False discovery rate was calculated using a decoy database search, and only high-confidence peptide identifications (false discovery rate <1%) were included.

### Publication Abstract
Background Mutations in <i>ATP1A2</i> gene encoding the Na,K-ATPase &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub> isoform are associated with familial hemiplegic migraine type 2. Migraine with aura is a known risk factor for heart disease. The Na,K-ATPase is important for cardiac function, but its role for heart disease remains unknown. We hypothesized that <i>ATP1A2</i> is a susceptibility gene for heart disease and aimed to assess the underlying disease mechanism. Methods and Results Mice heterozygous for the familial hemiplegic migraine type 2-associated G301R mutation in the <i>Atp1a2</i> gene (&#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice) and matching wild-type controls were compared. Reduced expression of the Na,K-ATPase &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub> isoform and increased expression of the &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub> isoform were observed in hearts from &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice (Western blot). Left ventricular dilation and reduced ejection fraction were shown in hearts from 8-month-old &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice (cardiac magnetic resonance imaging), and this was associated with reduced nocturnal blood pressure (radiotelemetry). Cardiac function and blood pressure of 3-month-old &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice were similar to wild-type mice. Amplified Na,K-ATPase-dependent Src kinase/Ras/Erk1/2 (p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase) signaling was observed in hearts from 8-month-old &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice, and this was associated with mitochondrial uncoupling (respirometry), increased oxidative stress (malondialdehyde measurements), and a heart failure-associated metabolic shift (hyperpolarized magnetic resonance). Mitochondrial membrane potential (5,5&#xb4;,6,6&#xb4;-tetrachloro-1,1&#xb4;,3,3&#xb4;-tetraethylbenzimidazolocarbocyanine iodide dye assay) and mitochondrial ultrastructure (transmission electron microscopy) were similar between the groups. Proteomics of heart tissue further suggested amplified Src/Ras/Erk1/2 signaling and increased oxidative stress and provided the molecular basis for systolic dysfunction in 8-month-old &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub><sup>+/G301R</sup> mice. Conclusions Our findings suggest that <i>ATP1A2</i> mutation leads to disturbed cardiac metabolism and reduced cardiac function mediated via Na,K-ATPase-dependent reactive oxygen species signaling through the Src/Ras/Erk1/2 pathway.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Contractile function, Gene expression and regulation, Oxidant stress, Cell signaling

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark


