### Accession
PXD019461

### Title
Proteomic Features of Cardiomyopathy in Obese and After Weight Loss Rats

### Description
We performed quantitative and qualitative proteomic analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS to describe the proteomic phenotype of the heart and plasma in a rat model of diet-induced developmental obesity with an evaluation of whether the cardiac proteome is shaped by weight loss

### Sample Protocol
The isolated tissues were lysed in a buffer with 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and automatically homogenized using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies) in 0.5-mL tubes pre-filled with ceramic (zirconium oxide) beads (Bertin Technologies). Next, the material was subjected to a threefold cycle of freezing and thawing. Then, the tissue in the buffer was sonicated in a bath for three 1-minute cycles on ice and homogenized again using the Precellys 24 instrument. In case of plasma analysis, plasma samples were dissolved 1:60 with ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the isolated protein fraction according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In-solution digestion by trypsin was performed. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The following LC buffers were used: buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in Mili-Q water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of buffer B from 5% to 65% at a 300 nL/min (230 min. method). The instrument settings were as follows: the resolution was set to 70 000 for MS scans and 17 500 for the MS/MS scans to increase the acquisition rate.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were quantitatively analyzed by MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), version 1.5.1.2 (http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start). The database search engine Andromeda was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt database, with the following parameters: a tolerance level of 10 ppm for MS and 0.08 Da for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as the digesting enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. The analysis of the samples was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Resulting file containing normalized and quantified data was processed in Perseus software (part of MaxQuant package).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart proteomics, Cardiac fibrosis, Obesity cardiomyopathy, Weight loss, Plasma proteomics, Developmental obesity, Rats, Lc-ms/ms, Acafeteria diet, Caloric restriction

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan, Poland

### Submitter
Lukasz Marczak

### Lab Head
Dr Lukasz Marczak
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan, Poland


