### Accession
PXD001477

### Title
Biophoton emission is involved in reactive oxygen species as well as mitochondrial proteins

### Description
Mitochondrial Proteomics under flooding stress in roots of soybean plants

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of soybean (Glycine max L.) cv. Enrei were sterilized with sodium hypochloride solution for 2 min, rinsed twice with water for 2 min, and then germinated on silica sand under illumination with white fluorescent light (photosynthetic photon density of 200 µmol m-2 s-1; 16/8 h light/ dark cycle) at 25 °C and 70% relative humidity. Two-day-old soybean plants were exposed to flooding for 6 days and water was withheld at 6 days until 10 days (days 4) for recovering soybean plants. Flooding conditions were maintained that reached up to 3 cm above the sand surface. To analyze the enzymes, roots were collected at days 2, 4, 6 flooding and days10 recovery under flooding stress. Moreover, to analyze the biophoton emission and mitochondrial proteins, roots were collected at days 4 under flooding stress. For all experiments, non-flooded plants were collected as controls on the same days as treated plants, and triplicate experiments were performed as biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS analysis for peptide identification was performed using a nano liquid chromatography (LC) MS/MS system (nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The MS was operated in a data-dependent mode that switched automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for MS/MS data acquisition and processing. For the analysis, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, Dionex, Germering, Germany) in an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex). Peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a C18 Tip column (75 μm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, Nikkyo Technos) using a linear acetonitrile gradient of 8-30% over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min and a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap MS over a mass range of 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. The target ions selected for the MS/MS process were dynamically excluded for 90 sec.

### Publication Abstract
To understand the mechanism of biophoton emission, ROS and mitochondrial proteins were analyzed in soybean plants under flooding stress. Enzyme activity and biophoton emission were increased in the flooding stress samples when assayed in reaction mixes specific for antioxidant enzymes and reactive oxygen species; although the level of the hydroxyl radicals was increased at day 4 (2 days of flooding) compared to nonflooding at day 4, the emission of biophotons did not change. Mitochondria were isolated and purified from the roots of soybean plants grown under flooding stress by using a Percoll gradient, and proteins were analyzed by a gel-free proteomic technique. Out of the 98 mitochondrial proteins that significantly changed abundance under flooding stress, 47 increased and 51 decreased at day 4. The mitochondrial enzymes fumarase, glutathione-S-transferase, and aldehyde dehydrogenase increased at day 4 in protein abundance and enzyme activity. Enzyme activity and biophoton emission decreased at day 4 by the assay of lipoxygenase under stress. Aconitase, acyl CoA oxidase, succinate dehydrogenase, and NADH ubiquinone dehydrogenase were up-regulated at the transcription level. These results indicate that oxidation and peroxide scavenging might lead to biophoton emission and oxidative damage in the roots of soybean plants under flooding stress.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Enzyme activity, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Biophoton emission

### Affiliations
NARO, National Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan
Post-Doctoral Fellow, NARO, Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan 305-8518

### Submitter
Abu Hena Mostafa Kamal

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO, National Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan


