### Accession
PXD039851

### Title
Substances in the mandibular glands mediate queen manipulation of larval development and colony transition from growth to reproduction in an annual social bumble bee

### Description
Social organization is commonly dynamic with extreme examples in annual eusocial insects ("annual superorganisms"), but the signals and mechanisms regulating social organization remained elusive. In annual bumble bee colonies, larvae with a close contact to a queen do not differentiate into gynes, pupate at an earlier age, and are commonly smaller than siblings that do not contact a queen. We combined detailed observations, proteomics, microRNA transcriptomics, and gland removal surgery, to study the regulation of brood development and division of labor in the model bumble bee Bombus terrestris. We found that regurgitates fed to larvae by queens and workers differ in their protein and microRNA composition. The proteome of the regurgitate overlaps significantly with that of the mandibular (MG) and hypopharyngeal glands (HPG), suggesting that these exocrine glands are the sources of some regurgitate proteins.  The MG and HPG proteomes , but not that of the salivary glands, differed between queens and workers, with the caste-specificity preserved for the MG and regurgitate proteomes. Queens subjected to a surgical removal of  the MG showed normal behavior and brood care, but failed to manipulate the developmental program of the brood they reared. These findings suggest that substances in the queen MG are fed to larvae and influence their developmental program. As the colony grows, an increasing number of workers feed larvae and by that reduce the effects of the queen substances, such that she can no longer manipulate the development of all larvae, and the colony switches from producing workers (ergonomic phase) to gynes (reproductive phase).

### Sample Protocol
Glands were disturbed using plastic sticks in the Urea-Tris lysis buffer (6 M Urea, 200 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS,  pH 8.5) supplemented with 10µL/10mL protease inhibitor, incubated on ice for 15 min, followed by 30 min centrifugation at 15,000Xg at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and the proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 10°C under constant shaking at 350 rpm. To remove potential aggregates, the lysates were centrifuged again for 30 min at 15,000Xg at 4°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube for cysteine alkylation with 100 mM Iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature, in the dark. SDS and Urea were removed using the methanol-chloroform precipitation as described in 10.1002/elps.201000197. Briefly, 400 µL of HPLC grade methanol was added at a ratio of 1:4 to each sample and mixed well, followed by the addition of 100 µL of HPLC grade chloroform. Then, after dilution by double distilled water (DDW) to the 1:3 ratio, and brief centrifugation (14,000Xg for 2 min at room temp), three layers were obtained, while proteins are in the interphase, covered by methanol. After washing the methanol fraction, the proteins were extracted, dried by SpeedVac (1300 rpm, 45°C for 1 hour), and resuspended in 6 M urea. Then, the desalted proteins were digested by trypsin in a diluted digestion buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10% ACN) overnight  at 37°C, 350 rpm. Then, after quenching using 3 µL of formic acid (to a final concentration of 0.15%), the peptides were desalted using in-house C18 Stage tips as described in (10.1089/ars.2016.6900). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA).   Regurgitate sample preparation for the proteomics analysis The regurgitate samples were dissolved in 250 µl 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and washed twice with 80% acetonitrile. After the acetonitrile removal by SpeedVac (1300rpm, 45°C for 1 hour), the samples were resuspended in 8 M urea supplemented by 1 mM DTT and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C, 350 rpm. The aggregates and insoluble fractions were removed by 15 min centrifugation at 15,000Xg at 4°C. The thiol alkylation was done by 50 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 1 h. The digestion was carried out overnight in the digestion buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10% ACN, 1 M urea) at 37°C, 350 rpm. Then, after quenching using 3 µL of formic acid, the peptides were ,desalted using in-house C18 Stage tips as described in (10.1089/ars.2016.6900). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  nanoLC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were injected and desalted using the C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and separated using the 50 cm length C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC column ( 2 μm particle size and 100Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow of 300 µL/min using an Dionex Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to Orbitrap Mass spectrometer, Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific).  To separate the peptides, the column was applied with a linear gradient of solvent B at 40°C with a flow rate of 300 µL/min: from 1-4% in 45 min, 4-28% 90min, 28-50% 22 min, 50-80% 10 min and finally held at 80% for 10 min for washing the column and before equilibrating at 1% for 30 min (solvent A is  0.1% formic acid, solvent B is 0.1% formic acid with 80% ACN).  To Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated at a data-dependent acquisition method, with the following parameters: full-scan MS spectra was set to 300-1650 m/z, the resolution was 60,000, and the 10 most intense ions with charge states between 2-7 were fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 25 and 28. The target value (AGC) for MS was 3*106., maximum IT of 20 ms. Fragment ions were then detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 105, Maximum IT 25ms, and isolation window was set to 1.6 m⁄z. To avoid potential carryover of the peptides, the column was washed with 80% ACN for 40 min between each sample run.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed by the MaxQuant software, version 1.6.10.43 (10.1038/nbt.1511). Peptide search was done by Andromeda algorithm to search for MS/MS spectra against the Bombus terrestris proteome database derived from NCBI B. terrestris genome database 1.0. The proteins were predicted based on the B. terrestris genome sequence and RNA expression data from NCBI. The identification parameters allowed for two missed cleavages and the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Peptide length was set between 7 and 30 amino acids. Carbamidomethyl and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to p < 0.05. Fragment mass deviation was up to 20 ppm and initial precursor mass deviation was up to 4.5 ppm.  Proteins were identified by the appearance of at least two peptides and quantification was employed using label-free quantification (LFQ) using default parameters in the MaxQuant software. Statistical and bioinformatic analyses were performed using the Perseus software, version 1.6.0.7 (10.1038/nmeth.3901). In the analysis of gland protein abundance,  we used 4 biological repeats. Only proteins detected in at least 3 out of 4 samples were considered for the statistical analysis. The hierarchical clustering and PCA of the LFQ values was done using ANOVA test (p < 0.05; Benjamini-Hochberg FDR). For the heatmap visualization, Z-score normalization was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Social organization is commonly dynamic, with extreme examples in annual social insects, but little is known about the underlying signals and mechanisms. Bumble bee larvae with close contact to a queen do not differentiate into gynes, pupate at an earlier age, and are commonly smaller than siblings that do not contact a queen. We combined detailed observations, proteomics, microRNA transcriptomics, and gland removal surgery to study the regulation of brood development and division of labor in the annual social bumble bee <i>Bombus terrestris</i>. We found that regurgitates fed to larvae by queens and workers differ in their protein and microRNA composition. The proteome of the regurgitate overlaps significantly with that of the mandibular (MG) and hypopharyngeal glands (HPG), suggesting that these exocrine glands are sources of regurgitate proteins. The proteome of the MG and HPG, but not the salivary glands, differs between queens and workers, with caste-specificity preserved for the MG and regurgitate proteomes. Queens subjected to surgical removal of the MG showed normal behavior, brood care, and weight gain, but failed to shorten larval development. These findings suggest that substances in the queen MG are fed to larvae and influence their developmental program. We suggest that when workers emerge and contribute to larval feeding, they dilute the effects of the queen substances, until she can no longer manipulate the development of all larvae. Longer developmental duration may allow female larvae to differentiate into gynes rather than to workers, mediating the colony transition from the ergonomic to the reproductive phase.

### Keywords
Bee, Queen, Worker, Proteome, Cephalic glands, Bombus terrestris

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Associate Professor, Vice president of the ISBMB society Dept. of Biological Chemistry, room 1-637 The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel

### Submitter
Rosi Fassler

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dana Reichmann
Associate Professor, Vice president of the ISBMB society Dept. of Biological Chemistry, room 1-637 The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel


