### Accession
PXD021715

### Title
Ablation or Inhibition of Protein Disulfide Isomerase A3 (PDIA3) in Aberrant Club Cells Attenuates Osteopontin (SPP1) Production and Pulmonary Fibrosis

### Description
Rationale: The role of club cells in the pathology of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis IPF is not well understood. PDIA3, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) based redox chaperone catalyzes the cysteine disulfide bonds (-S-S-) in various fibrosis-related proteins; however, mechanisms of action of PDIA3 in pulmonary fibrosis is not fully elucidated. Objectives: To examine the role of club cells and PDIA3 in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis (PF) and therapeutic potential of inhibition of PDIA3 in PF. Methods: The impact of PDIA3 and aberrant club cells in PF was studied by retrospective analysis of human transcriptome data from LGRC, and specific deletion and inhibition of PDIA3 in club cells and blocking Osteopontin (SPP1) downstream of PDIA3 in mice. Measurements and Main Results: The PDIA3 along with club cell secretory protein (SCGB1A1 or CCSP) signatures are upregulated in IPF compared to control patients, and PDIA3 increases correlate with a decrease in lung function in IPF patients. The Bleomycin (BLM) model of PF showed increases in aberrant CCSP and PDIA3 positive cells in the lung parenchyma. Ablation of Pdia3, specifically in CCSP cells, decreases CCSP cells along with PF in mice. The therapeutic administration of a PDI inhibitor LOC14 reversed the BLM-induced CCSP cells and PF in mice. The proteomic screen of the PDIA3 partners revealed SPP1 as a major interactor in PF. Blocking SPP1 attenuated the development of PF in mice.  Conclusions: Collectively, this study demonstrates a new relationship of club cells, with PDIA3, SPP1, and a putative pathological function of club cells in pulmonary fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and trypsin digestion: Immunoprecipitates (PBS (n=3), BLM_14d (n=3), BLM24d (n=3) and the IgG control BLM24d (n=1)) were run briefly onto the SDS-PAGE (1/3 of the whole length of the gel), which was then stained with silver.  For each lane (sample), the gel regions containing the antibody heavy and light chains (labeled as “IgG”) and the separated proteins were excised separately (labeled as “IP”).  This allows the high abundant IgG and proteins with similar molecular weight and the relatively low abundant proteins in the other gel regions to be analyzed by separate mass spectrometry runs to increase the proteome coverage.  The gel pieces were minced to 1 mm3 cubes, combined, destained and subjected to disulfide reduction and alkylation, and trypsin digestion protocols, as described previously. [Hristova et al., 2014]  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based protein identification.  The tryptic peptides resuspended in 2.5% CH3CN and 2.5% formic acid (FA) in water were analyzed on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples were loaded onto a 100 μm x 350mm capillary column packed with UChrom C18 (1.8 μm particle size, 120 Å, Cat. No: PN-80001; Nanolcms, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1.  The column end was laser pulled to a ~3 μm orifice and packed with minimal amounts of 5um Magic C18AQ before packing with the 1.8 um particle size chromatographic materials.  Peptides of immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by a gradient of 0-35% CH3CN/0.1% FA over 150 min, 35-80% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 1 min and then 80% CH3CN/0.1% FA for 8 min, followed by an immediate return to 0% CH3CN/0.1% FA and a hold at 0% CH3CN/0.1% FA. Peptides originating from heavy and light chains of IgG were separated by a gradient of 0-35% CH3CN/0.1% FA over 60 min, 35-80% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 1 min and then 80% CH3CN/0.1% FA for 8 min, followed by an immediate return to 0% CH3CN/0.1% FA and a hold at 0% CH3CN/0.1% FA.  Samples were randomized in run order and peptide standards (bovine serum albumin) were run between samples. Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data-dependent “Top 10” acquisition mode with lock mass function activated (m/z 371.1012; use lock masses: best; lock mass injection: full MS), in which a survey scan from m/z 350-1600 at 70, 000 resolution (AGC target 1e6; max IT 100 ms; profile mode) was followed by 10 higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans on the most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution (loop count = 10; AGC target 5e4; max IT 100 ms; centroid mode).  MS/MS scans were acquired with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collisional energy of 26%.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled (peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; underfill ratio: 1%; exclusion duration: 15 sec). Minimum AGC target = 5 e2.

### Data Protocol
Database searches. Raw files (.RAW) were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the two raw files (“IgG” and “IP”) from each sample imported as “fractions”.  Product ion spectra were searched using SEQUEST with the “Basic” Processing and Consensus workflows against a Uniprot Mus musculus protein database (UP000000589; downloaded Mar 3rd, 2020; 63,628 entries).  Search Parameters were as follows: Full trypsin enzymatic activity; Mass tolerance at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively; dynamic modification on methionine (oxidation: +15.995 Da), and static modification on cysteines (carbamidomethylation: +57.021 Da).  Percolator was included in the workflow to limit the false discovery rate to less than 1%.  The resulting msf result files were incorporated into Q+S 4.11 (Proteome Software, OR) as mudPIT with “prefiltered mode” (precalculated probability from Percolator was used) and Protein Cluster Analysis.  FDR at protein and peptide levels at 1% and “Min number of peptides” = 2 were selected to achieve a 0.4% Protein Decoy FDR and 0.04% Peptide (PSM) Decoy FDR in the filtered dataset  Statistical Analysis The total spectral counts were statistically evaluated between “Control”, “BLM_14d” and “BLM_24d” with respect to specific protein isoforms/clustering.  Statistical tools in Scaffold Quantitative Analysis Mode were used for pairwise comparisons (two-tailed t-test for BLM24d vs. PBS and BLM14d vs. PBS), and for the three-group comparison (ANOVA for BLM24d vs. BLM14d vs. PBS) with the following settings: No normalization was used; Min. Value = 0.5 (All spectral counts of 0 were replaced with a value of 0.5); and total spectra as quantitative method.  “Spectral Counting Reports” were exported from Scaffold with “Show lower scoring peptides and <5% Probabilities” deactivated, and “Hide Decoy” selected.  The total spectral counts of all proteins (including protein cluster members) and the corresponding statistical analyses exported from Scaffold as “Spectrum Counting Reports” are included in QUANT Excel spreadsheets with a tab name beginning with “All_”.  Only spectral counts of protein clusters (exported from “Current View” with “0”s replaced with “0.5”) were used to construct the heat maps and volcano plots for simplicity (QUANT Excel spreadsheets with a tab name beginning with “Clusters_”).  One of the cluster members was selected to represent the cluster and the associated spectral counts were derived from the peptides of all the members (see QUANT Excel spreadsheets tab names starting “All_” for the spectral counts and p-values for all members/isoforms within clusters.)  Fold changes (log2 ratio of the average number of peptides of the proteins between two groups) and p values (-log10) were imported into Graph Pad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., CA) for constructing volcano plots.  Heat maps were generated by first scaling the total spectral counts in individual samples so that all the counts in all samples summed up to the number of samples *100 (this allows the fold change of proteins of varying abundances be represented on the same color intensity scale) and then importing the scaled values into Graph Pad Prism 8 (Dobule gradient; Baseline value set as 100).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdia3, Loc14, Ccsp, Pulmonary fibrosis, Upr, Spectral counting, Osteopontin, Lc-ms/ms, Ipf

### Affiliations
Vermont Genetics Network Proteomics Facility
Department of Biology
University of Vermont

Associate Professor Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine HSRF 218, University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA

### Submitter
Ying Wai Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Vikas Anathy
Associate Professor Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine HSRF 218, University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA


