### Accession
PXD012479

### Title
microbiome of methane hydrate sediments: Hydrate Ridge

### Description
Gas hydrates, also known as clathrates, are cages of ice-like water crystals encasing gas molecules such as methane (CH4).   Despite the global importance of gas hydrates, their microbiomes remain mysterious. Microbial cells are physically associated with hydrates, and the taxonomy of these hydrate-associated microbiomes is distinct from non-hydrate-bearing sites.   Global 16S rRNA gene surveys show that members of sub-clade JS-1 of the uncultivated bacterial candidate phylum Atribacteria are the dominant taxa in gas hydrates.  The Atribacteria phylogeny is highly diverse, suggesting the potential for wide functional variation and niche specialization.   Here, we examined the distribution, phylogeny, and metabolic potential of uncultivated Atribacteria in cold, salty, and high-pressure sediments beneath Hydrate Ridge, off the coast of Oregon, USA, using a combination of 16S rRNA gene amplicon, metagenomic, and metaproteomic analysis.  Methods were developed to extract bacterial cellular protein from these sediments, as outlined below. Sample Description Three sediments samples were collected from beneath Hydrate Ridge, off the coast of Oregon, USA.  Sediments were cored at ODP site 1244 (44°35.1784´N; 125°7.1902´W; 895 m water depth) on the eastern flank of Hydrate Ridge ~3 km northeast of the southern summit on ODP Leg 204 in 2002 and stored at -80°C at the IODP Gulf Coast Repository. E10H5 sediment is from 68.5 meters below sediment surface interface C1H2 sediment is from 2 meters below sediment surface interface.   C3H4  sediment is from 21 meters below sediment surface interface.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Three methane hydrate sediment samples ( C1H2, C3H4, E10H5) were extracted using two protocols. 1)For each 10g sediment sample, 2.5mL of desorption buffer and 2 mL of a pH-buffered amino acid solution was added on ice adapted from Nicora et al. 2013).  The desorption buffer consisted of 0.5M NaCl, 0.1 M glycerol, 0.2% SDS, 6M urea, 1mM EDTA, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate.  The goal of the pH-buffered amino acid solution is to fill the electronegative sites on the mineral grains to reduce absorption of proteins to these particles and contained 8.3g of each of the 3 positively charged amino acids histidine, lysine and arginine dissolved in 100mL water and adjusted to a final pH of 7.0.  Samples were vortexed for 4 times, 5 minutes vortexing alternating on ice for 5 minute, for a total of 20 minutes.  Sediment slurry was then sonicated with Bronson probe sonicator (4 x 30 s) to lyse cells and heated at 95oC for 5 min.  Supernatent was collected and put on ice after pelleting the sediments.  Sediment pellet was washed 2 more times with 3mL desorption buffer and the supernatants were combined.  Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used (Ostasiewicz et al., 2010).  Filtrate was collected via centrifugation (3000 rpm, 90 min, 4oC), and speedvaced to near dryness at 4oC. Peptides were then resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid prior to desalting and MS analysis.   All samples were desalted using Nest Group C18 Proto centrifugal macro columns following manufacturers instructions.    2) A 10g sample from C1H2 was prepared following Kallmeyer et al. (2008) with modifications.  Primary modifications that we employed included the removal off all detergents, modification of the sonication step, and removal of all detergent- like chemicals.  Additionally, because we needed to recover the bacteria in as small of a volume as possible, we modified the protocol to remove steps and reduce the total number of tube to tube transfers.  To kill the bacteria, prior to protein extraction, sediments were treated with a 0.1% sodium azide (20 min; 4oC). The Emulsifier mixture consisted of 100mM EDTA and 100mM sodium pyrophosphate, while the bacterial cell removal buffer (BCRB) was modified to only include 4mL phosphate buffered saline, 645 ml emulsifier mixture, 516 ml methanol.  The 10g sediment sample was slurried on ice and placed in a sonicating ice bath for 20 minutes to dislodge bacteria from particles. was distributed across six 10ml ultracentrifuge tubes to isolate the bacteria using a density gradient (50,000 xg, 18 hrs, 4oC).  The top layer with the bacterial cells was collected and Nycodenz solutionwas diluted to 2% and bacteria cells were pelleted using the ultracentrifuge (50,000 xg, 18 hrs, 4oC).  Cells were rinsed and final bacterial pellets were lysed using the Bronson sonicating probe and the proteins were digested following Nunn et al. (2015).  Both tandem mass spectrometry instruments have inline NanoAquity UPLC chromatography systems.  On both instruments, the Lumos and Fusion, 10 ml injections of samples were separated using the inline NanoAquity UPLC with a 60 min gradient (2-35% ACN). Samples C1H2, C3H4 and E10H5 were analyzed on the Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Precursor masses were collected in the orbitrap with 120K resolution, scanning a range from 400-1600 m/z.  The maximum injection time was 20ms with an AGC target of 200K.  Fragments were generated with HCD activation and fragmentation spectra were collected on ions with precursor charge state +2-+5 with 30s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Searches Protein database for identifying the collected fragmentation spectra was generated from the metagenomic data from samples C1H2, C3H4, E10H5. These databases were concatenated with 50 common contaminants, yielding a protein database of 10,325 proteins.  To assign spectra to peptide sequences, correlative database searches were completed using Comet v. 2015.01 rev. 2 (Eng et al., 2012, 2015). Comet parameters included: Trypsin enzyme specificity, semi-digested, allowed 1 missed cleavage, 10 ppm mass tolerance, cysteine modification of 57 Da (resulting from the iodoacetamide) and modifications on methionine of 15.999 Da (oxidation). Minimum protein and peptide thresholds were set at P > 0.95 on Protein and Peptide Prophet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2010). Protein inferences from the whole-cell lysates were accepted by ProteinProphet if the thresholds noted above were passed, two or more peptides were identified, and at least one terminus was tryptic (Nesvizhskii et al., 2010; and Pedrioli, 2010).

### Publication Abstract
Gas hydrates harbour gigatons of natural gas, yet their microbiomes remain understudied. We bioprospected 16S rRNA amplicons, metagenomes, and metaproteomes from methane hydrate-bearing sediments under Hydrate Ridge (offshore Oregon, USA, ODP Site 1244, 2-69&#x2009;mbsf) for novel microbial metabolic and biosynthetic potential. Atribacteria sequences generally increased in relative sequence abundance with increasing sediment depth. Most Atribacteria ASVs belonged to JS-1-Genus 1 and clustered with other sequences from gas hydrate-bearing sediments. We recovered 21 metagenome-assembled genomic bins spanning three geochemical zones in the sediment core: the sulfate-methane transition zone, the metal (iron/manganese) reduction zone, and the gas hydrate stability zone. We found evidence for bacterial fermentation as a source of acetate for aceticlastic methanogenesis and as a driver of iron reduction in the metal reduction zone. In multiple zones, we identified a Ni-Fe hydrogenase-Na<sup>+</sup> /H<sup>+</sup> antiporter supercomplex (Hun) in Atribacteria and Firmicutes bins and in other deep subsurface bacteria and cultured hyperthermophiles from the Thermotogae phylum. Atribacteria expressed tripartite ATP-independent transporters downstream from a novel regulator (AtiR). Atribacteria also possessed adaptations to survive extreme conditions (e.g. high salt brines, high pressure and cold temperatures) including the ability to synthesize the osmolyte di-myo-inositol-phosphate as well as expression of K<sup>+</sup> -stimulated pyrophosphatase and capsule proteins.

### Keywords
Cold, Metaproteomics, High-pressure, Hydrate-associated microbiome, Bacteria, Atribacteria

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Univ of Washington Dept of Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Brook Nunn

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L Nunn
Univ of Washington Dept of Genome Sciences


