### Accession
PXD012230

### Title
Integrated multi-omics approach reveals a role of ALDH1A1 in lipid metabolism in human colon cancer cells

### Description
An integrated systems approach was used with bioinformatics tools to understand the the role of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1) in human colon cancer cells. We combined transcriptomics, proteomics and untargeted metabolomics to gain insight into the mechanisms affected by the suppression of the ALDH1A1 gene in COLO320 cells. RNA-seq and proteomics analyses revealed 1747 transcripts and 336 proteins that were differentially expressed in cells in which the ALDH1A1 had been suppressed by shRNA transfection. Transcriptomics pathway analysis showed significant signaling pathways, such as Wnt/β-catenin (p=3.47E-6), molecular mechanisms of cancer (7.41E-5) and others relevant to lipid metabolism, such as cholesterol biosynthesis I, II and III (p=1.82E-4). Proteomics pathway analysis identified oxidative phosphorylation to be the most highly significant pathway (p=5.01E-31). Pathway analysis of the genes common to the transcriptomics and proteomics analyses revealed the asparagine biosynthesis (p=3.16E-3) and cholesterol biosynthesis the most statistically significant (p=3.36E-3). Univariate analysis of the untargeted metabolomics dataset revealed 859 ions statistically significant. Network analysis showed alterations in pathways linked to energy and lipid metabolism, such carnitine shuttle (p=5.3E-4) and fatty acid oxidation (p=2.9E-2). A systems biology approach was used to integrate all three datasets and a total of 61 pathways were generated. A direct association between the suppression of ALDH1A1 and the Vitamin A (retinol) metabolism pathway and down-regulation of retinol and the UGT2B17, UGT2A3 and PRDX6 genes was shown. In conclusion, the present results confirm the role of ALDH1A1 in retinol metabolism and shows for the first time the influence of this gene on lipid metabolism pathways that may be crucial for cholesterol synthesis in human colon cancer cells. In addition, they demonstrate how an integrated systems approach using unbiased bioinformatics tools can be used to understand the interplay of cellular pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellet was resuspended in ice-cold Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS), which was supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails, centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded, cell pellet stored at -80C until processing. RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails was utilized to lyse the cells with a Broanson digital sonifier with triplicate 15 sec bursts of sonications. 4°C. 100μL of the supernatant was added to chloroform:methanol:water (100:400:300 μL, respectively) to precipitate proteins, vortexed, and centrifuged at 16,000g for 1 min. Top aqueous layer of the supernatant was removed and discarded, and an additional 400uL methanol was added to the remaining mixture, and vortexed well. The resultant mixture was centrifuged at 16,000g for 2 min, and the methanol was removed and discarded.  The protein pellet was dried and resolubilized with Rapigest SF surfactant solution in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide.  Digsetion was carried out with Lys C and Trypsin at 1:10 enzyme:protein ratio over night at 37 degree C, and quenched with 0.1% formic acid.  RT Cal mix was added and dilution of digest was made to final concentration of 0.05ug/uL prior to injecting on e on the nanoACQUITY UPLC Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer for normalization of Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) data collection.  To ensure a high level of identification and quantitation integrity, a resolution of 120,000 and 60,000 was utilized for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 μL/min in 97% Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and 3% Buffer B (0.075% FA in acetonitrile) prior to eluting with linear gradients that reached 6% B at 5 min, 35% B at 170 min, and 50% B at 175 min, and 97% B at 180 min for 5 min; then dropped down to 3% B at 186 min for 14 min.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was processed using Progenesis QI Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0), with protein identification carried out using the Mascot search algorithm. The Mascot search results were exported using a significance cutoff of p<0.05 and FDR of 1% into the Progenesis QI software, where search hits were assigned to corresponding peak features that were extracted from the MS data. Only proteins with two or more unique quantifiable peptides were utilized in downstream analyses. These protein abundances and their accession number were then utilized in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis for networking functions of the identified and quantified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1a1; colo320; transcriptomics; proteomics; metabolomics; colorectal cancer; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University; Keck MS & Proteomics Resource

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University; Keck MS & Proteomics Resource


