### Accession
PXD005305

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of microalgae Prototheca associated with severe, mild and non-infectious strains

### Description
Three strains, P. zopfii genotype 1 (SAG 2063), P. zopfii genotype 2 (SAG 2021) and P. blaschkeae (SAG 2064) from the culture collection at the Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany were cultured six times independently at 37°C in Sabouraud dextrose liquid medium until OD600 measurement reached 0.6 to 0.9. Following the cell harvest by brief centrifugation, the cells were lysed and label free quantitative proteomics analysis were carried out to investigate the differences between these strains.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed as follows 1. Each strains were cultured times independently at 37°C in Sabouraud dextrose liquid medium until OD600 measurement reached 0.6 to 0.9. 2. The cells were harvested by centrifugation and subsequently, inactivated by addition of 300 µl of water and 900 µl of ethanol.  3. Centrifuges, supernatant discarded and  the residual amount of ethanol was completely removed by air –drying. 4. The resultant pellet was then re-suspended in 250 µl of HEPES buffer (pH 7.4, 20 mM). Cell lysis was carried out by sonication on ice (1 min, 100% amplitude and 1 duty cycle, Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany).  5. 10 µg of proteins were acetone precipitated, subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion, desalted using stage-tip cleaning protocol and the resultant peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase chromatography.  6. The peptides were then eluted and subjected to ionization by electrospray ionization and then transferred into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)  to measure full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–1700) following isolation and fragmentation of the twenty most intense ions by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS spectra search were processed using MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5) software. Search parameters were set: Initial maximum precursor-7 ppm, fragment mass -0.5 Da, variable modification-methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, fixed modification-cysteine carbamidomethylation, digestion with trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length - 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Proteins from the Chlorella variabilis (Green alga) (Proteome ID: UP000008141, protein count: 9831, version May 2016) and Auxenochlorella protothecoides (Green microalga) (Proteome ID: UP000028924: protein count: 7001, version May 2016) proteome were downloaded from the UniProt Knowledgebase and imported into the Maxquant associated Andromeda search engine. The protein identification was valid only when atleast one unique or ‘‘razor’’ peptide was present and after removal of the frequently observed laboratory contaminants (248). The normalized protein intensities were then imported on to the Perseus software. The data was then transformed in to logarithmic scale with base two and the missing values were imputed with the value of the lowest intensity. The protein quantification and statistical significance was carried out using two-way Student-t test and error correction (p value < 0.05) using the method of Benjamini–Hochberg. All those proteins that varied by fold changes and significant were considered as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Microalgae of the genus <i>Prototheca</i> (<i>P.</i>) spp are associated with rare algal infections of invertebrates termed protothecosis. Among the seven generally accepted species, <i>P. zopfii</i> genotype 2 (GT2) is associated with a severe form of bovine mastitis while <i>P. blaschkeae</i> causes the mild and sub-clinical form of mastitis. The reason behind the infectious nature of <i>P. zopfii</i> GT2, while genotype 1 (GT1) remains non-infectious, is not known. Therefore, in the present study we investigated the protein expression level difference between the genotypes of <i>P. zopfii</i> and <i>P. blaschkeae.</i> Cells were cultured to the mid-exponential phase, harvested, and processed for LC-MS analysis. Peptide data was acquired on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos, raw spectra were quantitatively analyzed with MaxQuant software and matching with the reference database of <i>Chlorella variabilis</i> and <i>Auxenochlorella protothecoides</i> resulted in the identification of 226 proteins. Comparison of an environmental strain with infectious strains resulted in the identification of 51 differentially expressed proteins related to carbohydrate metabolism, energy production and protein translation. The expression level of Hsp70 proteins and their role in the infectious process is worth further investigation. All mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005305.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Bovine masititis, Ltq orbitrap velos mass spectrometer; maxquant, Prototheca, Prototheca zopfii, Perseus software, Prototheca blaschkeae, Label free quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Freie Universität Berlin,  Centre for Infectious Medicine, Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Freie Universität Berlin,  Centre for Infectious Medicine, Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.


