### Accession
PXD028507

### Title
SUMOylation proteomic analysis of renal distal convoluted tubule cells

### Description
We profiled SUMO1 and SUMO2 modified proteins in distal convoluted tubule (mpkDCT) as a precursor to targeted approaches to assess SUMO function. SUMO levels in cells following heat shock and treatment with deSUMOylation inhibitors were assessed.

### Sample Protocol
A modified form of SUMO1 or SUMO2, with a histidine tag and a T to K mutation preceding the carboxyl-terminal GG motif was expressed in mpkDCT cells. SUMO-conjugated proteins were purified using the histidine tag, and after cleavage with the endoproteinase Lys-C followed by Glu-C, a di-glycine specific antibody was used to enrich SUMOylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were done by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). All the raw files from one SUMO family (SUMO1 or SUMO2) were searched together, with Lys-C/P as enzyme for group0 (Lys-C digested peptides) and LysC/P plus GluC for group1 (Lys-C, followed by GluC digested peptides). The raw files were searched against mouse Uniprot database downloaded on 19th of July 2021, plus normal contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Acetylation of Protein N-term, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and most importantly, di-glycine modification of lysine were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. All other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Renal, Sumoylation, Distal convoluted tubule, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Qi Wu
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


