### Accession
PXD027159

### Title
Reanalysis of a synthetic cross-linked peptide library with MaxLynx

### Description
Reanalysis of a synthetic crosslinked peptide library datasets with DSS (non-cleavable), DSSO and DSBU (MS-cleavable) cross linkers from Beveridge et al., Nat. Commun., 2020 (PXD014337)

### Sample Protocol
The synthetic peptide library was crosslinked using DSS (non-cleavable), DSSO or DSBU (MS-cleavable) cross linkers as described in Beveridge et al., Nat. Commun., 2020 (PXD014337).

### Data Protocol
The search databases used in the data analysis were Cas9 plus 10 proteins and Cas9 plus 116 cRAP contaminants proteins for the non-cleavable and MS-cleavable data sets, respectively. Some of the default MaxQuant search settings were changed: The minimum peptide length was set to five and the maximum peptide mass was 6000 Da. The database search settings were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The precursor and the fragment mass tolerance were set at 5 ppm and 20 ppm. The enzyme was trypsin, up to three missed cleavages. “including contaminants” were disabled. Including any loss and also high-charge states on the MS/MS analyzer section were disabled. A new option called “Peak Refinement” was enabled. Second peptide search was disabled. No cross link specific filtering were enabled, which are the minimum score for cross-linked peptides, the minimum score for other cross linked products and the minimum number of fragment ions from each peptide. The minimum partial score remained as 10 for both the non-cleavable and the MS-cleavable data sets. The MaxQuant results were at the crosslinked peptide-to-spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crosslinking

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Cox
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


