### Accession
PXD018173

### Title
CSF SERPINA3 levels are increased in patients with progressive multiple sclerosis

### Description
One of the most challenging aspects in multiple sclerosis (MS) research is to understand the mechanisms leading to neurodegeneration and subsequent tissue repair. Here, we aimed to identify biomarkers associated with the progressive phases of the disease that may have neuroprotective potential. To achieve this, we performed a bioinformatic approach integrating transcriptional and proteomic profiles obtained during the course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) combined with gene expression microarray data from neuronal differentiation. Integrative analysis of omics data identified two molecules, serine (or cysteine) peptidase inhibitor, clade A, member 3N (Serpina3n) and S100 calcium binding protein A4 (S100A4), as biomarkers up-regulated in chronic progressive EAE whose expression was also induced during neuronal differentiation. Immunofluorescence studies revealed a primarily neuronal expression of Serpina3n and S100A4 during EAE as reflected by their co-localization with β-III-Tubulin in neurons from cerebellum, hippocampus and spinal cord tissues during EAE. Finally, levels of SERPINA3, the human ortholog of murine Serpina3n also known as α1-antichymotrypsin, and S100A4 were increased in cerebrospinal fluid of MS patients compared with non-inflammatory neurological controls. However, only SERPINA3 showed differences across MS clinical forms and levels were significantly elevated in patients with progressive forms of the disease, particularly in patients with primary progressive MS, compared with relapsing-remitting MS and neurological controls. Altogether, these results point to a role of SERPINA3 as biomarker associated with the progressive forms of MS that may also have neuroregenerative potential

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to digestion with endoproteinase and trypsin. The resulting peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column (NTCC-360/75-1.9-25L, Nikkyo Technos) with a chromatographic gradient of 120 minutes. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode and data-dependent adquisition (DDA) was performed. Full MS scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 400-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Following each survey scan, the number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision induced dissociation (collision energy 35%) and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software. Digested bovine serum albumin was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.5, Matrix Science . The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot mouse database (as in April 2015) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the extracted ion chromatograms and the obtained values used to perform protein relative quantitation using the R package MSstats v2.6. Protein abundance changes were considered significant when adjusted pvalue was below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UPF
Center for Genomic Regilation, University Pompeu Fabra

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Center for Genomic Regilation, University Pompeu Fabra


