### Accession
PXD008736

### Title
Quantitative proteomics profiling determines the uniqueness of the sinus node

### Description
The sinus node is a collection of highly specialized cells that constitute the natural pacemaker activity of our heart. The protein expression landscape of the sinus node differs from the surrounding cardiac tissue, although it is primarily comprised of myocytes and fibroblasts like the rest of the cardiac tissue, endowing it with its unique ability to regulate heart rate. Here we performed quantitative proteomics experiments to profile protein expression in the pacemaker of the heart, and compared it to protein expression in the neighbouring atrial muscle. In summary, the quantitative proteomics data presented here offer a highly detailed insight into the unique composition of the pacemaker of our heart.

### Sample Protocol
Sinus node and right atrial tissue were dissected from mouse hearts and immediately snap-frozen. Frozen tissue samples were homogenized, tissue lysates incubated for 2h at 4°C, sonicated and supernatants collected. Sample protein was precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubation on ice, followed by centrifugation. Supernatants were discarded and protein resuspended in Guanidine-HCl buffer (Gnd-HCl; 6MGnd-HCl, 50mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 5mM NaF, 5mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1mM Na-orthovanadate, containing 1x Roche complete protease inhibitor). Disulfide bridges were reduced and cysteine moieties alkylated by addition of 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 15min. From each sample, up to 1mg protein was digested in-solution by addition of endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100, 1h), followed by dilution (1:12 with 50mM Tris-HCl pH8) and digestion with trypsin (1:100, 16h) at 37°C, 750rpm. Samples were acidified and soluble fractions desalted and concentrated on C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 60% ACN, and organic solvents subsequently evaporated by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were pre-fractionated into 12 fractions by micro-flow reverse-phase ultrahigh pressure chromatography at high pH for increased proteome coverage. Fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) by searching MS/MS spectra against an in-silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt protein entries. Raw files originating from fractionated samples of the same tissue biopsy were grouped for the search (resulting in 3 biological replicates per tissue,measured in technical duplicate). The MS/MS spectra were searched with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-termini and Gln->pyro-Glu as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages and six variable modifications was allowed and minimum Andromeda score required for modified peptides was set to 25. Due to the similarity of the samples the match-between-runs option was enabled with default parameters. False-discovery rate cutoffs were set to 1% on peptide, protein and site decoy level (default), only allowing high-quality identifications to pass. All peptides were used for protein quantification, and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant with fast LFQ option enabled. All other parameters were kept at default.

### Publication Abstract
The sinus node is a collection of highly specialised cells constituting the heart's pacemaker. The molecular underpinnings of its pacemaking abilities are debated. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we here quantify &gt;7,000 proteins from sinus node and neighbouring atrial muscle. Abundances of 575 proteins differ between the two tissues. By performing single-nucleus RNA sequencing of sinus node biopsies, we attribute measured protein abundances to specific cell types. The data reveal significant differences in ion channels responsible for the membrane clock, but not in Ca<sup>2+</sup> clock proteins, suggesting that the membrane clock underpins pacemaking. Consistently, incorporation of ion channel expression differences into a biophysically-detailed atrial action potential model result in pacemaking and a sinus node-like action potential. Combining our quantitative proteomics data with computational modeling, we estimate ion channel copy numbers for sinus node myocytes. Our findings provide detailed insights into the unique molecular make-up of the cardiac pacemaker.

### Keywords
Heart, Tissue, Conduction, Sinus node, Mouse, Pacemaker, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Department of Biomedical Sciences & NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Noerre Allé 14, 9-07-34, DK-2200 Copenhagen N

### Submitter
Nora Linscheid

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Lundby
Department of Biomedical Sciences & NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Noerre Allé 14, 9-07-34, DK-2200 Copenhagen N


