### Accession
PXD032677

### Title
MultiOMICs landscape of SARS-CoV2-induced host responses in human lung epithelial cells

### Description
COVID-19 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection continues to be a global health pandemic. Despite the availability of vaccines and approved therapeutics, the emergence of newer plausible resistant variants continues to be on the rise. Several multi-omics studies have provided extensive evidence of host-pathogen interactions and potential therapeutic targets. However, an increased understanding of host cellular signaling networks regulated by multiple post-translational modifications and its ensuing effect on the biochemical and cellular dynamics is vital to expand the current knowledge on the host response to SARS-CoV-2 infections. Here, employing unbiased global proteomics, acetylomics, phosphoproteomics, RNA sequencing, and exometabolome analysis of a lung-derived human cell line, we show that SARS-CoV2 Norway/Trondheim-S15 strain induces time-dependent alterations in host cellular processes, including induction of type I IFN response, activation of DNA damage response pathway, RNA processing, metabolism, and cytoskeletal reorganization. We provide evidence for the interplay of phosphorylation and acetylation dynamics on host proteins and its effect on the altered release of metabolites, especially organic acids and ketone bodies. Together, our findings can serve as a resource for the identification of potential targets to design newer host-directed therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3 cells (ATCC®) were grown in DMEM-F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin (Pen Strep) in a humidified incubator at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2. The cells were mock- or infected with hCoV-19/Norway/Trondheim-S15/2020 strain at a MOI of 0.1 for 0, 3, 6, 12, 24 and 48h in DMEM-F12 containing 0.2% BSA. All experiments were performed in three biologically independent samples. Post-stimulation at indicated time points, the cells were washed twice with 1x TBS buffer, lysed using 4% SDS cell lysis buffer and heat-inactivated at 90oC for 10 min. An equal amount of proteins from each condition were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to downstream processing using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method followed by solid phase extraction of peptide digests using Macro Spin columns. The peptide samples were labeled using a TMT6plex reagent kit. An aliquot of the pooled labelled samples were fractionated using SCX StageTip based fractionation to assess global proteome changes. The remaining pooled TMT labeled peptide digest was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment strategy, fractionated, lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1700 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 30 ms and AGC target value of 3× 106. The 15 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2 Th. Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 32% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 200-2000 m/z, AGC target value of 1 x105 and a maximum injection time of 150ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data (.raw) were searched against the human RefSeq database (Uniprot human UP000005640) appended with SARS-CoV2 protein sequences 04/09/2020) and common contaminats using SEQUEST HT search algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v2.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameter for global proteome and phosphoproteome analysis included a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex Lysine, and TMT 6-plex N-terminal as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine as dynamic modifications. In the case of acetylome, a maximum of three missed cleavages as well as acetylation at lysine was specified.The precursor mass error tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. The data were searched against a decoy database, and percolator node was employed to calculate the FDR. Peptides identified at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered further for protein identification. The phosphorylation probability at each S/T/Y site and acetylation at K were calculated using the PTM-RS node in the Proteome Discoverer, and peptides with more than 75% site localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 pandemic continues to remain a global health concern owing to the emergence of newer variants. Several multi-Omics studies have produced extensive evidence on host-pathogen interactions and potential therapeutic targets. Nonetheless, an increased understanding of host signaling networks regulated by post-translational modifications and their ensuing effect on the cellular dynamics is critical to expanding the current knowledge on SARS-CoV-2 infections. Through an unbiased transcriptomics, proteomics, acetylomics, phosphoproteomics, and exometabolome analysis of a lung-derived human cell line, we show that SARS-CoV-2 Norway/Trondheim-S15 strain induces time-dependent alterations in the induction of type I IFN response, activation of DNA damage response, dysregulated Hippo signaling, among others. We identified interplay of phosphorylation and acetylation dynamics on host proteins and its effect on the altered release of metabolites, especially organic acids and ketone bodies. Together, our findings serve as a resource of potential targets that can aid in designing novel host-directed therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Signaling, Covid-19, Innate immune signaling, Inflammation, Multi-omics, Functional networks

### Affiliations
NTNU
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

### Submitter
Richard K. Kandasamy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard K. Kandasamy
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway


