### Accession
PXD002388

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the interplay of Staphylococcus aureus and human alveolar epithelial cells during infection - host cell proteins

### Description
Since infectious diseases caused by Staphylococcus aureus are still a major threat for human health we aimed to gain a detailed understanding of the molecular interplay of pathogen and host upon internalization by proteome analyses. In the present study we infected human alveolar epithelial A549 cells with S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and separated intact bacteria from host cell debris or infected from non-infected A549 cells prior to proteome analysis by cell sorting thus facilitating detailed analyses. During the first 6.5 h in the intracellular milieu S. aureus displayed reduced growth rate, induction of the stringent response, and adaptation to microaerobic conditions as well as cell wall stress. Interestingly, both truly infected host cells and those only potentially exposed to secreted S. aureus proteins but not infected displayed differences in the proteome pattern compared to A549 cells which had never been in contact with S. aureus. However, adaptation reactions were more pronounced in infected compared to non-infected A549 cells. Additional cytokine measurements revealed elaborated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in supernatants of the infection setting compared to pure host cell cultures which might mediate communication among the host cells and trigger adaptation even in cells not infected with S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Internalization experiments of S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and human alveolar epithelial A549 cells for analysis of the bacterial proteome were performed as described previously (Surmann et al., 2014, Frontiers in Microbiology). In brief, S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP which were cultivated in prokaryotic minimal essential medium (pMEM, optical density at 600 nm of 0.4) were used to infect confluent A549 cells in eukaryotic minimal essential medium (eMEM) at a multiplicity of infection of 25. Samples for host cell proteome analysis were collected hourly between 1.5 h and 6.5 h after infection. Whole cells were detached from the culture plate adding trypsin-EDTA (PAA Laboratories GmbH, Pasching, Austria) for 7 min at 37°C and subsequently trypsin was inactivated with eMEM. Medium was removed by centrifugation (500xg, 4°C, 5 min) and cell pellets were resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; PAA). Infected host cells containing bacteria were separated from cells without bacteria by cell sorting using a FACSAria. GFP fluorescence of the internalized bacteria was used to discriminate between infected and non-infected cells. Infected GFP-positive and non-infected GFP-negative host cells were sorted into 15 mL reaction tubes, centrifuged at 500xg, 4°C for 5 min and the number of cells was determined using a Neubauer chamber in a reduced volume of PBS (about 500 µL). The efficiency of the GFP-based cell sorting was controlled by counting of colony forming units.  A549 cells mock infected by sterile pMEM with a pH of 6.95, comparable to bacterial medium of the exponential growth phase, were subjected to the same treatment and those GFP-negative sorted cells were used as negative control for the infection experiment. Numbers of sorted infected and non-infected host cells were determined in a Neubauer chamber and spiked 1:1 with untreated A549 cells grown in medium containing 30 µg/mL 13C heavy isotope labeled arginine and 70 µg/mL lysine. The heavy isotope labeled A549 cells served as internal standard for precise quantification of the response to infection with S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP. Pellets of the host cells were resuspended in buffer containing 2 mol/L thiourea and 8 mol/L urea and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein extraction was done by five freeze-thaw cycles (freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing shaking at 30°C) combined with 3x3 s ultrasonication, 50% power (SonoPuls, Bandelin electronic, Berlin, Germany). Soluble proteins which were present in the supernatant after centrifugation (45 min, 16,000xg) were quantified using a Bradford assay (Biorad, München, Germany). Protein samples (2µg) were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Velos by reduction with 2.5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT; 60°C, 1 h) and alkylation with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide (IAA; 37°C, 30 min) followed by trypsin digestion (1:25 at 37°C, overnight) and purification using µC18 columns (Merck Millipore). LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germany) coupled with a Proxeon Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Denmark). Peptides were separated using an analytical column, Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, particle size 3 μm, 100Å (manufactured by LC-Packings, Dionex, USA) of 15-cm bed length and a solvent mixture consisting of Buffer A (2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% acetic acid) and Buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid). Peptides were enriched on a pre-column, Biosphere C18 (ID 100µM, particle size 5 µm, lenght 20 mm, pore size 120 Å manufactured by NanoSeparations, Netherlands), eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with formation of a solvent gradient of Buffer A and B (2-5% buffer B in 1 min, 5-25% B in 59 min, 25-40% B in 10 min, 40-100% B in 8 min) and ionised using a nano source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R=30,000. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to 20 most intense ions and depending on signal intensity they were subjected to fragmentation in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation. Target ions already selected with an isolation width of 2 Da for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. The general MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 1.6-1.75 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 2,000 counts for MS/MS, an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were also applied for MS/MS with normalized collision energy of 35%. The charge state screening and monoisotopic selection was enabled with the rejection of +1, +4, and more along with unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Identification of human and staphylococcal proteins was accomplished with the Rosetta Elucidator software (Rosetta Biosoftware, Ceiba Solution Inc., Boston MA, USA) with an automated database search against a Uniprot/SwissProt database from 2012 (limited to human proteins or a S. aureus ssp. aureus NCTC 8325 sequence from NCBI) together with the SEQUEST algorithm rel. 3.5 (Sorcerer built 4.04, Sage-N Research Inc., Milpitas, CA, USA). An alignment search was performed in a search distance of 4 min retention time and 10 ppm instrument mass accuracy. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was a fixed modification only in the human search. Oxidation of Met and SILAC labeling of Arg and Lys (6.02 Da) were variable modifications. A maximum of three SILAC labels per peptide was allowed in a tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.5 min RT location tolerance. Peptides were annotated based on Peptide Teller allowing a predicted error of maximum 0.01.  For SILAC quantification of host proteins, only labeled pairs reaching a labeled pair status of “good” were considered. Host proteins could only be analyzed between 2.5 h and 6.5 h p.i. as the 1.5 h value gave unstable results for the GFP-positive A549 cells due to the low number of internalized bacteria obtained at this sampling point. Only proteins that were analyzed in all the three types of A549 cells (control, GFP-positive or GFP-negative) were considered for further analysis. Ratios of the host proteins were calculated between the samples (control, GFP-positive or GFP-negative) and the heavy labeled standard. Principal component analysis of host proteins was performed for medians of three biological replicates for each point in time per treatment group with the normalized values using the Genedata Analyst v7.6 software (Genedata AG, Basel, Switzerland). Pathway analysis of host proteins was performed with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity ® Systems, www.ingenuity.com, release 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Infectious diseases caused by pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus are still a major threat for human health. Proteome analyses allow detailed monitoring of the molecular interplay between pathogen and host upon internalization. However, the investigation of the responses of both partners is complicated by the large excess of host cell proteins compared to bacterial proteins as well as by the fact that only a fraction of host cells are infected. In the present study we infected human alveolar epithelial A549 cells with S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and separated intact bacteria from host cell debris or infected from non-infected A549 cells by cell sorting to enable detailed proteome analysis. During the first 6.5h in the intracellular milieu S. aureus displayed reduced growth rate, induction of the stringent response, adaptation to microaerobic conditions as well as cell wall stress. Interestingly, both truly infected host cells and those not infected but exposed to secreted S. aureus proteins and host cell factors showed differences in the proteome pattern compared to A549 cells which had never been in contact with S. aureus. However, adaptation reactions were more pronounced in infected compared to non-infected A549 bystander cells.

### Keywords
Epithelial cells, Internalization, Proteomics, Host-pathogen interaction, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany


