### Accession
PXD023819

### Title
Pathological Features of Enterovirus 71-associated Brain and Lung Damage in Mice Based on Quantitative Proteomic Analyses

### Description
Enterovirus 71 (EV71), a member of the Enterovirus genus in the Picornaviridae family, was first recognized as a dermotrophic virus that usually cause mild, self-limiting hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD). However, EV71 infection can sometimes induce a variety of severe neurological complications, pulmonary edema and even death. Here, we aimed to provide an overview of proteomics characterization of EV71-infected brain and lung tissues.

### Sample Protocol
1. Animal Infection Experiments As described in our previous study (PMID: 29765110), three-day-old BALB/c mice were inoculated with 2×106 pfu EV71 (ZZ1350 strain, KY886010.1) via intraperitoneally (i.p.). The control mice were inoculated with an equal volume of culture supernatant of RD cells and kept in a separate cage from the infected mice. Brains and lungs were removed from euthanized mice at 7 dpi for quantitative proteomic.  2. Tissue Protein Isolation The tissue sample was fully homogenized with an electric tissue homogenizer on ice. After that, RIPA lysis buffer (1 mL/100 mg) containing 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail was added to the cell powder. After lysis on ice for 1.5 h, the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 3. Enzymatic Digestion For digestion, the protein extracts were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 4. TMT/iTRAQ Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 5. HPLC Fractionation The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length) (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA). Briefly, peptides were first fractionated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were noncontiguously pooled into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  6. LC-MS/MS Analysis Dried samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.) (Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo).  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was set to 2.0 kV in positive-ion mode. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap with 17,500 resolution. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
1. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. 2. Bioinformatics Methods 2.1 Annotation Methods GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Subcellular Localization There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. 2.4 Protein-protein Interaction Network All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score >0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreaks of enterovirus 71 (EV71)-associated hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) have emerged as an emergency of global health due to its association with fatal encephalitis and subsequent neurogenic pulmonary edema; however, the molecular characteristics and pathological features underlying EV71-associated encephalitis and pulmonary edema remain largely unknown. In this study, we performed a proteomic analysis of fresh brain and lung tissues from EV71-infected mice at 7 days post infection. We detected a perturbed expression of 148 proteins in the brain and 78 proteins in the lung after EV71 expression. Further analysis showed that the dysregulated proteins in the brain are involved in a variety of fundamental biological pathways, including complement and coagulation cascades, innate and adaptive immune responses, platelet activation, and nitrogen metabolism, and those proteins in the lung participate in innate and adaptive immune responses, phagosome, arginine biosynthesis, and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 signaling pathway. Our results suggested that immune activation, complement and coagulation dysfunction, platelet activation, imbalance of nitrogen metabolism, and hypoxia could be involved in the pathogenesis of EV71, which explains the major clinical manifestation of hyperinflammatory status of severe HFMD cases. Our study provides further understanding of the molecular basis of EV71 pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Enterovirus 71; quantitative proteomics; central nervous system; pulmonary edema; complement and coagulation cascade; type i ifn response

### Affiliations
Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
Yuefei Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Yuefei Jin
Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University


