### Accession
PXD016735

### Title
Enhanced interactome capture (eRIC) of steady-state and arsenite stressed HuH7 cell cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions

### Description
HuH7 cells were grown under steady-state conditions or exposed 100 ÂµM Na-arsenite for 1h. Subsequently, the cells were irradiated or not with 253 nm UV light (150 mJ/cm^2), processed to nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, and subjected to eRIC for determining the nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins from the different conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell fractionation: Cells were scraped on ice to fractionation buffer (FB) (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM KCl, 0.2 % NP-40) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich), and centrifuged with 1000 x g, 3 min at +4°C. The cytoplasmic fraction was transferred to a new tube and the nuclear pellet was further washed 2x with FB and low speed centrifugation (300 x g, 2 min at +4°C). The nuclear pellets were resuspended in 3.5 ml DNase buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2) and disrupted with 500 µl of 0.5 mm zirconia/silica beads (Carl Roth GmbH) using a PreCellys tissue homogenizer and Cryolys cooling unit (Bertin Instruments) (2x 20 s and 5 s interval at +4°C). The tubes were punctured and the lysates collected by centrifugation (450 x g, +4°C, 5 minutes). The nuclear lysates were further treated with 1 kU of DNase I (New England BioLabs) for 30 min at +37°C. Finally, 1 ml of 5x DNase stop buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 25 mM EDTA) was added, the protein concentrations measured (Protein DC Assay, Bio Rad), and the lysates were supplemented with 5x interactome buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2.5M LiCl, 5mM EDTA, 2.5% LiDs, 25mM DTT, cOmplete). The cytoplasmic fractions were equally supplemented with the 5x interactome buffer as above. For eRIC, 20 mg of cytoplasmic and 3.5 mg of nuclear fractions were used. eRIC: the lysates were incubated for 15 min at +60°C, supplemented with 5 mM fresh DTT, and centrifuged at 1700 x g for 10 min at +4°C. The samples were transferred to new tubes and incubated with 300 µl of LNA2.T-coupled magnetic beads for 1 h at +37°C. The beads were washed for 5 min at +37°C with the following buffers: 1 wash with eRIC lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.5% (w/v) LiDs), and two washes with buffer 1 (20 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.1% (w/v) LiDs), buffer 2 (20 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.02% (v/v) NP-40), and buffer 3 (20 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 200 mM LiCl, 1mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.02% (v/v) NP-40). Subsequently, the beads were resuspended in 170 µl of nuclease free water and incubated for 5 min at +40°C and 800 rpm. The captured proteins were eluted with RNase buffer (10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 0.01% NP-40, 1µl/ml RNase A (#R4642-10MG, Sigma Aldrich), 1 µl/ml RNase T1 (#R1003-100KU, Sigma Aldrich)) for 45min at +37°C and 800 rpm. The lysates were subjected to two rounds of captures, the eluates were pooled together, supplemented with 2 µl of 10% SDS, and concentrated to 100 µl using a SpeedVac. Sample preparation for MS and TMT labeling: Disulfide bonds in cysteine-containing proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 (56°C, 30 min) and alkylated with 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 (RT, in the dark, 30 min). Samples were prepared using the SP3 protocol and trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37°C. Peptides were labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific). For further sample clean up an OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters) was used. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex). 8 and 12 fractions were pooled for the interactomes and inputs, respectively. Each fraction was subjected individually to mass spectrometry. MS data acquisition: An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters) was used. Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 2% to 4% in 6 min, from 4% to 8% in 1 min, then 8% to 25% for a further 71 min, and finally from 25% to 40% in 5 min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer using the proxeon nanoflow source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the Fusion Lumos via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full mass scan was acquired with mass range 375-1500 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with resolution of 120,000. The filling time was set at max of 50 ms with a limit of 4x10^5 ions. Data dependent acquisition was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 30,000, isolation window of 0.7 m/z, with a fill time of 64 ms and a limit of 1x10^5 ions. A normalized collision energy of 38 was applied. MS2 data was acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against a Uniprot Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640) containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). For the full scan (MS1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was set. Further parameters were set: Trypsin as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages: a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. The protein.txt output files of IsobarQuant were processed using the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). To ensure good data quality, only proteins which were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Furthermore, proteins had to be quantified in at least two out of three replicates. The ‘signal_sum’ column of the protein.txt output files were first cleaned for batch-effects using the ‘removeBatchEffect’ function of the limma package (PMID: 25605792) and second normalized with a variance stabilization normalization method (vsn – PMID: 12169536). During the normalization process all cross-link (CL) conditions and all non-cross-link (NoCL) conditions were normalized separately in order to keep the abundance difference between the two groups. Missing values were imputed using the ‘impute’ function of the Msnbase package (PMID: 22113085) and the k-nearest neighborhood method (knn). In order to test for differential abundance, limma was employed again. Imputed values were given a weight of 5 %. For comparisons of CL against NoCL conditions, adjusted p-values directly from limma were used. For comparison of CL against another CL conditions, t-values from limma were used to recalculate false discovery rates (qvalues) using the fdrtool package (PMID: 18441000). A protein was annotated as ‘hit’ with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100 % and annotated as ‘candidate’ with an fdr smaller 20 % and a fold-change of at least 50 %.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular stress causes multifaceted reactions to trigger adaptive responses to environmental cues at all levels of the gene expression pathway. RNA-binding proteins (RBP) are key contributors to stress-induced regulation of RNA fate and function. Here, we uncover the plasticity of the RNA interactome in stressed cells, differentiating between responses in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. We applied enhanced RNA interactome capture (eRIC) analysis preceded by nucleo-cytoplasmic fractionation following arsenite-induced oxidative stress. The data reveal unexpectedly compartmentalized RNA interactomes and their responses to stress, including differential responses of RBPs in the nucleus versus the cytoplasm, which would have been missed by whole cell analyses.

### Keywords
Human, Cell culture, Arsenite

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
EMBL

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas E. Kulozik
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


