### Accession
PXD023816

### Title
The fungivorous phagocyte Protostelium aurantium targets redox homeostasis and cell wall integrity during intracellular killing of Candida parapsilosis

### Description
Predatory interactions among microbes are a major evolutionary driving force for biodiversity. The fungivorous amoeba Protostelium aurantium has a wide fungal food spectrum including major pathogenic members of the genus Candida. Phagocytic feeding by P. aurantium is highly effective with C. parapsilosis, a major pathogenic yeast. Here we show that upon ingestion by the amoeba C. parapsilosis is confronted with an oxidative burst and undergoes phagosomal lysis within minutes. On the fungal side, a functional genomic approach identified the fungal copper and redox homeostasis as primary targets of amoeba predation with the highly expressed copper exporter Crp1 and the peroxiredoxin Prx1 contributing to survival when encountering P. aurantium. The fungolytic activity was largely retained in intracellular vesicles of the amoebae. Following their isolation, the content of these vesicles induced immediate killing and lysis of C. parapsilosis. A proteomic analyses identified 56 vesicular proteins. Although fully unknown proteins were dominant, many of them could be categorized as hydrolytic enzymes presumably targeting the fungal cell wall, indicating that fungal cell wall structures are under predatory selection pressure in natural environments.

### Sample Protocol
Amoebae grown in petri dishes were washed and harvested to inoculate shaking flasks with 75 ml of 2 mM PB with C. parapsilosis at an OD600 of 20. Cells were grown at 22°C and 150 rpm until visible orange pigmentation of the culture and subsequently transferred to 500, 1000, and subsequently 2000 ml Erlenmeyer culture flasks. Cell numbers of yeast and amoebae were measured until a density of the amoebae 5x106 amoebae ml-1. Amoeba cells were washed twice with PB and harvested at 200 x g for 10 min to separate the trophozoites from residual yeast cells. Cells were resuspended in 15 ml PB and a tablet of protease inhibitor cocktail was added (cOmplete™ ULTRA, Roche). Cell disruption occurred by ultra-sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 30 min to sediment the insoluble, membrane fraction, enriched in cytoplasmic granules. Sediments were extracted overnight at 4°C under constant shaking with 2% [v/v] of acetic acid. The acidic extract of the cytoplasmic granules was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The acidic extract was further concentrated using 2 mM PB and 0.5-ml centrifugal filter units with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 10 kDa.Samples were solubilized in 100µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50/50 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE)/H2O (v/v) and the proteins were reduced and alkylated by addition of 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 12.5 mM 2-chloroacetamide and incubation at 70°C for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated using the protocol of Wessel & Flügge (1984) and resolubilized 100 µl 100 mM TEAB in 5% (v/v) 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (aqueous). Trypsin/LysC protease mix (Promega) was added at a protease: protein ratio of 1:25 and the protein were digested in solution for 18 h at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator and resolubilized in 30 µl 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN in water. The peptide solution was filtered through 0.2 µm spin filters at 14000 rpm (~18000 g) for 5 min at 4°C. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min followed by gradient elution separation on an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) was mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) as follows: 0 min at 4% B, 30 min at 12% B, 75 min at 30% B, 85 min at 50% B, 90-95 min at 96% B, 95.1-120 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter and a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive HF was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt databases of Planoprotostelium fungivorum (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000241769; 2020-08-19) and Candida parapsilosis (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005221; 2020-08-19) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4, Sequest HT (version of PD2.4), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 3.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and protein N-term acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and at least a search engine threshold >30 (Mascot), >4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) or >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. The identified proteins were manually categorized by their annotated function using UniProt functional information database (https://www.uniprot.org/) and the protein classification database InterPro 83.0.

### Publication Abstract
Predatory interactions among microbes are major evolutionary driving forces for biodiversity. The fungivorous amoeba Protostelium aurantium has a wide fungal food spectrum including foremost pathogenic members of the genus Candida. Here we show that upon phagocytic ingestion by the amoeba, Candida parapsilosis is confronted with an oxidative burst and undergoes lysis within minutes of processing in acidified phagolysosomes. On the fungal side, a functional genomic approach identified copper and redox homeostasis as primary targets of amoeba predation, with the highly expressed copper exporter gene CRP1 and the peroxiredoxin gene PRX1 contributing to survival when encountered with P. aurantium. The fungicidal activity was largely retained in intracellular vesicles of the amoebae. Following their isolation, the content of these vesicles induced immediate killing and lysis of C. parapsilosis in vitro. Proteomic analysis identified 56 vesicular proteins from P. aurantium. Although completely unknown proteins were dominant, many of them could be categorised as hydrolytic enzymes targeting the fungal cell wall, indicating that fungal cell wall structures are under selection pressure by predatory phagocytes in natural environments. TAKE AWAY: The amoeba Protostelium aurantium feeds on fungi, such as Candida parapsilosis. Ingested yeast cells are exposed to reactive oxygen species. A copper exporter and a peroxiredoxin contribute to fungal defence. Yeast cells undergo intracellular lysis. Lysis occurs via a cocktail of hydrolytic enzymes from intracellular vesicles.

### Keywords
Redox homeostasis, Lc-ms/ms, Protostelium, Predation, Amoeba, Candida parapsilosis

### Affiliations
Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


