### Accession
PXD029034

### Title
A Membrane-Permeable and Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography (IMAC)-Enrichable Cross-Linking Reagent to Advance In Vivo Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry

### Description
We developed a novel membrane-permeable and IMAC-enrichable cross-linker tBu-PhoX. Applying our optimized in vivo XL-MS pipeline, we revealed protein interaction landscape of intact human cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells, E. coli and B. Subtilus were harvested and re-suspended in Phosphate-buffered saline. Samples were washed 3 times with PBS to exclude amine-contained medium. Intact mitochondria were harvested and purified from mouse heart, then washed 3 times with 300mM Trehalose buffer. Protein concentration was adjusted to 10 mg/ml. or intact mitochondria Crosslinking was performed twice, each time with 1 mM tBu-PhoX for 30 min at room temperature. Crosslinking reaction was quenched with 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 15 min at room temperature.  Crosslinked proteins were digested in-solution. In brief, urea was added to reach a final concentration of 6M. Then proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 60 min and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out using Lys C at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:75 (w/w) at 37 °C for 4h. After diluting to 2M urea, the digestion was continued with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C and overnight. Samples were desalted with C8 StageTip, dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20 °C for single-shot LC-MS measurement or SEC fractionation. Pre-cleaned samples were re-suspended in 0.5% TFA for deprotecting t-butyl groups for 2 hours at room temperature, then diluted to 80% ACN/0.1% TFA by adding pure ACN for enrichment step. For enrichment, agarose Ni-NTA beads was first de-chelated by 30 mins incubation in 100mM EDTA at room temperature, followed by chelating the beads with another 30 mins incubation in 10 mM FeCl3 to condition the Fe-NTA beads. Next, samples were added to conditioned agarose Fe-NTA beads using a sample-to-bead ratio of 10:1 (w/w), then incubated on a shaker at room temperature for 30 mins. Beads were collected and loaded onto self-packed C8 StageTip, then washed with 80% ACN/0.1%TFA 3 times to clean non-specific binding. The phosphonate crosslinked peptides were eluded from Fe-NTA beads to C8 membrane by 500 mM potassium phosphate buffer (192 mM monobasic potassium phosphate and 308 mM dibasic potassium phosphate). Samples were then washed to desalt with 0.1%FA, followed by eluting with 50% ACN/0.1% FA. Finally, samples were dried for subsequent analysis. LC-MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reversed-phase separation was performed using a 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7µm, Agilent Technologies) with 120 min gradients for single-shot experiments or 180 min gradients for SEC fractions. Crosslink acquisition was performed using a LC-MS2 method. The following parameters were applied: MS resolution 120,000; MS2 resolution 30,000; charge state 3-8 enable for MS2 (unless otherwise stated); HCD energy 30, FAIMS -50/-60/-70 V (unless otherwise stated).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using pLink 2.3.9 with the following parameters: minimum peptide length=6; maximal peptide length=60; missed cleavages=3; fix modification: Cys carbamidomethyl=57.021 Da; variable modification: Met oxidation=15.995 Da; BS3 crosslinker=138.068 Da; precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance = 20 ppm. MS2 spectra were searched against full UniProt human database (retrieved in 2020). Results were reported at 1% FDR at CSM level. FDR calculation for intra-protein and inter-protein crosslinks were considered separately.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is an attractive method for the proteome-wide characterization of protein structures and interactions. Currently, the depth of in&#x2005;vivo XL-MS studies is lagging behind the established applications to cell lysates, because cross-linking reagents that can penetrate intact cells and strategies to enrich cross-linked peptides lack efficiency. To tackle these limitations, we have developed a phosphonate-containing cross-linker, tBu-PhoX, that efficiently permeates various biological membranes and can be robustly enriched using routine immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography. We have established a tBu-PhoX-based in&#x2005;vivo XL-MS approach that enables cross-links in intact human cells to be identified in high numbers with substantially reduced analysis time. Collectively, the developed cross-linker and XL-MS approach pave the way for the comprehensive XL-MS characterization of living systems.

### Keywords
Protein structures, Proteomics, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie

### Submitter
Pin-Lian Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)


