### Accession
PXD010185

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of glacial ecosystem

### Description
Glaciers are populated by a large number of microorganisms including bacteria, archaea and microeukaryotes. From an ecological point of view, three ecosystems can be differentiated in glaciers: the supraglacial ecosystem, the subglacial ecosystem and the englacial ecosystem. Several factors such as solar radiation, nutrient availability and water content greatly determine the diversity and abundance of microbial populations, the type of metabolism and the biogeochemical cycles. Firstly, the supraglacial ecosystem, sunlit and oxygenated, is predominantly populated by autotrophic microorganisms. Secondly, the subglacial ecosystem contains a majority of chemoautrotophs that are fed on the mineral salts of the rocks and basal soil. Lastly, the englacial ecosystem is the less studied and the one that contains the smallest number of microorganisms. However, these unknown englacial microorganisms establish a true trophic chain and appear to have an active metabolism.  In order to study their metabolic potentials, samples of englacial ice were taken from an Antarctic glacier. The cells were harvested and their proteins were extracted and analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI/TOF/TOF). Several proteins and enzymes were found that demonstrate the existence of cellular activity at subzero temperatures. In this way it is shown that the englacial microorganisms are not quiescent, but that they maintain an active metabolism and play an important role in the glacial microbial community.

### Sample Protocol
Ice cores were soaked in ice-cold 95% ethanol, followed by rinsing with sterile MilliQ water. Then, they were thawed in a sterile container at 4ºC. The meltwater was directly used for cultures. All procedures were performed in a UV-irradiated laminar flow hood using ethanol-sterilized tools and sterilized gloves. To control for laboratory contamination, 1 liter of MilliQ rinse water was subjected to identical analytical procedures. Broth cultures (100 mL) were grown with agitation in Erlenmeyer flasks. Growth was monitored by optical density at 600 nm until achievement of an absorbance of 0.3. Nutrient formulations for T2, T3, T4, T6, T7, T8 and T9 were prepared as concentrated stocks (20x), sterilized and added to 100 mL of meltwater (from each of the 3 direct samples) to get 1x final concentration. Blanks were made with 100 mL of sterile water supplemented with the same nutrients. Each sample was incubated at 5 temperatures (-4ºC, 0ºC, 4ºC, 20ºC and 28ºC). A total of 120 cultures were obtained. The best cultures, in addition to three other uncultivated direct samples, were analyzed by proteomics. The cells were centrifuged (10,000 x g, 15 min), rinsed in PBS and stored at -20ºC. Then, DNA or proteins were extracted as explained in previous reports. A total of 120 cultures were obtained (3 glacial ice sample replicates in 8 culture media at 5 different temperatures).The cultured cells were centrifuged and lysed following the method previously described. A total of 108 gels were prepared: 4 replicates of 24 cultures + 3 direct samples. Protein spots from the Coomassie stained 2-DE gels were digested and analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF with the method previously described. Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used. Given that we are searching for environmental microorganisms, some precautions have been taken to check the results from protein identifications. Only peptides and proteins with confidence scores of at least 66% (p<0.05) were considered positive identifications. We have also considered other main features of proteins in 2D gels such as their molecular weight and isoelectric point to better confirm their identity. Mascot search parameters were tryptic peptides with one missed cleavage, using 80 ppm and 0.3 Da for precursor and fragment tolerances, respectively. Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland). Apparent molecular weight and isoelectric point were obtained from each spot position in gels.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used. Mascot search parameters were tryptic peptides with one missed cleavage, using 80 ppm and 0.3 Da for precursor and fragment tolerances, respectively. Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
Glaciers are populated by a large number of microorganisms including bacteria, archaea and microeukaryotes. Several factors such as solar radiation, nutrient availability and water content greatly determine the diversity and abundance of these microbial populations, the type of metabolism and the biogeochemical cycles. Three ecosystems can be differentiated in glaciers: supraglacial, subglacial and englacial ecosystems. Firstly, the supraglacial ecosystem, sunlit and oxygenated, is predominantly populated by photoautotrophic microorganisms. Secondly, the subglacial ecosystem contains a majority of chemoautotrophs that are fed on the mineral salts of the rocks and basal soil. Lastly, the englacial ecosystem is the least studied and the one that contains the smallest number of microorganisms. However, these unknown englacial microorganisms establish a food web and appear to have an active metabolism. In order to study their metabolic potentials, samples of englacial ice were taken from an Antarctic glacier. Microorganisms were analyzed by a polyphasic approach that combines a set of -omic techniques: 16S rRNA sequencing, culturomics and metaproteomics. This combination provides key information about diversity and functions of microbial populations, especially in rare habitats. Several whole essential proteins and enzymes related to metabolism and energy production, recombination and translation were found that demonstrate the existence of cellular activity at subzero temperatures. In this way it is shown that the englacial microorganisms are not quiescent, but that they maintain an active metabolism and play an important role in the glacial microbial community.

### Keywords
Glacier, Metaproteomics, Maldi-tof ms, Culturomics

### Affiliations
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain
ES (+34) 915206455

### Submitter
Eva Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Cid Sanchez
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain


