### Accession
PXD010597

### Title
A novel labelling strategy enables spatial resolution of metastatic niche cellular composition and uncovers lung stem cell activity proximal to breast cancer

### Description
Cancer cell behaviour is strongly influenced by the surrounding cellular environment, making the characterization of the local tumour microenvironment (or niche) a fundamental question in tumour biology. To date, a direct investigation of the early cellular changes induced by metastatic cells within the surrounding tissue is difficult to achieve, especially at early micro-metastatic stages and for low frequency niche populations. Here we present the strategy whereby metastatic cancer cells release a cell-penetrating fluorescent protein that is efficiently taken up by neighbouring cells, allowing spatial identification of the local metastatic cellular environment within the whole tissue. Notably, this strategy can be used to follow metastatic niches from early micro-metastasis to late macro-metastasis, allowing temporal resolution. Moreover, the presence of low represented niche cells can be detected and characterized among the bulk tissue. To highlight its potential, we have used this niche-labelling strategy to study the lung metastatic environment of breast cancer cells. We uncover the presence of lung parenchymal cells within the metastatic niche where lung epithelial cells show stem cell-like features with expression of lung progenitor markers, multi-lineage differentiation potential and self-renewal activity. Moreover, lung epithelial cells can be directly perturbed by cancer cells in ex vivo co-culture assays and support their growth. In summary, here we describe a novel labelling system that enables spatial resolution of the metastatic microenvironment and provide evidence that the tissue cellular environment surrounding metastatic growth is characterized by undifferentiated features. The data highlight the significant potential of this method as a platform for new discoveries.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 10 cycles (1 min on, 30 sec off, 20°C, highest settings), heated for 10 min at 95°C, and sonicated again. Samples were spun down at 20800x g for 1 min and the lysate supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. Reduction was performed by adding 200mM DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, and incubating for 15 min at 45°C. Alkylation was performed using 200mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15mM, and incubating 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then precipitated with 8 volumes ice cold acetone to 1 volume sample and incubated overnight at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min, 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 500µL 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold). After each wash step, the samples were vortexed, then centrifuged again for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in 25µL of digestion buffer composed of 3M urea in 0.1M HEPES pH 8 and 1:100 (w/w) of LysC (Wako), and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking at 600 rpm. Then the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and were incubated with 1:100 (w/w) of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. The digests were then acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3x100µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x 100µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in milliQ water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100µL solvent A, and then eluted into PCR tubes with 50µL solvent B. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concetrator and dissolved in 10µL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG).Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC MClass system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The samples (approx. 1 µg) were loaded onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column. Total runtime was 60 min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap.  The default charge state was set to 3+. DIA scans were acquired with 22 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired. Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.9 were employed.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA and DIA data were searched independently using Pulsar in Spectronaut Professional+ (version 11.0.15038, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01, 16,747 entries) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed), and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. A DpD (DDA plus DIA) library was then created by merging the two libraries together in Spectronaut. This library contained 22579 precursors, corresponding to 1714 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level followed by multiple testing correction according to (Storey, 2002). The data was exported from Spectronaut and used for further data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Direct investigation of the early cellular changes induced by metastatic cells within the surrounding tissue remains a challenge. Here we present a system in which metastatic cancer cells release a cell-penetrating fluorescent protein, which is taken up by neighbouring cells and enables spatial identification of the local metastatic cellular environment. Using this system, tissue cells with low representation in the metastatic niche can be identified and characterized within the bulk tissue. To highlight its potential, we applied this strategy to study the cellular environment of metastatic breast cancer cells in the lung. We report the presence of cancer-associated parenchymal cells, which exhibit stem-cell-like features, expression of lung progenitor markers, multi-lineage differentiation potential and self-renewal activity. In ex vivo assays, lung epithelial cells acquire a cancer-associated parenchymal-cell-like phenotype when co-cultured with cancer cells and support their growth. These results highlight the potential of this method as a platform for new discoveries.

### Keywords
Lung, Metastasis, Tumour microenvironment

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI)

### Submitter
Ivonne Heinze

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI)


