### Accession
PXD006857

### Title
MAZ induces MYB expression during the exit from quiescence via the E2F site in the MYB promoter

### Description
Most E2F-binding sites repress transcription through the recruitment of Retinoblasoma (RB) family members until the end of the G1 cell-cycle phase. Although the MYB promoter contains an E2F-binding site, its transcription is activated shortly after the exit from quiescence, before RB family members inactivation, by unknown mechanisms. We had previously uncovered a nuclear factor distinct from E2F, Myb-sp, whose DNA-binding site overlapped the E2F element and had hypothesized that this factor might overcome the transcriptional repression of MYB by E2F-RB family members. We have purified Myb-sp and discovered that Myc-associated zinc finger proteins (MAZ) are major components. We show that various MAZ isoforms are present in Myb-sp and activate transcription via the MYB-E2F element. Moreover, while forced RB or p130 expression repressed the activity of a luciferase reporter driven by the MYB-E2F element, co-expression of MAZ proteins not only reverted repression, but also activated transcription. Finally, we show that MAZ binds the MYB promoter in vivo, that its binding site is critical for MYB transactivation, and that MAZ knockdown inhibits MYB expression during the exit from quiescence. Together, these data indicate that MAZ is essential to bypass MYB promoter repression by RB family members and to induce MYB expression.

### Sample Protocol
Protein spots were excised manually and then processed automatically using a Proteineer DP protein digestion station (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was that of Schevchenko et al. with minor variations: gel plugs were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile prior to reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The gel pieces were then rinsed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile and dried under a stream of nitrogen. Modified porcine trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega, Madison WI) at a final concentration of 16 ng/ul in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the dry gel pieces and the digestion proceeded at 37 ºC for 6 h. Peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for a final extraction volume of 20 ul.

### Data Protocol
An 0.3 ul aliquot of matrix solution (5 g/l 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 33% aqueous acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) was manually deposited onto a 400 um AnchorChip™ MALDI probe and allowed to dry at room temperature. Then 0.3 ul of the above extraction solution were added and again allowed to dry at room temperature. Samples were measured on a Bruker Reflex™ IV MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker-Franzen Analytic GmbH, Bremen, Germany) equipped with the SCOUT™ source in positive ion reflector mode using delayed extraction. Ion acceleration voltage was 20 kV. The equipment was first externally calibrated employing protonated mass signals from a peptide mixture covering the 1000-3200 m/z range and thereafter every spectrum was internally calibrated using selected signals arising from trypsin autoproteolysis to reach a typical mass measurement accuracy of ±30 ppm. The measured tryptic peptide masses were transferred through MS BioTools™ program as inputs to search the Human Uniprot database using Mascot™ 2.6 software (Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Most E2F-binding sites repress transcription through the recruitment of Retinoblastoma (RB) family members until the end of the G1 cell-cycle phase. Although the MYB promoter contains an E2F-binding site, its transcription is activated shortly after the exit from quiescence, before RB family members inactivation, by unknown mechanisms. We had previously uncovered a nuclear factor distinct from E2F, Myb-sp, whose DNA-binding site overlapped the E2F element and had hypothesized that this factor might overcome the transcriptional repression of MYB by E2F-RB family members. We have purified Myb-sp and discovered that Myc-associated zinc finger proteins (MAZ) are major components. We show that various MAZ isoforms are present in Myb-sp and activate transcription via the MYB-E2F element. Moreover, while forced RB or p130 expression repressed the activity of a luciferase reporter driven by the MYB-E2F element, co-expression of MAZ proteins not only reverted repression, but also activated transcription. Finally, we show that MAZ binds the MYB promoter in vivo, that its binding site is critical for MYB transactivation, and that MAZ knockdown inhibits MYB expression during the exit from quiescence. Together, these data indicate that MAZ is essential to bypass MYB promoter repression by RB family members and to induce MYB expression.

### Keywords
Myb, Maz, Retinoblasoma, Quiescence

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Tenured Scientist and Lab Director Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas CSIC-UAM

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel R. Campanero
Tenured Scientist and Lab Director Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas CSIC-UAM


