### Accession
PXD022676

### Title
The TUTase URT1 connects decapping activators and prevents the accumulation of excessively deadenylated mRNAs to avoid siRNA biogenesis

### Description
Uridylation is a widespread modification destabilizing eukaryotic mRNAs. Yet, molecular mechanisms underlying TUTase-mediated mRNA degradation remain mostly unresolved. Here, we report that the Arabidopsis TUTase URT1 participates in a molecular network connecting several translational repressors/decapping activators. URT1 directly interacts with DECAPPING 5 (DCP5), the Arabidopsis ortholog of human LSM14 and yeast Scd6, and this interaction connects URT1 to additional decay factors like DDX6/Dhh1-like RNA helicases. Nanopore direct RNA sequencing reveals a global role of URT1 in shaping poly(A) tail length, notably by preventing the accumulation of excessively deadenylated mRNAs. Based on in vitro and in planta data, we propose a model that explains how URT1 could reduce the accumulation of oligo(A)-tailed mRNAs both by favoring their degradation and because 3’ terminal uridines intrinsically hinder deadenylation. Importantly, preventing the accumulation of excessively deadenylated mRNAs avoids the biogenesis of illegitimate siRNAs that silence endogenous mRNAs and perturb Arabidopsis growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
For each IP with crosslinking step on N.benthamiana samples, 500 mg of leaves were ground during 10 min in 1.5 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer supplemented with 0.375 % formaldehyde (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The crosslinking reaction was quenched by adding glycine at a final concentration of 200 mM for 5 min. After cell debris removal by centrifugation (twice 15 min at 10,000 g, 4 °C), supernatants were incubated for 45 min with 50 µl of magnetic microbeads coupled to anti-c-myc antibodies or anti-GFP antibodies (Miltenyi). Beads magnetic capture and washing steps were done according to the manufacturer's instructions, except that washes were performed with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche). Samples were eluted in 100 µl of pre-warmed elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM DTT, 1 % SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 0.005 % bleu de bromophenol, 10 % glycerol). Negative control IPs were performed with beads coupled to anti-c-myc and anti-GFP antibodies in Col-0 plants or in plants expressing the GFP alone. Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
IP data were searched against the Sol Genomics Niben101 database (N.benthamiana samples) with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science) and data were imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least four independent IPs and two independent biological replicates. Volcano plots display the adjusted p-values and fold changes in Y- and X-axis, respectively, and show the enrichment of proteins co-purified with tagged URT1 IPs as compared to control IPs, the differential accumulation of proteins between URT1 and m1URT1 IPs or the differential accumulation of proteins between m1URT1D491/3A  and URT1D491/3A  IPs. The statistical analysis based on spectral counts was performed using a homemade R package that calculates fold change and p-values using the quasi-likelihood negative binomial generalized log-linear model implemented in the edgeR package. Common and tagwise dispersions were calculated with the implemented edgeR function by filtering out the 50 % less abundant proteins that could adversely affect the dispersion estimation. The size factor used to scale samples were calculated according to the DESeq2 normalization method (i.e., median of ratios method). P-value were adjusted using Benjamini Hochberg method from stats R package. For N. benthamiana IPs, XIC (Extracted Ion Chromatograms)-based abundances were also calculated for peptides that map DCP5 isoforms. XIC-based quantification and statistics were performed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v2.3, Thermo Scientific) with the following parameters: Sequest and MS-Amanda algorithms with a FDR at 1%, “Top 3 Average” method, no imputation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna degradation, Deadenylation, Decapping, Dcp5, Arabidopsis, Nanopore drs, Gigyf, Tutase, Uridylation

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
1Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue Zimmer, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Gagliardi
1Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue Zimmer, 67000 Strasbourg, France.


