### Accession
PXD012526

### Title
Global quantification of intact proteins via chemical isotope labeling and mass spectrometry

### Description
Although thousands of intact proteins can be feasibly identified in recent years, global quantification of intact proteins is still challenging. Herein, we develop a high-throughput strategy for global intact protein quantification based on chemical isotope labeling. The isotope incorporation efficiency is as high as 99.2% for complex intact protein samples extracted from HeLa cells. Further, the pTop 2.0 software is developed for automated quantification of intact proteoforms in a high-throughput manner. The high quantification accuracy and reproducibility of this strategy have been demonstrated for both standard and complex cellular protein samples. A total of 2,283 intact proteoforms originated from 660 protein accessions are successfully quantified under anaerobic and aerobic conditions and the differentially expressed proteins are observed to be involved into the important biological processes such as stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4741 was cultured in yeast extract-peptone-dextrose (YPD) media in anaerobic or aerobic conditions to an OD600 ~0.6 at 30 ℃. The yeast cells were harvested by 4000 g centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 5 min followed with ice-cold PBS buffer washing. The cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and boiled for 10 min in water bath. After cooling to room temperature, the cells were lysed by 200 w ultrasonication for 30 × 3 s in ice bath. The cell debris were removed by 25000 g centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 30 min. Protein sample within the supernatants were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of ice-cold precipitation solution and kept at -20 ℃ overnight. The protein pellets were obtained by 25000 g centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 30 min followed by washing with ice-cold precipitation solution and acetone. The protein pellets were re-dissolved in labeling buffer and kept at -80 ℃ until usage. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. The proteins were dissolved into labeling buffer to a concentration of about 1.1 mg mL-1. The reactant pyridine borane in methanol was firstly added into the protein solution to 30 mM (the final concentration of methanol was kept at 5%~10% (v/v)) and vortexed for 5 seconds. Then, 4% formaldehyde or D2-formaldehyde was added into the solution to 20 mM and vortexed for 5 seconds. The labeling reaction solution was kept at 37 ℃ for 2 h. The reaction was stopped by adding ammonium acetate (5 M, pH 7.0) to a concentration of 50 mM. Then, the heavy and light isotope labeled protein solutions were mixed equally or with specified ratios.Samples were pre-concentrated by ultrafiltration with 0.5 mL Amicon Ultra-15 (MWCO, 30kDa, Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and purified by adding 5 volumes of ice-cold precipitation solution and kept at -20 ℃ overnight. The protein pellets were obtained by 25000 g centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 30 min followed by washing with ice-cold precipitation solution and pure acetone.500 μg purified protein sample was re-dissolved into a buffer consisted of 30 μL GELFrEE sample loading buffer (5×), 8 μL 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) and 112 μL H2O. The protein samples were kept in water bath at 50 ℃ for 10 min. Then, 150 μL protein sample was added into the loading chamber of GELFrEE 8100 12% Tris-Acetate Cartridge and fractionated by GELFrEE 8100 Fractionation System (Expedeon Ltd., UK).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were processed by pTop 2.0 (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/Software.html) 35, which was developed with the function of intact protein quantification to deal with the large dataset in this work. Dimethyl and Dimethyl_2H (4) of lysine were set as the static modification for light and heavy labeled intact proteins, respectively. Acetylation, dimethylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance of protein ions and product ions was set as 5 Da and 20 ppm, respectively. Spectra were searched against the Escherichia coli or Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4741 database downloaded from Uniprot. The database searching results were filtered by FDR < 1% at spectra level for intact protein identification. The quantification ratios of intact proteins were calculated based on the highest isotopic peaks of light and heavy labeled intact protein ions.

### Publication Abstract
Although thousands of intact proteins have been feasibly identified in recent years, global quantification of intact proteins is still challenging. Herein, we develop a high-throughput strategy for global intact protein quantification based on chemical isotope labeling. The isotope incorporation efficiency is as high as 99.2% for complex intact protein samples extracted from HeLa cells. Further, the pTop 2.0 software is developed for automated quantification of intact proteoforms in a high-throughput manner. The high quantification accuracy and reproducibility of this strategy have been demonstrated for both standard and complex cellular protein samples. A total of 2283 intact proteoforms originated from 660 protein accessions are successfully quantified under anaerobic and aerobic conditions and the differentially expressed proteins are observed to be involved in the important biological processes such as stress response.

### Keywords
Highest isotopic peak, Ptop, Chemical isotope labeling, Intact protein quantification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Doctor
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China

### Submitter
Zheyi Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fangjun Wang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China


