### Accession
PXD030984

### Title
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma A431 cells with itraconazole

### Description
Our objective is exploring the therapeutic potential of itraconazole in cSCC and investigate its molecular mechanism.Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were used to explore the underlying anti-cancer mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
A431 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 °C in a cell incubator containing 5% CO2. Cells were grown to 70%-80% confluence in cell culture plates or dishes, and then treated with or without 1μM itraconazole for 48h.

### Data Protocol
Cells were diluted in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail and 1 mM PMSF immediately before use, sonicated to dissolve at 4 °C, and then centrifuged 15 min at 4 °C with top speed. We transferred the supernatant to new tube and keep it on ice. BCA assay, acetone precipitation, re-suspend protein for tryptic digest, cleaning up of SDC, and peptide desalting for base-RP fractionation were performed in order. About 2 µg peptides each sample were separated and then analyzed with a nano-UPLC (EASY-nLC1200) coupled to Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). The peptides were separated using a reversed-phase column (100 µm, ID × 15 cm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Math). We performed data dependent acquisition in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000 (@200 m/z).  MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0) was used to analyze raw MS files. The protein sequence database (Uniprot_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were searched against using MaxQuant software. The quantification type was LFQ with match between run and iBAQ; Trypsin was considered as specific enzyme with up to 3 miss cleavage; Acetyl [protein N-term] and Oxidation [M] were set as variable modification that max number of modifications per peptide is 3, while Carbamidomethyl as fixed modification; FDR of both peptide and protein had to be less than 0.01, and quantification work only used unique & razor peptides. Other parameters were reserved as default. Samples were standardized to make the total protein or median of each group consistent. Differentially expressed protein (DEP) were identified using a fold change > 1.5, and the presence of least 2 unique peptides with a P value <0.05. DEPs were analyzed to two key databases (KEGG and GO) as described previously. The interaction network for the DEPs were created with STRING database (http://string-db.org/cgi/).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is a common cutaneous cancer with increasing incidence. Itraconazole has been identified as a potential anticancer drug candidate. However, the role of itraconazole in cSCC was still unclear. Our objective is exploring the therapeutic potential of itraconazole in cSCC and investigate its molecular mechanism. <b>Methods:</b> The anti-proliferation effect of itraconazole was tested with CCK-8 assay and clone formation assay. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis rate were detected using flow cytometry and TUNEL assay, respectively. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were used to explore the underlying anti-cancer mechanism. Luciferase reporter assay was used for promoter activity. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), lipid peroxidation and iron accumulation were examined. The <i>in vivo</i> efficacy of itraconazole was assessed in a xenograft model. <b>Results:</b> Itraconazole inhibited the cell proliferation, induced apoptosis and blocked cell cycle of cSCC cells. An integrated analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic analyses identified that 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 (HMGCS1) and acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) were significantly upregulated in A431 cells treated with itraconazole. HMGCS1 silencing reversed the antiproliferative activity of itraconazole in A431 cells. Dual-luciferase assay showed that itraconazole could promote HMGCS1 transcription. HMGCS1 silencing abated the expression of ACSL4 in A431 cells. The level of ROS, lipid peroxidation, as well as iron accumulation were increased by itraconazole. Moreover, treatment with itraconazole impeded tumor growth in A431-bearing mice. <b>Conclusion:</b> We proved itraconazole inhibits the growth of cSCC by regulating HMGCS1/ACSL4 axis.

### Keywords
A431; itraconazole

### Affiliations
Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
 Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Congcong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Congcong Xu
Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


