### Accession
PXD035001

### Title
Heat shock chaperone HSPB1 regulates cytoplasmic TDP-43 phase separation and liquid-to-gel transition

### Description
While acetylated, RNA binding deficient TDP-43 reversibly phase separates within nuclei into complex droplets (anisosomes) comprised of TDP-43-containing liquid outer shells and liquid centers of HSP70 family chaperones, cytoplasmic aggregates of TDP-43 are hallmarks of multiple neurodegenerative diseases, including ALS. Here we show that transient oxidative stress, proteasome inhibition, or inhibition of HSP70’s ATP-dependent chaperone activity provokes reversible cytoplasmic TDP-43 de-mixing and transition from liquid to gel/solid, independent of RNA binding or stress granules. Proxmity labeling coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry is used to identify that phase separated cytoplasmic TDP-43 is bound by the small heat shock protein HSPB1.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling and enrichment of biotinylated protein  Prior to labeling, U2OS cells were treated with the indicated reagents and biotin phenol (Iris-Biotech, 41994-02-9) containing medium was further added to 250 µM final concentration and treated for 30 min. Then 1 mM hydrogen peroxide was added to the medium to activate APEX labeling reaction for 1 min, followed by immediate quenching of reaction with ice-cold quenching buffer (1xPBS, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 2.5 mM Trolox). After four washes with cold quenching buffer, the cells were collected from plates with scrapers. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (100 mM NaPO4, PH 8.0, 8 M Urea, 1% SDS, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM TCEP) and passed through an insulin syringe for 15 times to break DNA. After sonication at water bath sonicator for 10 mins, protein lysates are cleared by centrifuge. Protein concentration was measured using 2-D quant kit (GE healthcare, Cat# 80648356), by following manufacturer’ instruction. After alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min, 0.5 mg of protein samples were aliquoted and equilibrated to the same volume with lysis buffer. After dilution with equal volume of ddH2O to reduce the concentration of urea to 4 M and SDS to 0.5%, the samples were incubated with streptavidin magnetic AccuNanobeads (Bioneer, Cat# TA-1015-1) at 4 oC overnight.  Protein digestion and TMT labeling  After three washes with wash buffer 1 (100 mM TEAB, PH 8.0, 4 M Urea, 0.5% SDS) and four washes with wash buffer 2 (100 mM TEAB, PH 8.0, 4 M Urea), the beads were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, 2 M Urea supplemented with 10 ng/uL Trypsin, 5 ng/uL Lys-C for pre-digestion at 37 oC on a thermo-mixture shaking at 1,000 rpm. The pre-digested products were collected, and an additional 10 ng/uL Trypsin were added to digest overnight at with 1% 37 oC. Digested peptides from each sample are labeled with TMT six-plex labeling reagents (Thermo, Cat# 90061) following manufacture instruction. Briefly, TMT reagents are solubilized in anhydrous acetonitrile and add to peptides from each sample according to the labeling design in Supplementary Table 1. After 1-hr reaction at RT, 5% hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 mins to quench the reaction. Then equal volume of peptides of each sample in the same group are pooled together and speedvac to remove acetonitrile. The samples are acidified with formic acid (1%, final concentration) and desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (89870).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-Mass spectrometry analysis  The TMT labeled samples were analyzed on a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 μm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 μm C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nLC 1200 (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile and 80% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 0–25% B over 75 min, an increase to 40% B over 30 min, an increase to 100% B over another 10 min and held at 100% B for a 5 min was used for a 120 min total run time.  Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nano-sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Eclipse was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution. The cycle time was set to 3 s, and within this 3 s the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap. MS3 analysis with multi-notch isolation (SPS3) was utilized for detection of TMT reporter ions at 7.5k resolution118. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 60 s. Quantitative mass spectrometry data analysis  The raw data was processed by Rawconverter119 to extract MS2 and MS3 spectra with a correction of each precursor ion peak to its monoisotopic peak when appropriate. MS2 and MS3 mass spectrometry spectra were searched against a complete human protein database downloaded from Uniprot with the addition of APEX2 and Clover protein sequence using the search algorithm ProLuCID120. The searching parameters are: precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 500 ppm for CID spectra and of 20 ppm for HCD spectra; minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids; static modifications for carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.162932 Da). The identified PSMs were filtered to an FDR of ≤1% at a PSM level with DTASelect2121. The FDR was calculated based on the number of PSMs that matched to sequences in the reverse decoy database. TMT quantification of reporter ions from MS3 spectra is done by Census2122 with the filter of over 0.6 for isobaric purity. The normalized intensity based on weighted normalization were used to calculate the ratio of reporter ions corresponding to the indicated groups. The ratios of each protein from three forward labeling groups and three reverse labeling groups (Supplementary Table 1) were used to calculate P-value through one sample t-test. The volcano plot was generated with R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tdp-43, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

### Submitter
Shan Lu

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Yates III
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


