### Accession
PXD027906

### Title
proteome of human myometrium landscape in labor and non-labor

### Description
Proteome data from 20 myometrium (in labor, IL, n = 10; non-labor, NL, n = 10) was performed by quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Myometrial tissue samples were collected from lower segment of 40 women with singleton gestations undergoing cesarean deliveries at Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center ( Guangzhou, China ). Subjects were recruited into two groups, spontaneous in labor ( IL, n = 10 ) and elective caesarean section, non-labor (NL, n = 10), between 37 and 40 weeks of gestation. Term was defined as >37 completed weeks of gestation. The IL group was undergoing caesarean section for reasons of undiagnosed breech or large baby/cephalopelvic disproportion. labor was defined as regular contractions (<3 min apart) , membrane rupture, and cervical dilatation (>2 cm) with no augmentation. These women with no pregnancy complications (such as gestational diabetes, preeclampsia and chorioamnionitis), multiple pregnancy, and/or given labor-augmenting drugs (prostaglandins and oxytocin).

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were digested refers to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Each sample of 100μg diluted with 200 ul Buffer1Buffer1(8M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl，pH 8.5). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 2 h at 37℃. Subsequently, the samples were incubated in 5 mM IAA for 15 min in the dark followed by centrifugation of 12,000g for 10 min. The resulting concentrate was diluted with 200 ul Buffer2 (8M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl，pH 8.0), and centrifugated 2 times. The concentrate was subjected to proteolytic digestion overnight at 37 ℃. The digests were collected by centrifugation. After digestion, the peptides were dissolved in LC-MS/MS buffer, and the concentration of peptide was determined by automatic analyzer (Hiachi7600-020, Japan). Protein was dissolved in 100 μL mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium formate, 5% acetonitrile, pH 10.0). The peptide was separated on Thermo Ultimate 3000 UHPLC analytical column (ZORBAX Extended-C18, 2.1, Agilent), detection wavelength: UV 215 nm, flow rate: 0.3 mL /min; The separation gradient of buffer B (10mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH10.0) was linearly increased from 5% to 38% within 80 min. The collected polypeptide samples were centrifugally dried and re-dissolved in Nano-LC mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) for LCMS analysis. 2 μL dissolved sample was loaded onto NanoViper C18 pre-column (3μm, 100 Å) and rinsed with 20 μL for desalination. The liquid phase was Easy NLC 1200 nm liquid phase system (Thermofisher, USA), and the samples were desalted and retained on a pre-column and then separated on an analytical column.The analytical column was A C18 reverse-phase chromatographic column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC,75 μm×25 cm C18-2 μm 100 Å).The elution gradient of the liquid phase was 120 min, and the mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) increased from 5% to 38%.The mass spectrometry was performed using Thermofisher Q Exactive system ( Thermofisher, USA) combined with nano-L spray Nano Flex ion source ( Thermofisher, USA). The spray voltage was 1.9kV, the heating temperature of the ionon transfer tube was 275℃, and the scanning mode was DDA ( Data Depend Analysis ). The first-level mass spectrometry scanning resolution was 70000. The scanning range is 350-2000m/z and the maximum injection time is 100ms. At most 20 secondary spectrograms with charges of 2+ to 5+ were collected in each DDA cycle, and the maximum ion implantation time of the secondary mass spectrum was 50ms. Collision chamber energy (high-energy collision-induced disaggregation, HCD ) is set to 28eV for all precursor ions, and dynamic elimination is set to 25 seconds. The peptides of each sample were scanned by a method of Data Independent Analysis ( DIA ), the first-stage mass spectrometry scanning resolution is 70,000, the scanning range is 350-1200m/z, the maximum injection time is 50ms. According to the mass peak density of the pre-mixed sample, the data was collected by a variable window. There were 34 separate windows in each cycle, the window mass range was 14-152Da, and the maximum ion implantation time was 50ms.Collision chamber, HCD was 28eV. The liquid chromatography conditions were consistent with the separation conditions of the DDA data collection. DIA raw data was analyzed by Spectre Pulsar X.

### Publication Abstract
During labor, a variety of coordinated physiological and biochemical events cause the myometrium to transition from a quiescent to contractile state; the molecular mechanisms responsible for this transition, however, remain unclear. To better understand this transition at a molecular level, the global transcriptome and proteome of human myometrial samples in labor and those not in labor were investigated through RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) <i>via</i> data-independent acquisition (DIA) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) methods. Furthermore, an integrated proteotranscriptomic analysis was performed to explore biological processes and pathway alterations during labor; this analysis identified 1,626 differentially expressed mRNAs (1,101 upregulated, 525 downregulated) and 135 differentially expressed proteins (97 upregulated, 38 downregulated) in myometrium between nonlabor and in labor groups. The comprehensive results of these analyses showed that the upregulated mRNAs and proteins increased&#xa0;inflammation under hypoxia stress in the myometrium under labor, and related proteins and cytokines were validated by PRM and Luminex assays. Our study confirmed the biological process of inflammation and hypoxia in laboring myometrium at the transcriptome and proteome levels and provided recourse to discover new molecular and biological changes during labor.

### Keywords
Myometrium, Proteome, Labor

### Affiliations
Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Kaiyuan Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Kaiyuan Ji
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China


