### Accession
PXD011256

### Title
Analysis of YAP1 phosphorylation sites induced by TAK1

### Description
This study aims at determining which YAP residues are phosphorylated by TAK1.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged YAP was immunoprecipitated from 293T cells co-transfected with HA-tagged TAK1 or TAK1 kinase dead mutant, and subjected to MS analysis to identify novel YAP phosphorylation site induced by TAK1.

### Data Protocol
YAP protein were trypsin digested (50:1 protein:enzyme, sequencing grade trypsin, Promega) at 37°C for 16 hr and desalted using C18 Zip-Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, the samples were resuspended in water and subjected to LC-MS/MS.The first search mass tolerance was 20ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was 6ppm. The MS/MS tolerance was 20ppm. False discovery rate (FDR) of PSM, protein and peptide was set to be less than 1%. Score and delta score for modified peptides were set to be higher than 40 and 8, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis is one of the leading causes of pain and disability in the aged population due to articular cartilage damage. This warrants investigation of signaling mechanisms that could protect cartilage from degeneration and degradation. Here we show in a murine model of experimental osteoarthritis that YAP activation by transgenic overexpression or by deletion of its upstream inhibitory kinases Mst1/2 preserves articular cartilage integrity, whereas deletion of YAP in chondrocytes promotes cartilage disruption. Our work shows that YAP is both necessary and sufficient for the maintenance of cartilage homeostasis in osteoarthritis. Mechanistically, inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF&#x3b1; or IL-1&#x3b2;, trigger YAP/TAZ degradation through TAK1-mediated phosphorylation. Furthermore, YAP directly interacts with TAK1 and attenuates NF-&#x3ba;B signaling by inhibiting substrate accessibility of TAK1. Our study establishes a reciprocal antagonism between Hippo-YAP/TAZ and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling in regulating the induction of matrix-degrading enzyme expression and cartilage degradation during osteoarthritis pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University
Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China

### Submitter
Yujie Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Hai Song
Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China


