### Accession
PXD025125

### Title
Pathophysiological pathway differences in children who present with COVID-19 ARDS compared to COVID -19 induced MIS-C

### Description
Background: COVID-19 has infected more than 100-million worldwide. Children appear less susceptible to COVID-19 and present with milder symptoms. Cases of children with COVID-19 developing clinical features of Kawasaki-disease have been described.  Methods: We utilised SWATH-MS proteomics to determine the plasma proteins expressed in healthy children, children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) and children with COVID-19 induced ARDS. Pathway analyses were performed to determine the affected pathways.  Results: 76 proteins were differentially expressed across the groups, with 85 and 52 proteins specific to MIS-C and COVID-19 ARDS. Complement and coagulation activation were implicated in these clinical phenotypes, however there was contribution of FcGR and BCR activation in MIS-C and scavenging of heme and retinoid metabolism in COVID-19 ARDS. Conclusions:  We show proteome differences in MIS-C and COVID-ARDS, although both show complement and coagulation dysregulation. The results may be helpful in developing therapeutic targets that could improve the outcomes for these children.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma preparation has been described elsewhere (26). Briefly, all venous blood samples were collected into S-Monovette tubes (Sarstedt, Australia) or Vacuette (Greiner Bio-one, France) containing 1-part sodium citrate to 9-parts blood. Samples were centrifuged at 2500g at room temperature for 10 mins (twice) and stored at -80 °C until sample testing. To eliminate risk of handling COVID-19 samples, all plasma was added to TRIzol (Thermo Fisher, United States) in a ratio of 1-part plasma to 4-parts TRIzol. Plasma samples from different groups of healthy children and SARS-CoV-2 infected children were separated into 9 batches in a randomised fashion. Each batch was processed individually from sample preparations all the way to SWATH data acquisitions. Furthermore, we have implemented a workflow with an additional inclusion of a control plasma standard sample, a technical replicate where one sample from each batch was randomly selected and acquired twice, as well as samples pooled from one batch in data acquisition and data analysis for assessing data quality in each batch. Sample (350 µL) containing 70 µL of plasma and 280 µL of TRIzol was taken for protein extraction. 5N acetic acid followed by chloroform were added with centrifugation at 12,000 ×g for 15 minutes at 4 °C to separate into three phases. The top phase was discarded, and ethanol was added to precipitate DNA from the interphase, followed by centrifugation at 2,000 ×g for 5 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected and protein precipitated by addition of isopropanol. Protein pellet was collected by centrifugation and washed two times with 0.3 M guanidine hydrochloride in 95% ethanol solution, then with 100% ethanol. Protein pellet was collected by centrifugation at 7,500 ×g for 5 minutes at 4 °C. After a brief vacuum centrifugation, the protein pellet was dissolved in 100 µL of 4M urea, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solution, aided by brief probe sonication. Each sample was taken and diluted (1:3) with 1% SDC, 100 mM TEAB solution. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM IAA). Sample proteolysis was performed by digestion with trypsin (1:25 ratio) at 37 °C for overnight. Following digestion, pH was adjusted to approximately 3 using a final concentration of approximately 1% FA, and each sample desalted using a Stage tips containing Styrene Divinyl Benzene (Empore SDB-RPS 47 mm extraction disk, SUPLCO). Briefly, stage tips were self-packed into pipette tips, peptides were bound to the stage-tip, washed with 0.2% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and finally eluted with 80% acetonitrile: 5% ammonium hydroxide. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifuge and then reconstituted in 50 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (loading buffer). For SWATH-MS data, 5 μL of digested sample from each batch was diluted with loading buffer (1:1) prior to injection.

### Data Protocol
IDA Data Analysis—Protein identifications from 2D-IDA data were performed with ProteinPilot (v5.0, Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm in thorough mode. The search parameters were as follows: sample type: identification; cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; digestion: trypsin; instrument: TripleTOF 6600; special factors: none; species: Homo sapiens; ID focus: biological modifications. The database used was obtained from SwissProt (20,420 entries, May 2019) with the addition of a coronavirus database downloaded from UniProt (reviewed, 520 entries, October 2020). A reversed-decoy database search strategy was used with ProteinPilot, with the calculated protein FDR equalling 1%. SWATH Library Construction—The ProteinPilot group file from the 2D-IDA search result was imported into PeakView (v2.2) (Sciex) and used as a local peptide assay library. This library contained 387 proteins identified from un-depleted plasma samples.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 has infected more than 275 million worldwide (at the beginning of 2022). Children appear less susceptible to COVID-19 and present with milder symptoms. Cases of children with COVID-19 developing clinical features of Kawasaki-disease have been described. Here we utilise Mass Spectrometry proteomics to determine the plasma proteins expressed in healthy children pre-pandemic, children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) and children with COVID-19 induced ARDS. Pathway analyses were performed to determine the affected pathways. 76 proteins are differentially expressed across the groups, with 85 and 52 proteins specific to MIS-C and COVID-19 ARDS, respectively. Complement and coagulation activation are implicated in these clinical phenotypes, however there was significant contribution of FcGR and BCR activation in MIS-C and scavenging of haem and retinoid metabolism in COVID-19 ARDS. We show global proteomic differences in MIS-C and COVID-ARDS, although both show complement and coagulation dysregulation. The results contribute to our understanding of MIS-C and COVID-19 ARDS in children.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Swath

### Affiliations
Haematology Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute
The Australia Proteome Analysis Facility

### Submitter
Jemma Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Vera Ignjatovic
Haematology Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute


