### Accession
PXD006247

### Title
Global Landscape of Cell Envelope Protein Complexes in Escherichia coli

### Description
After extraction with mild non-denaturing detergents, we affinity-purified 785 endogenously-tagged CEPs and then identified stably-associated polypeptides by precision mass spectrometry. The resulting high-quality physical interaction network, comprising most  (77%) of all targeted CEPs, revealed hundreds of previously unknown heteromeric complexes. Lab Heads: Andrew Emili; andrew.emili@utoronto.ca ;Donnelly CCBR, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada Mohan Babu; mohan.babu@uregina.ca ;Research and Innovation Centre, University of Regina, SK S4S OA2, Canada

### Sample Protocol
C-terminally SPA-tagged E. coli cell envelope strains created with a kanamycin selectable marker integrated by targeted homologous recombination in the E. coli chromosome were grown in Luria-Bertani medium. After mechanical lysis of harvested cells by sonication and pelleting of debris, the lysates were ultra-centrifuged to isolate the membranes. The membrane fractions were washed and their stably associated proteins, were purified successively on anti-FLAG and calmodulin columns, as is usual for the SPA method, except that all but the first three column-washing steps incudes calmodulin wash buffer in the presence of 0.1% detergent, followed by the last two column-washing steps performed in the absence of detergent. The purified proteins digested overnight with trypsin and the resulting digested peptides were analysed using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each SPA-tagged bait purification was searched against the reference E. coli protein sequences using both the SEQUEST (ver. 27 - rev.9) and MS-GF+ algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial cell envelope protein (CEP) complexes mediate a range of processes, including membrane assembly, antibiotic resistance and metabolic coordination. However, only limited characterization of relevant macromolecules has been reported to date. Here we present a proteomic survey of 1,347 CEPs encompassing 90% inner- and outer-membrane and periplasmic proteins of Escherichia coli. After extraction with non-denaturing detergents, we affinity-purified 785 endogenously tagged CEPs and identified stably associated polypeptides by precision mass spectrometry. The resulting high-quality physical interaction network, comprising 77% of targeted CEPs, revealed many previously uncharacterized heteromeric complexes. We found that the secretion of autotransporters requires translocation and the assembly module TamB to nucleate proper folding from periplasm to cell surface through a cooperative mechanism involving the &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machinery. We also establish that an ABC transporter of unknown function, YadH, together with the Mla system preserves outer membrane lipid asymmetry. This E. coli CEP 'interactome' provides insights into the functional landscape governing CE systems essential to bacterial growth, metabolism and drug resistance.

### Keywords
Macromolecues, Escherichia coli, Cell envelope, Cell envelope proteins, Multi-protein complexes, Cell envelope protein complexes, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Donnelly CCBR, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly CCBR, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada


