### Accession
PXD021383

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Commercial Dust Mite Skin Prick Test Solutions and Allergy Vaccines from India

### Description
Skin prick test (SPT) solutions and allergy vaccines (AVs) are crucial tools for diagnosis and therapy of allergies. It was the aim of this study to corroborate the content of products for diagnosis and treatment of dust mite allergies that are produced and sold in India.

### Sample Protocol
Desalted peptides resulting from the tryptic digests were separated by reverse-phase nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), directly coupled via nano electrospray to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 75m x 15cm, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was developed with an acetonitrile gradient (Solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/90% (v/v) acetonitrile; 5–45% B in 120 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min at 55°C. Capillary voltage of the nano spray was 2.5 kV. Lock mass calibration was used for highest accuracy. Peptide fragmentation/identification was done with a top 12 method and a normalized fragmentation energy at 27%.

### Data Protocol
Survey and fragment spectra were analyzed/sequenced with PEAKS Studio 8.5 and X+,respectively (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). Primary searches were done against the complete UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, release April 2019). Based on the results obtained in the primary search, searches were repeated with specific subsets of this database in a multi-round approach. Settings for searches: trypsin (semi-specific), 0.1% FDR for UniProt, -10lgP≥35 for refined searches. Fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications: deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Allergens, Skin prick, Dust mites

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
University of Salzburg, Department of Biosciences

### Submitter
Peter Briza

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Briza
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria


