### Accession
PXD030354

### Title
The Transglutaminase-2 interactome in the APP23 mouse model of Alzheimer disease

### Description
Amyloid-beta (Aβ) deposition in the brain, is closely linked to development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).  Unfortunately, therapies specifically targeting Aβ deposition have failed to reach their primary clinical endpoints, emphasizing the need to broaden the search strategy for identification of alternative therapeutic targets/mechanisms. Transglutaminase (TG2) catalyses posttranslational modifications, is present in characteristic AD lesions and has AD-associated proteins, including Aβ, tau and apolipoprotein E. However, an unbiased overview of TG2 interactors (TG2 interactome) and the cellular pathways of which these interactors are part in control and AD brain is lacking. Here, anticipating future studies in AD brain, we aimed to identify these interactors and their pathways using a crossbred of the AD-mimicking APP23 mouse model with wildtype and TG2-/- mice. We found that absence of TG2 had no (statistically) significant effect on Aβ pathology, soluble brain levels of Aβ1-40, Aβ1-42, and mRNA levels of TG2 family members compared to APP23 mice. Quantitative proteomics and network analysis revealed a large cluster of TG2 interactors with synaptic transmission/assembly and cell adhesion typical of AD in the APP23 brain. Comparative proteomics were in line with these observations as it also revealed association of proteins of both pathways to be linked to TG2 in APP23 brains Together, our data showed that TG2 deletion led to considerable network alterations consistent with a role of TG2 in (dys)regulation of synaptic transmission and cell adhesion in APP23 brains.

### Sample Protocol
Five mice brains per animal group (WT, TG2-/-, APP23 and APP23/TG2-/-) were weighted and homogenised in 10% w/v IP lysis buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 5% glycerol; Sigma protease inhibitors) (Merck Life Science UK Limited, Gillingham, United Kingdom) using a glass-teflon Dounce homogenizer. The five APP23 and APP23/TG2-/- mice were selected based on the presence of average levels of Aβ pathology when compared to the whole group. The tissue lysates were centrifuged at 13,000xg at 4°C for 10 min and the supernatants used for further analysis (soluble brain homogenates). Equal amounts of total protein extracts (50 μg) were acetone precipitated (-80°C overnight), followed by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 10 min at 4°C and solubilisation in 50 mM tri-ethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) containing 0.1% (w/v) ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant (Promega UK, Southampton, United Kingdom). Proteins were subjected to reduction (5 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 20 minutes), alkylation (15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 minutes), and then trypsin digested overnight at 37°C with 0.01 mg/ml MS-grade trypsin (Promega) and 0.01% (w/v) ProteaseMAX surfactant in a water bath. Samples were vacuum concentrated to dryness and resuspended in 30 µl of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid for MS analysis. Peptides were analysed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Ontario, Canada).

### Data Protocol
MS Aquisition data: IDA files searched in ProteinPilot 5.0.3 (Sciex), The group file was then was then aligned to the SWATH datafiles in PeakView 2.1 (Sciex) and saved in txt format. SWATH files were extracted against two library files (one from the IP experiment and once from whole cell lysates (PreIP)) in OneOmics Extractor (SCIEX) using the parameters 6 transitions per peptide, 30 peptides per protein, 30ppm XIC, 5 min window.  Analysis of differentially expressed proteins was performed using the OneOmics "Assembler" (SCIEX) as the ratio of protein peak area in APP23/TG2-/- or WT/TG2-/- mice over the protein peak area of the same protein in APP23 or WT mice, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) deposition in the brain is closely linked with the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Unfortunately, therapies specifically targeting A&#x3b2; deposition have failed to reach their primary clinical endpoints, emphasizing the need to broaden the search strategy for alternative targets/mechanisms. Transglutaminase-2 (TG2) catalyzes post-translational modifications, is present in AD lesions and interacts with AD-associated proteins. However, an unbiased overview of TG2 interactors is lacking in both control and AD brain. Here we aimed to identify these interactors using a crossbreed of the AD-mimicking APP23 mouse model with wild type and TG2 knock-out (TG2<sup>-/-</sup>) mice. We found that absence of TG2 had no (statistically) significant effect on A&#x3b2; pathology, soluble brain levels of A&#x3b2;<sub>1-40</sub> and A&#x3b2;<sub>1-42</sub>, and mRNA levels of TG family members compared to APP23 mice at 18 months of age. Quantitative proteomics and network analysis revealed a large cluster of TG2 interactors involved in synaptic transmission/assembly and cell adhesion in the APP23 brain typical of AD. Comparative proteomics of wild type and TG2<sup>-/-</sup> brains revealed a TG2-linked pathological proteome consistent with alterations in both pathways. Our data show that TG2 deletion leads to considerable network alterations consistent with a TG2 role in (dys)regulation of synaptic transmission and cell adhesion in APP23 brains.

### Keywords
Lc-msms swath mouse tgm2 alzheimer's

### Affiliations
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University
Nottingham Trent University

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David Boocock
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University


