### Accession
PXD022547

### Title
Reduced Nicotinamide Mononucleotide (NMNH) Potently Enhances NAD+, Suppresses Glycolysis and Cell Growth

### Description
In the present study, we developed a chemical method to produce dihydro nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMNH), which is the reduced-form of nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN). We demonstrated that NMNH was a better nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) enhancer compared to NMN both in vitro and in vivo mediated by mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT). Additionally, NMNH increased the reduced NAD (NADH) levels in cells and in mouse liver. Metabolomic analysis revealed that NMNH inhibited glycolysis and TCA cycle. In vitro experiments demonstrated that NMNH induced cell cycle arrest and suppressed cell growth. Nevertheless, NMNH treatment did not cause observable difference in mice. Taken together, our work demonstrates that NMNH is a potent NAD+ enhancer, and suppresses glycometabolism and cell growth.

### Sample Protocol
200 μg proteins were extracted using 8 M urea followed by reduction and alkylation. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) for 14 hours at 37 ℃. Peptides were then desalted and labeled by tandem mass tag (TMTsixplexTM, Thermo) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Next, samples were mixed, desalted and separated by HPLC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS system. An Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™) directly interfaced with a nano-HPLC system was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (release date of October, 06, 2019, 20352 sequences) using the SEQUEST searching engine of Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm and product ion mass tolerance was set to be 0.02 Da. The fixed modifications included TMTsixplex (N-terminal and K) and carbamidomethylation (C). Variable modification included oxidation (M). 2 missed cleavage was allowed and full tryptic specificity was required. Peptides that with target false discovery rate less than 1% were accepted as high-confidence hits.

### Publication Abstract
Decreased cellular NAD<sup>+</sup> levels are causally linked to aging and aging-associated diseases. NAD<sup>+</sup> precursors in oxidized form such as nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) and nicotinamide riboside (NR) have gained much attention and been well studied for their ability to restore NAD<sup>+</sup> levels in model organisms. Less is known about whether NAD<sup>+</sup> precursors in reduced form can also efficiently increase the tissue and cellular NAD<sup>+</sup> levels and have different effects on cellular processes than NMN or NR. In the present study, we developed a chemical method to produce dihydronicotinamide mononucleotide (NMNH), which is the reduced form of NMN. We demonstrated that NMNH was a better NAD<sup>+</sup> enhancer than NMN both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>, mediated by nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMNAT). Additionally, NMNH increased the reduced NAD (NADH) levels in cells and in mouse livers. Metabolomic analysis revealed that NMNH inhibited glycolysis and the TCA cycle. <i>In vitro</i> experiments demonstrated that NMNH induced cell cycle arrest and suppressed cell growth. Nevertheless, NMNH treatment did not cause an observable difference in mouse weight. Taken together, our work demonstrates that NMNH is a potent NAD<sup>+</sup> enhancer and suppresses glycolysis, the TCA cycle, and cell growth.

### Keywords
Cell growth, Tca cycle, Glycolysis, Nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (nmnat), Reduced nicotinamide mononucleotide (nmnh), Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (nad+ and nadh)

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Yan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
Tsinghua University


