### Accession
PXD024200

### Title
TWIST1 expression is associated with high-risk Neuroblastoma and promotes Primary and Metastatic Tumor Growth

### Description
In this study, merging in silico transcriptomic data and in situ TMA studies, we first highlighted the clinical significance and the value as prognostic factors of the embryonic TFs TWIST1 and TWIST2, thus linking their level of expression with the outcome of NB patients.  Secondly, using NB cells knocked out for the TWIST1 protein, we studied the biological impact of TWIST1 in tumors xenografts. The expression of TWIST1 was associated with enhanced primary and secondary tumor growth capacity in immunocompromised mice. Furthermore, tumors expressing TWIST1 were portrayed by a more aggressive phenotype, characterized by the presence of spindle shaped cells and the destruction of the ECM collagen fibers.  Finally, the transcriptional signature deregulated by TWIST1 was found to have a clinical significance in human primary tumors and resulted to be able to activate the TME in ortho-derived xenograft.  This dataset reports analyses that studied the impact of knockout of the TWIST1 protein on the secretome of the neuroblastoma cell line mentioned above.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis. Three independent conditioned media (CM) samples recovered from the neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-Be2C control and sgTWIST1 cells cultured under FBS-free and phenol red-free DMEM during the last 24 hours of culture were first clarified by centrifugation steps: 10’ at 300 x g to remove cells; 10’ at 2000 x g to remove dead cells; 30’ at 10000 x g to remove cell debris. The CM was then concentrated using 15 ml Amicon spin filter cartridges (cutoff: 3 kDa), (10705884-Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) by serial addition of 10 ml of CM and centrifugation at 4000 x g until 1.5 ml were left. After dilution in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer to the starting volume, the CM was re-concentrated by centrifugation at 4000 x g, and these steps were repeated twice until 0.5 ml were left. Finally, aliquots were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and used for the LC-MS analysis that was performed at the Protein Analysis Facility of the University of Lausanne (Lausanne, Switzerland).  Concentrated, filtered CM’s were dried in a SpeedVac. Proteins were digested according to a modified version of the iST protocol (Kulak et al 2014). Pellets were resuspended in 50 ul of modified iST buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate, 20mM DTT, 5mM EDTA, 200mM Tris pH 8.6) and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. 50ul of 160 mM chloroacetamide (in 10 mM Tris pH 8.6) were then added and cysteines were alkylated for 45 minutes at 25°C in the dark. After 1:1 dilution with H2O, samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 0.5 ug Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) for 1h at 37°C, followed by a second 1h digestion with a second, identical aliquot of proteases. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were directly desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX ; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 250ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Tandem MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) (Cox and Mann, 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The UniProt human reference proteome database of January 2019 was used (73’950 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. After inspection and data QC based on the iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al, 2011) values, the LFQ label-free values (Cox et al, 2014) were used for protein quantitation. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al, 2016) for the filtering, log2-transformation and normalization of values, the statistical analyses and GO annotations.  Data processing  After removal of contaminants and reverse hits, intensity values were log2 transformed. Only proteins identified  by at least 2 peptides and quantitated in at least all 3 samples of one condition were retained for further analysis. Missing values were imputed with standard Perseus parameters (normal distribution with width 0.3 and down-shifted by 1.8 SD). An unpaired T-test was used to determine significant changes, corrected for FDR with the Benjamini-Hochberg method and a threshold q-value at 0.01. Imputed values were subsequently removed from tables. This analysis yielded 394 significant proteins. After adding Gene Ontology terms, category enrichment was calculated on the T-test  KO/WT difference using Perseus, which applies the  1D enrichment method (Cox and Mann 2012). Results were FDR-filtered as above (Benjamini-Hochberg, 0.01). References Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–72.  Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V, & Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Journal of Proteome Research, 10(4), 1794–805.  Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. a, Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP, 13(9), 2513–26. Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nature Methods, 11(3), 319–24. Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., & Selbach, M. (2011). Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature, 473 (7347): 337-42. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M.Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M., & Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 13(9):731-40. Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2012). 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method integrating quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data. BMC Bioinformatics, 13 Suppl 1(Suppl 16), S12. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-13-S16-S12

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor-stroma cross-talk, Twist1/2, Tumor microenvironment, Extracellular matrix, Secretome, Neuroblastoma, Myofibroblasts, Metastasis

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Research Laboratory, Woman-Mother-Child Department, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Annick Mühlethaler-Mottet
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Research Laboratory, Woman-Mother-Child Department, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Switzerland.


