### Accession
PXD033856

### Title
Disturbance of key cellular subproteomes upon propofol treatment is associated with increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier

### Description
Background: Propofol is a short-acting anesthetic, which is often used for induction and maintenance of general anesthesia, sedation for mechanically ventilated adults and procedural sedation. Several side effects of propofol are known and a substantial number of patients suffer from post-operative delirium after propofol application. In this study, we analyzed the effect of propofol on the function and protein expression profile on a proteome-wide scale. Methods: We cultured human brain microvascular endothelial cells in the absence and presence of propofol and analyzed the permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) by fluorescein passage and protein expression on a proteome-wide scale by mass spectrometry. Results: Propofol interfered with the function of the blood-brain barrier. This was not due to de-creased adhesion of propofol-treated human brain microvascular endothelial cells. The proteomic analysis revealed that some key pathways in these cells were disturbed, such as oxygen metabolism, DNA damage recognition and response to stress. Conclusions: Propofol has strong effects on protein expression which could explain several side effects of propofol.

### Sample Protocol
Transfected human brain microvascular endothelial cells (THBMEC), provided by MF Stins (Los Angeles, CA, USA), were used as model for BBB endothelial cells. DMEM/F12 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 100 mg/L penicillin and 100 mg/L streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 2 mM L-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) was used for cultivation at 37 °C in a humified cell culture incubator. Cells were passaged every 2–3 days. Therefore, THBMECs were detached with 1% Trypsin/EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and pelleted at 210 g for 5 min. After incubation, treated and control cells were removed from the surface by scraping and washed twice in ice cold PBS. Lysis buffer was prepared by supplementing solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris pH=7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 % SDS, 1mM EDTA) with 0.2 % PIC, 0.1 % PMSF, 0.05 % Mg132, 1 % Sodium orthovanadate, each 1 % Phosphatase-Inhibitor Cocktail II and III, 5 µM SAHA and 400 µM NEM. Protein concentration was measured using BCA-assay (Thermo Scientific Fisher) following the manufacturer's instructions. 10 µg of protein from each sample were aliquoted and the remaining sample stored at -20 °C. Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry analysis with the USP3 protocol as described (Dagley, 2019). In brief, 1 µl of pre-prepared Sera-Mag speed beads were added to each sample and vortexed. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to 70 % and the mixture incubated for 20 mins at RT in a Thermo Mixer at 400 rpm to allow proteins to adsorb to the beads. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack for 2 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. Samples were subsequently washed three times on-bead with 70% ethanol and finally with pure ACN. After lypholising the beads to remove ACN, samples were re-suspended in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and reduced with 10 nM DTT at 80°C for 15 minutes. After cooling samples were alkylated with 20 mM CAA for half an hour at room temperature in the dark. LysC/Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 enzyme:substrate and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then placed on a magnetic rack for 2 minutes and the supernatant with peptides were removed for C18 spin column clean up (PierceTM C18 Spin Tips, Thermo Scientific #84850) as recommended by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed within Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 following a LFQ quantification workflow. Searches were performed against the Human database (accessed 07/07/2020 – Uniprot proteome UP000005640) with decoys using Sequest HT with a precursor tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, trypsin as a cleavage agent with 2 missed cleavages considered. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteines was set as a static modification, and the following dynamic modifications were investigated: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (K), Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Ubiquitination (GG on K), as well as N-terminal protein modifications of Acetylation, Met-loss, and Acetylation + Met-loss. IDs were filtered with Percolator at a strict FDR of 0.01. Precursor ion quantification was performed with unique and razor peptides with Top N of 3. Precursor abundance was based upon intensity and normalised over total peptide amount. Quantification was based on ratios of lipid:control and propofol:control where pairwise ratios were calculated and t-tests were used for hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anesthetics; blood-brain barrier; dna damage response; drug effect; human brain microvascular endothelial cells; metabolic stress; propofol; proteome; quantitative proteomics; reactive oxygen species (ros)

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther-Üniversität Halle-Wittenberg
Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Hollystr. 1, 06114 Halle (Saale); Germany

### Submitter
Matt Fuszard

### Lab Head
Dr Heidi Olzscha
Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Hollystr. 1, 06114 Halle (Saale); Germany


