### Accession
PXD010361

### Title
Cell Surface Proteome during Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli infection

### Description
Proteins on the cell surface are crucial for the interaction of a cell with its surrounding environment. Viral infection is known to remodel to the host cell surface to the benefit of the pathogen, but relatively little is known about how bacterial pathogens alter the host cell surface. Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli(EHEC) infects the apical surface of gut epithelium, and maniplates multiple aspects of host physiology. Here we used quantitative cell surface proteomics to investigate EHEC-induced changes to the host cell surface and show that the complement regulatory protein CD55 is cleaved from epithelial surfaces by the EHEC metalloprotease StcE. As a consequence of this, neutrophil attachment to the apical surface of epithelial cells is increased. This study is the first to apply quantitaive cell surface proteomics to EHEC infection and reveals a novel mechanism by which EHEC manipulates the host immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Monolayers of uninfected and EHEC infected HeLa cells were washed 2 x PBS (pre-warmed) and 1 x PBS (chilled) and surface sialic acid residues were oxidized by addition of 1 mM sodium metaperiodate on ice for 30 minutes. All subsequent steps were performed at 4°C. Oxidized cells were washed 1 x PBS before addition of 6 mL biotinylation solution (250 µM aminooxybiotin (Biotium Inc.), 10 mM aniline, ice-cold PBS pH 6.7) and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes, with rocking. Biotinylation reactions were quenched by washing with 1 mM glycerol in ice-cold PBS pH 6.7 before further washing with 1 x PBS + 5% FCS pH 6.7 and 1 x PBS pH 6.7. When needed, T90 plates of R10K8 SILAC labeled HeLa cells were grown in parallel to provide spike-in material. Three cell surface enrichment experiments were performed in parallel for each condition.  Biotinylated cells were lysed (150 mM NaCl, 1% Trition X-100, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 5 mM iodoacetamide, 0.1 mg/mL phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride (PMSF)) supplemented with cOmplete-mini protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)) and lysed cells scraped into eppendorfs and incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes with end-over-end mixing before centrifugation at 2800 x g for 10 minutes. Supernatants were retained and centrifuged twice at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (Pierce) and 0.3 mg of infected, light labeled lysate mixed with R10K8-labelled lysate at a ratio of 2:1.   Biotinylated proteins were immunoprecipitated from lysate mixtures using high capacity Streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) overnight at 4°C with end-over-end mixing. Beads were washed extensively (20 x Lysis Buffer, 20 x PBS + 0.5% SDS, 40 x 6 M Urea + 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 20 x 5 M NaCl, 20 x 100 mM Sodium Carbonate, 20 x PBS, 20 x water, 5 x 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC)) using a vacuum manifold and snap-cap spin columns (Pierce). Samples were incubated for 5 minutes, with end-over-end rotation, between each buffer change. For a 40 µL bed of beads, samples were reduced by addition of 4 µL 100 mM DTT in 50 mM AMBIC at 55°C for 30 minutes and allowed to cool to RT. Beads were washed 2 x 50 mM AMBIC before addition of 4 µL 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AMBIC at RT for 30 minutes in the dark before washing 2 x 50 mM AMBIC. 1.6 µg of Trypsin (Modified Sequencing Grade, Promega) dissolved in 50 mM AMBIC was added to the beads and samples were digested overnight at 37°C with shaking at 1000 RPM. Samples were centrifuged, and the supernatant transferred to clean Lobind tubes (Eppendorf). Beads were washed with 0.1% aqueous formic acid and washes were combined with the original supernatant fractions. Solutions were purified using StageTips as previously described and peptides eluted from the sorbent (SDB-XC poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) copolymer) with 79% acetonitrile in water, followed by speed-vac-assisted solvent removal and storage at -80°C. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid in water and transferred to LC-MS sample vials for injection.  Analysis of peptide mixtures was carried out using an Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC column with an inner diameter of 50 cm x 75 µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 hour acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, flow rate of 250 nL.min-1 and an Easy nLC-1000 coupled to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer via an easy-spray nanoESI source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was run in data dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200. Up to 10 of the highest abundance isotope patterns with a charge of +2 or higher were selected to proceed from the survey scan (isolation window of 3.0 m/z) to fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalised collision energies of 25. Maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scan (resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms respectively. Ion target value for MS was 106 and for ms/ms, 105. The intensity threshold was 8.3 x 102.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.8.5. Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (proteome ID: UP000005640) and the Uniprot Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. EDL933 reference proteome (proteome ID: UP000028484) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. In silico digests of reference proteomes were performed using the Trypsin/P setting with up to three missed cleavages allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Both the “Re-quantify” and “Match between runs” functions were enabled. The sequence decoy mode used was ‘revert’.  All other parameters were used as pre-set in MaxQuant. Data were subsequently analysed in Perseus version 1.5.0.9

### Publication Abstract
Enterohemorrhagic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (EHEC) is one of several <i>E. coli</i> pathotypes that infect the intestinal tract and cause disease. Formation of the characteristic attaching and effacing lesion on the surface of infected cells causes significant remodeling of the host cell surface; however, limited information is available about changes at the protein level. Here we employed plasma membrane profiling, a quantitative cell-surface proteomics technique, to identify host proteins whose cell-surface levels are altered during infection. Using this method, we quantified more than 1100 proteins, 280 of which showed altered cell-surface levels after exposure to EHEC. 22 host proteins were significantly reduced on the surface of infected epithelial cells. These included both known and unknown targets of EHEC infection. The complement decay-accelerating factor cluster of differentiation 55 (CD55) exhibited the greatest reduction in cell-surface levels during infection. We showed by flow cytometry and Western blot analysis that CD55 is cleaved from the cell surface by the EHEC-specific protease StcE and found that StcE-mediated CD55 cleavage results in increased neutrophil adhesion to the apical surface of intestinal epithelial cells. This suggests that StcE alters host epithelial surfaces to depress neutrophil transepithelial migration during infection. This work is the first report of the global manipulation of the epithelial cell surface by a bacterial pathogen and illustrates the power of quantitative cell-surface proteomics in uncovering critical aspects of bacterial infection biology.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ehec, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Christopher Funriss

### Lab Head
Dr Abigail Clements
MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ


