### Accession
PXD022858

### Title
Molecular reprogramming and phenotype switching in Staphylococcus aureus lead to high antibiotic persistence and affect therapy success

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus causes invasive infections and easily acquires antibiotic resistances. Even antibiotic susceptible S. aureus can survive antibiotic therapy and persist, requiring prolonged treatment and surgical interventions. These so-called persisters display an arrested-growth phenotype, tolerate high antibiotic concentrations and are associated with chronic and recurrent infections. To characterize these persisters, we assessed S. aureus recovered directly from a patient suffering from a persistent infection. We show that host-mediated stress, including acidic-pH, abscesses-environment, and antibiotic exposure promoted persister formation in-vitro and in-vivo. Multi-omics analysis identified molecular changes in S. aureus in response to acid-stress leading to an overall virulent population. However, further analysis of a persister-enriched population revealed major molecular reprogramming in persisters including downregulation of virulence and cell division, and upregulation of ribosomal proteins, nucleotide-, and amino acid- metabolic pathways, suggesting their requirement to fuel and maintain the persister phenotype and highlighting that persisters are not completely metabolically inactive. Additionally, decreased aconitase activity and ATP-levels and accumulation of insoluble proteins involved in transcription, translation and energy-production correlated with persistence in S. aureus, underpinning the molecular mechanisms that drive the persister phenotype. Upon regrowth, these persisters regained their virulence potential and metabolically active phenotype including reduction of insoluble proteins, exhibiting a reversible state, crucial for recurrent infections.  We further show that a targeted anti-persister combination therapy using retinoid derivatives and antibiotics significantly reduced lag-phase heterogeneity and persisters in a murine infection model. Our results provide molecular insights into persisters and help explain why persistent S. aureus infections are so difficult-to-treat.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus cells (2-5*108 per sample) were lysed in 50 µL of lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5) using thirty cycles of sonication (30 sec on, 30 sec off per cycle) on a Bioruptor (Dianode). Following sonication, proteins in the bacterial lysate were reduced by TCEP at 95°C for 10 min. Proteins were then alkylated using 15 mM chloroacetamide at 37°C for 30 min and further digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, the samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide desalting was performed using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Germany) following the manufactures instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, peptides were stored at -20°C and dissolved in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml upon use.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the Staphylococcus aureus proteome (UniProt, NCTC 8325, release date: 09.12.2016) and commonly observed contaminants generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The following search criteria were used: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.4 (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) (32). Data processing included computation of total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, and summation of peak areas per protein and LC MS/MS run. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. Data were then normalized using the variance stabilization normalization provided by the VSN R package v3.52.0 (33). The normalized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant proteins between conditions. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-tests were applied, as implemented in the R limma package v3.40.2 (34). The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini Hochberg method. The assessment of pathway enrichment was performed as described for the RNAseq analysis, setting the significance threshold at 5%, and protein-protein interaction networks were obtained from STRING v11 database (Search Tool for Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) (35),  considering only those proteins that were significantly enriched or depleted by more than 2-fold. For raw data see Supplementary dataset 7, results of analysis are shown in Supplementary dataset 6 as well as in Supplementary dataset 8 for CI-1149 pH-stress and persisters including KEGG pathways. All LC-MS analysis runs are acquired from independent biological samples. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of the student t-test, MS-intensity signals are transformed from the linear to the log-scale when doing the normalization. The sample size of three biological replicates was chosen assuming a within-group MS-signal Coefficient of Variation of 10%. When applying a two-sample, two-sided Student t-test, this gives adequate power (80%) to detect protein abundance fold changes higher than 1.65 per statistical test. We did not do any simulations to assess power, upon correction for multiple testing (Benjamini-Hochberg), as a function of different effect sizes and assumed proportions of differentially abundant proteins ions, accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (7) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD018372 and 10.6019/PXD018372.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotic persistence, Persistent infection, Antimicrobial therapy, Host-pathogen interaction, Staphylococcus aureus, Persisters

### Affiliations
Biozentrum University of Basel
Infection Biology Biozentrum, University of Basel   CH-4056  Basel, Switzerland  Phone: +41 61 207 2382 http://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch/bumann

### Submitter
Minia Antelo

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Bumann
Infection Biology Biozentrum, University of Basel   CH-4056  Basel, Switzerland  Phone: +41 61 207 2382 http://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch/bumann


