### Accession
PXD010067

### Title
Characterization of a L-Gulono-1,4-Lactone Oxidase Like Protein in the Floral Nectar of Mucuna sempervirens, Fabaceae.

### Description
Floral nectar plays important roles in the interaction between animal-pollinated plants and pollinators. Growing empirical evidence shows that most of the proteins secreted in nectar (nectarins) are enzymes that can tailor nectar chemistry for their animal mutualists or reduce the growth of microorganisms in nectar. However, to date, the function of many nectarins remains unknown, and very few plant species have had their nectar proteome thoroughly investigated. Mucuna sempervirens (Fabaceae) is a perennial woody vine native to China. Nectarins from this species were separated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. A L-gulonolactone oxidase like protein (MsGulLO) was detected. MsGulLO has high similarity to L-gulonolactone oxidase 5 (AtGulLO5) in Arabidopsis thaliana, which was suggested to be involved in the pathway of ascorbate biosynthesis; however both MsGulLO and AtGulLO5 are divergent from animal L-gulonolactone oxidases. MsGulLO is suggested to function in hydrogen peroxide generation in nectar but not in plant ascorbate biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Raw Mucuna sempervirens nectar was collected from MS flowers in April 2017. Pooled nectar was filtered through 0.22 µm syringe filters (Millipore) to remove dirt and pollen granules from the samples, and stored at -80℃ prior to use. Because of high protein concentration in Mucuna sempervirens nectar, filtered nectar was directly used for 2-DE without further concentration. Isoelectrofocusing (IEF) was carried out using a PROTEAN i12 IEF system (Bio-Rad) and a 7-cm Immobiline Dry Strips (linear pH 3–10, Bio-Rad). Second-dimension electrophoresis was carried out on 12 % polyacrylamide gels in a Mini-PROTEAN Tetra system (Bio-rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The 2-DE gels were double stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 and silver nitrate. For protein identification, spots of interest were manually excised from 2-DE gels and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin as the protease, followed by protein identification using a 5800 tandem matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The combined mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem MS (MS/MS) peak lists were analysed using GPS (Global Proteome Server) Explorer Software 3.6 (Applied Biosystems) with a Mascot search engine (MASCOT version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK), and searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information database (NCBIprot 20170707). The taxonomic restrictions were set to NCBI-Other green plants.

### Publication Abstract
Floral nectar plays important roles in the interaction between animal-pollinated plants and pollinators. Its components include water, sugars, amino acids, vitamins, and proteins. Growing empirical evidence shows that most of the proteins secreted in nectar (nectarines) are enzymes that can tailor nectar chemistry for their animal mutualists or reduce the growth of microorganisms in nectar. However, to date, the function of many nectarines remains unknown, and very few plant species have had their nectar proteome thoroughly investigated. <i>Mucuna sempervirens</i> (Fabaceae) is a perennial woody vine native to China. Nectarines from this species were separated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. A L-gulonolactone oxidase like protein (MsGulLO) was detected, and the full length cDNA was cloned: it codes for a protein of 573 amino acids with a predicted signal peptide. MsGulLO has high similarity to L-gulonolactone oxidase 5 (AtGulLO5) in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, which was suggested to be involved in the pathway of ascorbate biosynthesis; however, both MsGulLO and AtGulLO5 are divergent from animal L-gulonolactone oxidases. <i>MsGulLO</i> was expressed mainly in flowers, and especially in nectary before blooming. However, cloning and gene expression analysis showed that L-galactonolactone dehydrogenase (MsGLDH), a vital enzyme in plant ascorbate biosynthesis, was expressed in all of flowers, roots, stems, and especially leaves. MsGulLO was purified to near homogeneity from raw MS nectar by gel filtration chromatography. The enzyme was determined to be a neutral monomeric protein with an apparent molecular mass of 70 kDa. MsGulLO is not a flavin-containing protein, and has neither L-galactonolactone dehydrogenase activity, nor the L-gulonolactone activity that is usual in animal GulLOs. However, it has weak oxidase activity with the following substrates: L-gulono-1,4-lactone, L -galactono-1,4-lactone, D-gluconic acid-&#x3b4;-lactone, glucose, and fructose. MsGulLO is suggested to function in hydrogen peroxide generation in nectar but not in plant ascorbate biosynthesis.

### Keywords
L-ascorbate biosynthesis; l-gulonolactone oxidase like protein; mucuna sempervirens hemsl; nectarin

### Affiliations
Huangshan University

### Submitter
Hong-Guang Zha

### Lab Head
Dr Hong-Guang Zha
Huangshan University


