### Accession
PXD039148

### Title
Regulation of Toxoplasma growth and development by AMPK

### Description
Regulation of Toxoplasma growth and development by AMPK

### Sample Protocol
The AMPKγ-mAID strain was pretreated with or without IAA for 48 hours, followed by needle passage to break host cells and release parasites. Tachyzoites were then collected, purified by filtration, and lysed in 8 M urea (0.1M Tris-Cl, pH 8.5) with the protease inhibitor cocktail (Merk, USA) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Germany). Three samples were prepared independently for each strain under each condition. The lysate was sonicated and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 4 ℃ to collect supernatant for protein concentration assessment using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). Then 500 μg protein of each sample was used for digestion. TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, final concentration is 5 mM) (Thermo Scientific, USA) and iodoacetamide (final concentration is 10 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) for reduction and alkylation were added to protein samples and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, respectively. The protein mixture was diluted four times (to reduce the concentration of urea to 2M) and digested at 37 ℃ with Lys-C at 1:100 (w/w) (Wako, Japan) for 2 hours, and then with trypsin at 1:50 (w/w) (Promega, USA) overnight. Then the reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to pH less than 2.
Digested samples were desalted by a SepPak tC18 3cc Vac cartridge (Waters Corporation, USA) and dried out by lyophilization. The samples were then resolved in 100 mM HEPES (pH = 8.0), and the peptide concentration was measured using the Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). 100 μg peptide of each sample (six samples in total, three with IAA treatment and three without) was labeled using the six-plex TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) following the manufacturer’s manual. Sample labeling efficiency of each channel was checked as previously described. The labeling reaction was quenched by hydroxylamine and then desalted by the tC18 Vac cartridge as described above. 
After TMT labeling, all peptides from the six samples were mixed (600 μg in total) and 30 μg was used for proteomic analysis. The samples were subject to high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation (Pierce, USA) and 13 fractions were acquired for LC-MS analyses. The rest of labeled peptides (570 μg in total) were used for phospho-peptide enrichment using a SMOAC workflow, which enriched phospho-peptides sequentially by TiO2 and IMAC (Thermo Scientific, USA).


### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a Toxoplasma gondii database (ToxoDB.org) by Maxquant V1.6.10.43 using the default settings. Tolerance of precursor mass and fragment mass were set to 20 ppm. The main search peptides tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm according to the feature of the instrument used in the study. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as static modifications. The quantification search type chose the reporter ion ms2 using the TMT 6plex method. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of protein N terminus were set as variable modifications for the proteomic data analysis, and phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine (+79.9663 Da) for the phospho-proteomic data. Trypsin was defined as cleavage enzyme at full specific mode, and the maximum missing cleavage was set at 2. FDR of the identified proteins was set at 1%, which was calculated at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Ampk

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yaqiong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Bang Shen
Huazhong Agricultural University


