### Accession
PXD018449

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of signaling downstream of p85β

### Description
p85β is a regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. The signaling mechanism of p85β is poorly understood. Quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analysis was therefore performed to reveal proteins with an altered phosphorylation status upon PIK3R2 depletion in ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3. This profiling yielded 90 unique altered phosphopeptides, mapping to 29 and 45 proteins whose levels were downregulated or upregulated at P<0.05 by PIK3R2-specific siRNA, respectively. We observed significant enrichment of proteins in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and autophagy regulation, suggesting a role of p85β in regulating these cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing and LC-MS/MS were performed at LKS Faculty of Medicine, Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong. A total of 1.5mg of protein lysate per sample was digested by the FASP method. For total proteome analysis, 50µg of the peptides was used, and remaining were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 beads. The peptides were desalted using C18 ziptips. Total and enriched peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ETD mass spectrometer interfaced with Dionex 3000RSLC nanoLC.

### Data Protocol
The high resolution, high mass accuracy MS data obtained were processed using Maxquant version 1.6.0.1. MS data analysed in triplicate for each condition were searched using inbuilt Andromeda algorithm against Uniprot human protein database (95,000 entries). Search parameters - Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavages allowed for digestion, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Phosphorylated site quantification was calculated using the label free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Data visualization and bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus software version 1.6.2.1. For statistical analysis, replicates were grouped, ANOVA test was carried out with permutation-based 1% FDR.  Hierarchical clustering of phosphosites was performed on logarithmized intensities.

### Publication Abstract
PIK3R2 encodes the p85&#x3b2; regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and is frequently amplified in cancers. The signaling mechanism and therapeutic implication of p85&#x3b2; are poorly understood. Here we report that p85&#x3b2; upregulates the protein level of the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL to induce oncogenic signaling in ovarian cancer. p85&#x3b2; activates p110 activity and AKT-independent PDK1/SGK3 signaling to promote tumorigenic phenotypes, which are all abolished upon inhibition of AXL. At the molecular level, p85&#x3b2; alters the phosphorylation of TRIM2 (an E3 ligase) and optineurin (an autophagy receptor), which mediate the selective regulation of AXL by p85&#x3b2;, thereby disrupting the autophagic degradation of the AXL protein. Therapeutically, p85&#x3b2; expression renders ovarian cancer cells vulnerable to inhibitors of AXL, p110, or PDK1. Conversely, p85&#x3b2;-depleted cells are less sensitive to these inhibitors. Together, our findings provide a rationale for pharmacological blockade of the AXL signaling axis in PIK3R2-amplified ovarian cancer.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Pi3k, P85

### Affiliations
University of Hong Kong
Assistant Professor, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, HK SAR

### Submitter
Lydia Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Dr CHEUNG, Lydia Wai Ting
Assistant Professor, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, HK SAR


