### Accession
PXD016053

### Title
The M-phase regulatory phosphatase PP2A-B55δ opposes protein kinase A on Arpp19 to initiate meiotic division

### Description
Oocytes are held in meiotic prophase for prolonged periods until hormonal signals trigger meiotic divisions. Key players of M-phase entry are the opposing Cdk1 kinase and PP2AB55δ phosphatase. In Xenopus, the protein Arpp19, phosphorylated at serine 67 by Greatwall, plays an essential role in inhibiting PP2A-B55δ, promoting Cdk1 activation. Furthermore Arpp19 has an earlier role in maintaining the prophase arrest through a second serine (S109) phosphorylated by PKA. Prophase release, induced by progesterone, relies on Arpp19 dephosphorylation at S109, owing to an unknown phosphatase. Here we identified this phosphatase as PP2A-B55δ. In prophase, PKA and PP2A-B55δ are simultaneously active, suggesting the presence of other important targets for both enzymes. The drop in PKA activity induced by progesterone decreases S109 phosphorylation, unlocking the prophase block. Hence, PP2A-B55δ acts critically on Arpp19 on two distinct sites, opposing PKA and Greatwall to orchestrate the prophase release and M-phase entry.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were incubated overnight at 37°C with 20 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5µg/ml, Promega) at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) and analyzed in technical triplicates or individually by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2cm, 75µm i.d., 3µm, 100Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50cm, 75µm i.d., 2µm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 98min, followed by a column regeneration for 23min, giving a total run time of 2 hrs. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3x106 . Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 2x105 , with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files were processed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1) coupled to Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for peptide identification with the Refseq non-redundant database of Xenopus laevis from NCBI (July 2016).On proteome Discoverer the following Post-Traductional Modifications were searched: Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-term, phosphorylation of serine/threonine and phosphorylation of tyrosine. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Greatwall, Pka, Cdk1, Pp2a, Meiotic division, Xenopus oocyte, Arpp19

### Affiliations
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University), 75013 Paris, France
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Sigrid Baumgarten
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University), 75013 Paris, France


