### Accession
PXD031450

### Title
Distinct functions of dimeric and monomeric Alix in regulating F-actin  assembly and loading of exosomal cargo

### Description
Alix is a ubiquitously expressed scaffold protein that participates in numerous cellular  processes, relating to the remodeling/repair of membranes and the actin cytoskeleton. Alix exists in monomeric and dimeric/multimeric configurations, but how dimer formation  occurs and what role the dimer has in Alix-mediated processes are questions still largely  elusive. Here, we reveal a mechanism for Alix homodimerization mediated by disulfide  bonds under physiological conditions and demonstrate that Alix dimer is enriched in  exosome and F-actin cytoskeleton subcellular fractions. Proteomic analysis of exosomes  derived from Alix−/− primary cells underlined Alix indispensable role in loading syntenin  into exosomes, thereby regulating the cellular levels of this protein. Using a set of Alix  deletion mutants, we could define the function of the Bro1 domain, which is solely required  for Alix’ exosomal localization, and that of the V domain, which is needed for recruiting syntenin into exosomes. We reveal an essential role for Cys814 within the disordered proline  rich domain (PRD) for Alix dimerization. By mutating this residue, Alix remains exclusively monomeric and, in this configuration, is more effective in loading syntenin into  exosomes. In contrast, loss of dimerization affects Alix ability to associate with F-actin,  thereby compromising Alix-mediated cytoskeleton remodeling. We propose that by  3 shifting the ratio between its dimeric and monomeric forms, Alix selectively executes two  of its main functions, exosomal cargo loading or cytoskeleton remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed PBS twice and then cultured for another day in medium containing the  serum which had been centrifuged at 100,000 X g for overnight at 4ºC to deplete  contaminating vesicles. Tissue culture supernatants were collected and centrifuged for 10  min at 300 X g, 10 min at 1,200 X g and for 30 min at 10,000 X g to remove cellular debris.  Vesicles were spun down by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 X g for 2 h at 4ºC. Supernatants  were discarded and vesicles were washed in PBS. Crude exosomes were collected by  centrifugation at 100,000 X g for 2 h at 4ºC and then resuspended in PBS. Quantification  of the resulting crude exosomes was done using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method. For proteomics study, 6 µg fibroblast exosomes, 10 µg proliferating myoblast exosomes or  D3 myocyte exosomes were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant with default settings unless stated otherwise in the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Alix is a ubiquitously expressed scaffold protein that participates in numerous cellular processes related to the remodeling/repair of membranes and the actin cytoskeleton. Alix exists in monomeric and dimeric/multimeric configurations, but how dimer formation occurs and what role the dimer has in Alix-mediated processes are still largely elusive. Here, we reveal a mechanism for Alix homodimerization mediated by disulfide bonds under physiological conditions and demonstrate that the Alix dimer is enriched in exosomes and F-actin cytoskeleton subcellular fractions. Proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from Alix<sup>-/-</sup> primary cells underlined the indispensable role of Alix in loading syntenin into exosomes, thereby regulating the cellular levels of this protein. Using a set of deletion mutants, we define the function of Alix Bro1 domain, which is solely required for its exosomal localization, and that of the V domain, which is needed for recruiting syntenin into exosomes. We reveal an essential role for Cys<sup>814</sup> within the disordered proline-rich domain for Alix dimerization. By mutating this residue, we show that Alix remains exclusively monomeric and, in this configuration, is effective in loading syntenin into exosomes. In contrast, loss of dimerization affects the ability of Alix to associate with F-actin, thereby compromising Alix-mediated cytoskeleton remodeling. We propose that dimeric and monomeric forms of Alix selectively execute two of the protein's main functions: exosomal cargo loading and cytoskeleton remodeling.

### Keywords
Syntenin, Exosome, Alix, Actin, Disulfide, Homeostasis, Cytoskeleton, Dimerization

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam - NL
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam - NL


