### Accession
PXD011644

### Title
Nematostella vectensis argonautes

### Description
We performed Immuno precipitation using antibodies against  Nematostella vectensis Argonauts proteins (i.e AGO1 and AGO2). Samples of the IP were analyzed by LC-MSMS in order to idetify the argonautes and prove antibodies specifity.

### Sample Protocol
9 days old Nematostella primary polyps were lysed using extraction buffer with protease inhibitors. Then, immunopreciptation process was performed using antiNvAGO antibodies coupled to protein A magnetic beads. Proteins from the beads were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Tryptic digestion (0.3 µg trypsin/ sample) was performed overnight at 37oC, followed by addition of  0.05% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (from Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA) and further incubation for 1 hr at 37oC. The tryptic  peptides were desalted on C18 Stage tips (Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.). A total of 1.25 µg of peptides from each sample were injected into the mass spectrometer.  MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (Ultimate 3000 Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.5.3.12 (Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008)). Peak lists were searched against the Nematostella vectensis gene models translated into protein FASTA sequence database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Protein identification required at least 2 unique or razor peptides per protein group. The dependent-peptide and match-between-runs options were used. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox, J. et al. MaxLFQ allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–2526 (2014)).   LFQ in MaxQuant uses only common peptides for pair-wise ratio determination for each protein and calculates a median ratio to protect against outliers. It then determines all pair-wise protein ratios and requires a minimal number of two peptide ratios for a given protein ratio to be considered valid.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nematostella vectensis, Nvago1, Mirna, Nvago2, Cnidarians

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Institute of life science, Faculty of Science, department of Ecology, Evolution and Behaviour
Hebrew University

### Submitter
Reuven Aharoni

### Lab Head
Dr Yehu Moran
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Institute of life science, Faculty of Science, department of Ecology, Evolution and Behaviour


