### Accession
PXD014468

### Title
Estrogen Receptor beta (ERβ) interactome in triple negative breast cancer cells nuclei

### Description
Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common type of cancer in women and one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. BC classification is based on the detection of three main histological markers: estrogen receptor alpha (ERα), progesterone receptor (PR) and the amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/neu). A specific BC subtype, named triple-negative BC (TNBC), lacks the aforementioned markers but a fraction of them express the estrogen receptor beta (ERβ). To investigate the functional role of ERβ in these tumors, interaction proteomics coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to deeply characterize the nuclear interactors partners in MDA-MD-468 and HCC1806 TNBC cells.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts obtained, from MDA-MB-468 and HCC1806 expressing or not ERβ were used for interaction proteomics experiments. Three biological replicates of each samples and control were analyzed. On-beads trypsin digestion was carried out by adding 0.5 ug trypsin (Promega, USA) for each sample and incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % TFA / 50 % ACN, dried, and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % TFA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, ThermoElectron, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides, an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length was employed. The flow rate was 300 ml/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % FA and solvent B 100 % ACN/ 0.1 % FA. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the C-trap. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.10) for protein identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant search was done against the UniProt Human database (October 2017). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Statistical analysis was performed using a T-test that was applied to MaxQuant protein “Intensities” values to obtain statistically significant difference (p-value≤0.05) between ERβ+ and ERβ- samples. Proteins identified and supported by statistical analyses and having a fold change ration greater than 1.5 when compared to the controls were considered as ERβ interactors.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by poor response to therapy and low overall patient survival. Recently, Estrogen Receptor beta (ER&#x3b2;) has been found to be expressed in a fraction of TNBCs where, because of its oncosuppressive actions on the genome, it represents a potential therapeutic target, provided a better understanding of its actions in these tumors becomes available. To this end, the cell lines Hs 578T, MDA-MB-468 and HCC1806, representing the claudin-low, basal-like 1 and 2 TNBC molecular subtypes respectively, were engineered to express ER&#x3b2; under the control of a Tetracycline-inducible promoter and used to investigate the effects of this transcription factor on gene activity. The antiproliferative effects of ER&#x3b2; in these cells were confirmed by multiple functional approaches, including transcriptome profiling and global mapping of receptor binding sites in the genome, that revealed direct negative regulation by ER&#x3b2; of genes, encoding for key components of cellular pathways associated to TNBC aggressiveness representing novel therapeutic targets such as angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis and cholesterol biosynthesis. Supporting these results, interaction proteomics by immunoprecipitation coupled to nano LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry revealed ER&#x3b2; association with several potential nuclear protein partners, including key components of regulatory complexes known to control chromatin remodeling, transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation and RNA splicing. Among these, ER&#x3b2; association with the Polycomb Repressor Complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1/2), known for their central role in gene regulation in cancer cells, was confirmed in all three TNBC subtypes investigated, suggesting its occurrence independently from the cellular context. These results demonstrate a significant impact of ER&#x3b2; in TNBC genome activity mediated by its cooperation with regulatory multiprotein chromatin remodeling complexes, providing novel ground to devise new strategies for the treatment of these diseases based on ligands affecting the activity of this nuclear receptor or some of its protein partners.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Estrogen receptor beta (erβ), Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


