### Accession
PXD013292

### Title
c-di-GMP affect the protein acetylation through CobB dependent deacetylation

### Description
To determine whether c-di-GMP could affect CobB-dependent deacetylation in a global setting, we applied Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) coupled with MS to quantitatively compare the levels of protein acetylation in WT, ΔcobB and ΔdgcZ cells.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli BW25113 (△lysA) ,and BW25113 with DgcZ cobB defectoverexpression (△lysA △cobBdgcZ+) and BW25113 with dgcZ defect (△lysA △dgcZ) were subjected for SILAC MS assay. The two three strains were activated in LB medium, and then were cultured in 2% glucose M9 minimal media supplemented with heavy isotopes of lysine (13C615N2-lysine, 13C615N4-arginine), medium isotopes of (4,4,5,5-D4 lysine, 13C614N4-arginine), or light isotopes of lysine (12C614N2-lysine, 12C614N4-arginine) (Silantes, Munich, Germany) for △lysA △cobB and, △lysA and △lysA △dgcZ dgcZ+, respectively. Strains were induced treated by 0.1 mM IPTG3 μg/mL kanamycin during exponential growth (OD600nm = ~0.45) and the cells were harvested after inducing treatment for 4 h (OD600nm = ~0.31.0). These cells (~30 OD) were added with 1 mL lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 2 mM sodium butyrate, 5 mM nicotinamide, 1x protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), pH 8.0) and lysed for 2 min at 4°C by an Ultrasonic Cell Disruptor (Cheng-cheng Weiye Science and Technology, Beijing, China). Protein concentration was determined by BCA kit (Pierce, MA, USA). The labeling efficiency of E.coli cultured in “heavy” “medium” medium was checked before sequential proteomic experiments.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) against Escherichia coli (strain K12) database from Uniprot (proteome ID: UP000000625, 4309 sequences, last modified on May 13th, 2017) with a reversed decoy database. SILAC was selected as “tribletsdoublets” and “Heavy labels and medium labels” panel was selected as heavy lysine (Lys86) and medium lysine (Lys4). Trypsin/P was chosen as the digestion enzyme and two maximum missing cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as the fixed modification and variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and acetylation (K). False discovery rates (FDR) at protein, peptide and modification level were all set as 1%. For quantitative analysis, H/L normalized was normalized from ratio H/L and make the median of the total ratio population to shift to 1 and the normalized H/L ratio of each acetylated peptide exported by MaxQuant software was corrected at the protein level to eliminate the protein abundance difference.

### Publication Abstract
As a ubiquitous bacterial secondary messenger, c-di-GMP plays key regulatory roles in processes such as bacterial motility and transcription regulation. CobB is the Sir2 family protein deacetylase that controls energy metabolism, chemotaxis, and DNA supercoiling in many bacteria. Using an Escherichia coli proteome microarray, we found that c-di-GMP strongly binds to CobB. Further, protein deacetylation assays showed that c-di-GMP inhibits the activity of CobB and thereby modulates the biogenesis of acetyl-CoA. Interestingly, we also found that one of the key enzymes directly involved in c-di-GMP production, DgcZ, is a substrate of CobB. Deacetylation of DgcZ by CobB enhances its activity and thus the production of c-di-GMP. Our work establishes a novel negative feedback loop linking c-di-GMP biogenesis and CobB-mediated protein deacetylation.

### Keywords
C-di-gmp cobb

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Zhaowei Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shengce Tao
Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


