### Accession
PXD010216

### Title
Tissue-based mapping of the fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) transcriptome and proteome

### Description
Omics approaches are broadly used to explore endocrine and toxicity-related pathways and functions. Nevertheless, there is still a significant gap in knowledge in terms of understanding the endocrine system and its numerous connections and intricate feedback loops, especially in non-model organisms. The fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas) is a widely used small fish model for aquatic toxicology and regulatory testing, particularly in North America. A draft genome has been published but the amount of available genomic or transcriptomic information is still far behind that of other more broadly studied species, such as the zebrafish. Here, we surveyed the tissue-specific proteome and transcriptome profiles in adult male fathead minnow. To do so, we generated a draft transcriptome using short and long sequencing reads. We also performed RNA sequencing and proteomics analysis on the telencephalon, hypothalamus, liver, and gut of male fish. The main purpose of this analysis was to generate tissue-specific omics data in order to support future aquatic ecotoxicogenomic and endocrine-related studies as well as to improve our understanding of the fathead minnow as an ecological model.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were mechanically disrupted in 300 μL RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% nonylphenoxylpolyethoxylethanol-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS (Thermo) containing a protease inhibitor tablet (Proprietary formulation containing AEBSF HCl, Aprotinin, Bestatin, E-64, Leupeptin, Pepstatin, EDTA) (Pierce) and subsequently incubated on ice for 30 minutes with intermittent vortexing. Samples were spun at 10,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C and supernatants were removed and protein content quantified by Bradford Protein Assay. To 100 μL of supernatant, 400 μL of Methanol was added followed by vigorous vortexing. Chloroform was added at 1:4 v/v Methanol and samples were vigorously vortexed. Thereafter, 300 μL ddH2O was added to the samples and vigorously vortexed. Samples were then spun at 14,000 x g for two minutes (temperature? ), the top aqueous layer was removed, and 400 μL Methanol was added followed by vigorous vortexing. Samples were spun at 14,000 x g for three minutes and Methanol was removed. Samples were dried and resuspended in 100 μL RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor tablets. A total of 100 µg of total protein from each sample was acetone precipitated. The samples were dissolved in 1% SDS, 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5; then reduced, alkylated, trypsin (Promega, USA) digested and labeled according to manufacturer’s instructions (ABsciex Inc. USA). Extra labels were quenched by adding 100 uL of ultrapure water and left at room temperature for 30 min. After quenching, samples were mixed together and dried down in speedvac. The peptide mixtures were cleaned up with C18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s instructions (ABSCIEX Inc.USA). Sample labeling was as follows; gut tissue biological replicates (113 and 118), hypothalamus biological replicates (114 and 117), telencephalon biological replicates (115 and 119), and liver biological replicates (116 and 121).  The samples were then dissolved in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent (25%v/vACN,10mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8) and injected to a Agilent HPLC 1100 system using a polysulfoethyl A column (2.1×100mm, 5µm, 300 Å, PolyLC, Columbia, USA). The peptides were eluted at a ﬂow rate of 200µL/min with a linear gradient from 0 to 20% solvent B (25%v/v ACN, 500 mM ammonium formate) over 80min, followed by a ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5min and holding for 10min. The peptides were detected at 214nm absorbance and a total of 10 fractions were collected.   2.7. Mass Spectrometry. Each SCX fraction was lyophilized in a speedvac and the resuspended in loading buffer and (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, 0.01% TFA) and cleaned up with C18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s instructions (Ziptip Millipore). After C18 SPE samples were resuspendend in loading buffer 10 uL were injected onto an Acclaim Pepmap 100 precolumn (20 mm × 75 μm; 3 μm-C18) and then separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) at a ﬂow rate at 350 nL/min on a 1200 nano Easy LC (Thermo Fisher). Solvent A composition was 0.1% formic acid (v/ v); whereas solvent B was 99.9% ACN v/v, 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Peptide separation was performed with a linear gradient from 2 to 24 % of solvent B for 95 min, followed by an increasing to 98% of solvent B in 15 min and hold for 10 min. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed onto an Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) for MS/MS analysis. The instrument was run on a data dependent mode with a full MS scan 400−2000 m/z and resolution of 70000. MS/MS experiments were performed for the top 10 most intense ions using an HCD NCE = 28%, isolation width = 3 Th, ﬁrst mass = 105 Th, 5% underﬁll ratio, peptide match set to “preferred”, and an AGC target of 1e6). Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was used to prevent repeated analysis of the same peptides.

### Data Protocol
A custom database was constructed for searching for protein identification.  This database was a composite of an in-house FHM protein database and the zebrafish (Danio rerio), database on uniprot.  The in-house FHM database was created by selecting the longest open reading frame from the 6-frame translation of each sequence in our transcriptome database consisting of the PacBio reads generated in this study and reads from previous sequencing data from our labs in Blast2Go with the ORF Predictor function.  The software chose the longest open reading frame for each sequence, which was subsequently annotated against zebrafish NR database using blastx and blastp and resulted in 56,099 annotated sequences.  Once combined with the Uniprot zebrafish protein database our composite database consisted of 117,445 entities.    The  identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of proteins were performed using ProteinPilot™ Software 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) utilizing the Paragon and Progroup algorithims. The previously described was appended before use to include common lab contaminants and then the entire search field was doubled by the inclusion of decoys for calculating the FDR by the taget-decoy method.. The search parameters were as follows: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled),  MMTS as a fixed modification on cysteine, trypsin digestion, orbi MS (1-3ppm), Orbi MS/MS, no special factors, and ID focus of biological modifications and amino acid substitutions. The Unused ProtScore (Conf) was set at >: 0.05 (10.0%) and p-value < 0.05 to ensure that quantitation was based on at least three unique peptides. Additionally, because iTRAQ is a relative quantitation method, all data are reported as ratios of expression against another tissue, we chose hypothalamus.  Our samples were expected to have a high percentage of differentially expressed proteins because they originate from different tissues no bias or background correction were applied.  For a protein to be used for quantitative analysis and downstream pathway analysis it had to meet a series of conditions; identified at a 1% global FDR and ratio calculation p-values of <0.05.  Quantified proteins with a p-value greater than 0.05 were not supported with enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis that differences observed in iTRAQ label ratios were random.   For each replicate, the ratio to both normalizing hypothalamus replicates was averaged in log space.  Then if both replicates  of that tissue had a quantitation p-value <0.05 they were also averaged in log space to calculate the overall tissue ratio.  For example, the log ratio of tissue A replicate 1 to hypothalamus replicate 1 and hypothalamus replicate 2 were averaged to determine the ratio of tissue A replicate 1 to tissue B.  For the overall tissue A ratio, the average log ratio of replicate 1 and replicate 2 were averaged and then transformed out of log space as long as both replicates had met the p-value threshold described above.

### Publication Abstract
Omics approaches are broadly used to explore endocrine and toxicity-related pathways and functions. Nevertheless, there is still a significant gap in knowledge in terms of understanding the endocrine system and its numerous connections and intricate feedback loops, especially in non-model organisms. The fathead minnow (<i>Pimephales promelas</i>) is a widely used small fish model for aquatic toxicology and regulatory testing, particularly in North America. A draft genome has been published, but the amount of available genomic or transcriptomic information is still far behind that of other more broadly studied species, such as the zebrafish. Here, we used a proteogenomics approach to survey the tissue-specific proteome and transcriptome profiles in adult male fathead minnow. To do so, we generated a draft transcriptome using short and long sequencing reads from liver, testis, brain, heart, gill, head kidney, trunk kidney, and gastrointestinal tract. We identified 30,378 different putative transcripts overall, with the assembled contigs ranging in size from 264 to over 9,720 nts. Over 17,000 transcripts were &gt;1,000 nts, suggesting a robust transcriptome that can be used to interpret RNA sequencing data in the future. We also performed RNA sequencing and proteomics analysis on four tissues, including the telencephalon, hypothalamus, liver, and gastrointestinal tract of male fish. Transcripts ranged from 0 to 600,000 copies per gene and a large portion were expressed in a tissue-specific manner. Specifically, the telencephalon and hypothalamus shared the most expressed genes, while the gastrointestinal tract and the liver were quite distinct. Using protein profiling techniques, we identified a total of 4,045 proteins in the four tissues investigated, and their tissue-specific expression pattern correlated with the transcripts at the pathway level. Similarly to the findings with the transcriptomic data, the hypothalamus and telencephalon had the highest degree of similarity in the proteins detected. The main purpose of this analysis was to generate tissue-specific omics data in order to support future aquatic ecotoxicogenomic and endocrine-related studies as well as to improve our understanding of the fathead minnow as an ecological model.

### Keywords
Endocrine system, Transcriptome, Proteome, Tissue-specific, Fathead minnows

### Affiliations
Chair, Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and Health Professions, University of Florida
University of Florida

### Submitter
Ley Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Sabo-Attwood
Chair, Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and Health Professions, University of Florida


