### Accession
PXD031524

### Title
Flexible B12 ecophysiology of Phaeocystis antarctica due to a B12-independent methionine synthase fusion protein with widespread homologues

### Description
Coastal Antarctic marine ecosystems play an important role in carbon cycling due to their highly productive seasonal phytoplankton blooms. Southern Ocean microbes are primarily limited by light and iron (Fe) and can be co-limited by cobalamin (vitamin B12 ). Micronutrient limitation is a key driver of ecosystem dynamics and influences the composition of blooms, which are often dominated by either diatoms or the haptophyte Phaeocystis antarctica, each with varied impacts on carbon cycling. However, the vitamin requirements and ecophysiology of the keystone species P. antarctica remains poorly characterized. Using cultures, physiological analysis, and comparative ’omics we examined the response of P. antarctica to a matrix of Fe-B12 conditions. We show that P. antarctica is not auxotrophic for B12 , as previously suggested, and report new mechanistic insights of its B12 response in cultures of predominantly solitary and colonial cells. Proteomics coupled with proteogenomics detected a B12 -independent methionine synthase fusion protein (MetE-fusion) that is expressed under vitamin limitation and is interreplaced with the B12 -dependent isoform (MetH) in replete conditions. Database searches returned homologs of the MetE-fusion protein in multiple Phaeocystis species and in a wide range of marine microbes, including other photosynthetic eukaryotes with polymorphic life cycles and also bacterioplankton. Furthermore, MetE-fusion homologs were found to be expressed in metaproteomic and metatranscriptomic field samples in polar and more geographically widespread regions. As climate change impacts micronutrient availability in the coastal Southern Ocean, our finding that P. antarctica has a flexible B12 metabolism has implications for its relative fitness compared to B12 -auxotrophic diatoms.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using a Michrom Advance HPLC system with reverse phase chromatography coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a Michrom Advance CaptiveSpray source. Each sample was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 250 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 140 min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer monitored MS1 scans from 380 m/z to 1580 m/z at 70K resolution. MS2 scans were performed on the top 10 ions with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a 15 second exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were searched against the P. antarctica CCMP 1871 translated transcriptome using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo). The protein identification criteria included a protein threshold False Discovery Rate (protein FDR) of 1.0%, 1 minimum peptide, and 0.1% peptide FDR. The MS/MS proteomics data were processes using Scaffold 4 (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Phaeocystis antarctica, Vitamin b12, Methionine synthase fusion protein

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA


