### Accession
PXD042532

### Title
TMT-labelled quantitative proteomics of 9 grape skin tissue samples

### Description
Flowers at the full bloom stage were dipped into water (blank), 50 mg∙L-1 GA3 (gibberellic acid) or 3 mg∙L-1 CPPU. This was followed by a second application two weeks later onto young berries. Using integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis, differentially expressed transcripts and proteins associated with growth regulator treatment were identified including those for flavonoid biosynthesis that contribute to the changes in sensory astringency levels.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Sample was first grinded with liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation.). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added. Then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. trypsin digestion: For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. TMT-labelling: Tryptic peptides were firstly dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB. Each channel of peptide was labeled with their respective TMT reagent (based on manufacturer’s protocol, ThermoFisher Scientific), and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Five microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine. The pooled samples were then desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS analysis and database search: The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics methods: GO Annotation, The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. KEGG Pathway Annotation, KEGG connects known information on molecular interaction networks, such as pathways and complexes (the “Pathway” database), information about genes and proteins generated by genome projects (including the gene database) and information about biochemical compounds and reactions. Protein-protein Interaction Network, All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 11.0 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grape skin, Tmt

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
Nnajing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jane Jing

### Lab Head
Dr Jiao Feng
Nnajing Agricultural University


