### Accession
PXD020493

### Title
Combined Tissue-Fluid Proteomics to Unravel Phenotypic Variability in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

### Description
The lack of biomarkers for early diagnosis, clinical stratification and to monitor treatment response has hampered the development of new therapies for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a clinically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder with a variable site of disease initiation and rate of progression. To identify new biomarkers and therapeutic targets, two separate proteomic workflows were applied to study the immunological response and the plasma/brain proteome in phenotypic variants of ALS. Conventional multiplex (TMT) proteomic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was performed alongside a recently introduced method to profile neuronal-derived proteins in plasma using brain tissue-enhanced isobaric tagging (TMTcalibrator). The combined proteomic analysis allowed the detection of regulated proteins linked to ALS pathogenesis (RNA-binding protein FUS, superoxide dismutase Cu-Zn and neurofilaments light polypeptide) alongside newly identified candidate biomarkers (myosin-9, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and plectin). In line with the proteomic results, orthogonal immunodetection showed changes in neurofilaments and ApoE in bulbar versus limb onset fast progressing ALS. Functional analysis of significantly regulated features showed enrichment of pathways involved in regulation of the immune response, Rho family GTPases, semaphorin and integrin signalling. Our cross-phenotype investigation of PBMCs and plasma/brain proteins provides a more sensitive biomarker exploratory platform than conventional case-control studies in a single matrix. The reported regulated proteins may represent novel biomarker candidates and potentially druggable targets.

### Sample Protocol
PBMC processing Whole blood was collected via venepuncture into 6 mL EDTA tubes (BD Vacutainer). Samples were processed within 1 h from blood collection. PBMCs were isolated from blood by density-gradient centrifugation at 1,500 g for 40 min (20 °C) using Lymphoprep™ (Alere) and washed in Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco). PBMC pellets were stored at −80 °C in 10% DMSO and foetal bovine serum. After 24 hours, PBMCs were transferred to liquid nitrogen.  PBMC lysis Prior to proteomic analysis, PBMCs were thawed by placing cryovials in a 37 °C water bath for 10 min and washed. After gentle centrifugation at 330 g for 10 min, surnatants were removed and PBMC pellets were suspended in 8 M Urea, 75 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 50 mM Tris buffer pH 8.2 and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), vortexed for 5 min and sonicated for 10 sec three times on ice. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C. Protein concentration was assessed by Bradford assay.  Digestion, TMT labeling and clean-up 20 µg of protein extract was diluted to 1 µg/µL by adding 100 mM of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). Proteins were reduced for 60 min at 55 °C by the addition of 5.3 µL of 20 mM aqueous tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated for 60 min at room temperature by the addition of 5.5 µL of 150 mM iodoacetamide in ACN. 10 µL of 0.4 µg/µL trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM TEAB was added and the sample was incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Digested proteins were labelled by adding 40.3 µL of a 60 mM TMT10 reagents (Thermo Scientific) in acetonitrile (ACN) for 1 h at room temperature. 8 µL of an aqueous hydroxylamine solution (5%, w/v) was added and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. All 10 TMT-labeled samples were mixed together to generate four TMT 10plexes. Each TMT 10plex was desalted using vacuum pump and Oasis HLB 1 cc 30 mg extraction cartridges (Waters) according to manufacturer’s instruction then lyophilized. Samples were solubilised in 5% ACN and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then desalted. Following lyophilisation, all vials were stored at −80 °C.  Plasma and brain processing Plasma samples from the discovery study and re-test were extracted from whole blood collected into EDTA tubes (BD Vacutainer). All samples were processed within 1 h from blood collection. Following centrifugation at 3500 rpm 10 min at 20 °C plasma samples were aliquoted and frozen at −80 °C (0.5 mL/aliquot in polypropylene tubes with screw caps).  The plasma samples processed for the discovery TMTcalibrator study were depleted of albumin and IgG (ProteoPrep Immunoaffinity Albumin and IgG Depletion Kit Sigma). The same plasma volume equivalent (50 µL) was used for the depletion of all samples. Depleted fractions were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C. Protein concentration was determined after thawing using the Bradford assay.  The brain samples (n = 2) were obtained from The Netherlands Brain Bank, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam (open access: www.brainbank.nl). Donors provided a written informed consent for a brain autopsy and the use of the material. For one of the subjects, TDP-43 positive inclusions were reported. Brain tissues were homogenized in 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche).  Digestion, TMT 10 labeling and clean-up 100 µg total proteins per sample (depleted plasma and brain lysates) were processed as previously described17. 10 µg of six depleted plasma were mixed with brain lysates (105 µg) to generate a TMT 10plex (or Set). In total, five plexes were prepared.  SCX fractionation The five TMT 10plexes were separated into 10 fractions by strong cation exchange (SCX), (polySULFOETHYL-A column (PolyLC)) on HPLC system (Waters Alliance 2695).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer (PD) v1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Each raw file was searched as individual file on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using a human FASTA file data base (UniProtKB database; March 2015). Results from SEQUEST searches were exported with 1% FDR & ≥1 rank one peptides per protein settings.

### Publication Abstract
The lack of biomarkers for early diagnosis, clinical stratification and to monitor treatment response has hampered the development of new therapies for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a clinically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder with a variable site of disease initiation and rate of progression. To identify new biomarkers and therapeutic targets, two separate proteomic workflows were applied to study the immunological response and the plasma/brain proteome in phenotypic variants of ALS. Conventional multiplex (TMT) proteomic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was performed alongside a recently introduced method to profile neuronal-derived proteins in plasma using brain tissue-enhanced isobaric tagging (TMTcalibrator). The combined proteomic analysis allowed the detection of regulated proteins linked to ALS pathogenesis (RNA-binding protein FUS, superoxide dismutase Cu-Zn and neurofilaments light&#xa0;polypeptide) alongside newly identified candidate biomarkers (myosin-9, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and plectin). In line with the proteomic results, orthogonal immunodetection showed changes in neurofilaments and ApoE in bulbar versus limb onset fast progressing ALS. Functional analysis of significantly regulated features showed enrichment of pathways involved in regulation of the immune response, Rho family GTPases, semaphorin and integrin signalling. Our cross-phenotype investigation of PBMCs and plasma/brain proteins provides a more sensitive biomarker exploratory platform than conventional case-control studies in a single matrix. The reported regulated proteins may represent novel biomarker candidates and potentially druggable targets.

### Keywords
Als, Tmt, Pbmc, Tmtcalibrator

### Affiliations
Proteome Sciences
Proteome Sciences Plc., London

### Submitter
Michael Bremang

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ian Pike
Proteome Sciences Plc., London


