### Accession
PXD031049

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of three exercise modalities in human skeletal muscle

### Description
To characterize phosphorylation-based signaling events across different exercise modalities we subjected eight healthy young men (age, 26.3±1.3 years; BMI, 23.5±0.7 kg/m2; maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max), 42.6±1.5 ml/kg/min) that did not perform regular physical activity apart from local bicycling to an acute bout of endurance (90 min ~60% of VO2 max), sprint (3 x 30-s all-out cycling), or resistance exercise (6 sets of 10 RM knee extensions) in the fasting state. All participants completed the three types of exercise in a randomized crossover design with 14 days washout between each exercise bout.

### Sample Protocol
Human and mouse skeletal muscle were lysed essentially as described previously with minor modifications [PMID: 26280412: 30814737]. Briefly, tissue was lysed in 6 M guanidine HCL (Sigma; #G4505), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water and precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of acetone at -20°C. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was resuspended in Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Protein was quantified with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific) and one milligram of protein was normalised to a final volume of 200 µl in Digestion Buffer, and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. For analysis of human skeletal muscles by isobaric tagging quantification, peptides were quantified with Qubit and 200 µg labelled with 800 µg of 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) in 50% acetonitrile with a final volume of 80 µl at room temperature for 1.5 h. The reaction was deacylated with 0.3% (w/v) of hydroxylamine for 10 min at room temperature and quenched to a final volume of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). At this point, the ten TMT labelled samples per experiment were pooled to give a final amount of 2 mg of peptide per experiment. A total of eight TMT 10-plex experiments were performed where each experiment consisted of nine biopsies from a single subject and the tenth channels was and common internal reference of pooled peptides from all subjects. The sample identity and labelling channels have been uploaded as a table with the .raw proteomic data to the PRIDE ProteomeXchange (see Data Availability section). For analysis of mouse skeletal muscle by label-free quantification, the digestion was simply quenched to a final volume of 1% TFA without TMT labelling to give a final amount of 1 mg of peptide per sample. Twenty micrograms of peptide was removed for total proteome analysis and phosphopeptides were enriched from the remaining digestions using a modified EasyPhos protocol [PMID: 30190555]. Briefly, samples were diluted to a final concentration of 50% isopropanol containing 5% TFA and 0.8 mM KH2PO4 and incubated with 6 mg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences; #5010-21315) per 0.5 mg of peptide for 8 min at 40°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. The beads were washed four times with 60% isopropanol containing 5% TFA and resuspended in 60% isopropanol containing 0.1% TFA. The bead slurry was transferred to in-house packed C8 microcolumns (3M Empore; #11913614) and phosphopeptides eluted with 40% acetonitrile containing 5% ammonium hydroxide. The enriched phosphopeptides and twenty microgram aliquot for total proteome analysis were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA in 90% isopropanol and purified by in-house packed SDB-RPS (Sigma; #66886-U) microcolumns. The purified peptides and phosphopeptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% and stored at -80°C prior to either direct injection by LC-MS/MS (label-free phosphoproteomics of mouse muscle) or offline fractionation using neutral phase C18BEH HPLC as previously described [PMID: 34767745].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 30%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 60min (fractionated phosphoprotemics) or 120 min (single-shot phosphoproteomics and fractionated total proteomics) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–1,550 m/z (120,000 resolution, 1 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with fixed cycle time of 3 s (for TMT-labelled peptides) or X s (for non-labelled peptides) via HCD fragmentation mode and detection in the orbitrap (50,000 resolution (for TMT-labelled peptides) or 15,000 resolution (for non-labelled peptides), 1 × 105 AGC, 150 ms maximum injection time (for TMT-labelled peptides) or 22 ms maximum injection time (for non-labelled peptides), and 0.7 m/z isolation width (TMT-labelled peptides) or 1.2 m/z isolation width (non-labelled peptides)). Only ions with charge state 2-7 triggered MS/MS with peptide monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 s at 10 ppm.   Data were searched against the UniProt human database (September 2019; UP000005640_9606 and UP000005640_9606_additional) or mouse database (June 2020; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% [PMID: 19029910]. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification, and for analysis of TMT-labelled peptides, TMT was added as fixed modification to peptide N-termini and Lysine. First search MS1 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by recalibration and main search MS1 tolerance set to 4.5 ppm, while MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise induces signaling networks to improve muscle function and confer health benefits. To identify divergent and common signaling networks during and after different exercise modalities, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis of human skeletal muscle from a cross-over intervention of endurance, sprint, and resistance exercise. This identified 5,486 phosphosites regulated during or after at least one type of exercise modality and only 420 core phosphosites common to all exercise. One of these core phosphosites was S67 on the uncharacterized protein C18ORF25, which we validated as an AMPK substrate. Mice lacking C18ORF25 have reduced skeletal muscle fiber size, exercise capacity, and muscle contractile function, and this was associated with reduced phosphorylation of contractile and Ca<sup>2+</sup> handling proteins. Expression of C18ORF25 S66/67D phospho-mimetic reversed the decreased muscle force production. This work defines the divergent and canonical exercise phosphoproteome across different modalities and identifies C18ORF25 as a regulator of exercise signaling and muscle function.

### Keywords
Exericse, Phosphoproteomics, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


