### Accession
PXD017759

### Title
HPLC-ESI-MS PROFILE OF SALIVARY PROTEINS IN MASTOCYTOSIS PATIENTS

### Description
Mastocytosis is a myeloproliferative neoplasm characterized by infiltration of clonally derived mast cells in different tissues. According to mast cells localization, it is possible to discriminate cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) from systemic mastocytosis (SM), the latter involving at least an extracutaneous organ, like bone marrow, liver, spleen and gastrointestinal tract. Some of the SM patient can develop also cutaneous lesions (SM+C). Disease classification is often tricky. Oral cavity is commonly involved in the symptomatology. With the aim to highlight possible qualitative/quantitative modifications of the salivary proteome associated to the different forms of the disease, we investigated the protein profiles of CM, SM,  and SM+C patients, and healthy controls, by integrated top-down platforms. a top-down proteomic platform, based on high performance liquid chromatography separation coupled to electrospray-ion trap mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-IT-MS) analysis of the acidic soluble proteome of human saliva,  which was standardized in our previous studies for detecting and quantifying of hundreds salivary peptides/proteins. By this approach, it is possible to obtain a profiling of the naturally occurring salivary proteome, including isoforms and post-translational modifications (PTMs), to compare an unlimited number of samples and to quantify proteins aby a label-free method.

### Sample Protocol
41 patients were enrolled from the Internal Medicine and Immunology outpatient clinic of the University of Cagliari. 48 sex/age matched healthy controls were enrolled as volunteers among the staff of the Department of Life and Environmental Science, University of Cagliari. The informed consent process agreed with the latest stipulations established by the Declaration of Helsinki. The local review boards authorized the study, and in view of its observational nature, a formal ethical. The patients have been classified in cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) and systemic mastocytosis (SM) on the basis of the clinical criteria established by WHO. All the samples of unstimulated whole saliva were collected during the morning (between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.). Donors, in fasting conditions, were invited to sit assuming a relaxed position and to swallow. Whole saliva was collected as it flowed into the anterior floor of the mouth with a soft plastic aspirator for less than 1 min, and transferred to a plastic tube, cooled on ice. Salivary samples were immediately diluted in a 1:1 v/v ratio with a 0.2% solution of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 50μM of leu-enkephalin as internal standard. Then, each sample was centrifuged at 20000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Finally, the supernatant was separated from the precipitate and immediately analyzed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS or stored at -80°C until the analysis for up to two weeks. The identification of the peptides and proteins investigated in this study were performed by HPLC-high resolution ESI-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite) operating in “Intact Protein Mode”, with the delta HCD vacuum pressure reduced to 0.1. The chromatographic separation was carried out using eluent A:  0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and eluent B:  0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN-water 80/20. The gradient was: 0-2 min 5% B, 2-10 min from 5% to 25% B (linear), 10-25 min from 25% to 34% B, 25-45 min from 34% to 70% B, 45-55 min from 70% to 90% B at flow rate of 50 µL/min. The injection volume was 19 μL. Full MS experiments were performed in positive ion mode with mass range from 400 to 2000 m/z at resolution of 120000 (at 400 m/z).  Capillary temperature was 275°C, source voltage 4.0 kV, S-Lens RF level 69%. In data-dependent acquisition mode the five most abundant ions were acquired and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID), with 35% normalized collision energy for 10 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, activation q of 0.25. HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed by both manual inspection of the MS/MS spectra recorded along the chromatogram and the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software elaboration based on the SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA) against the UniProtKB human data-bank (163 117 entries, release 2018_02). For peptide matching, high-confidence filter settings were applied: the peptide score threshold was 2.3, and the limits were Xcorr scores >1.2 for singly charged ions and 1.9 and 2.3 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed), and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance was 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. N-terminal pyroglutamination from E or Q residues, serine phosphorylation, N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation, Cys glutathionylation, and nitrosylation were selected as dynamic modifications. Because of the difficulties of the automated software to detect with high confidence every protein and their fragments, the structural information derives in part from manual inspections of the MS/MS spectra, obtained by either CID fragmentation, against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the Protein Prospector Web site (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). All of the MS/MS spectra have been manually verified by utilizing all the fragmentation spectra with an acceptable number of fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Mastocytosis is a myeloproliferative neoplasm causing abnormal clonal mast cell accumulation in different tissues, such as skin and bone marrow. A cutaneous subtype (CM) is distinguished from a systemic one (SM); SM patients can be grouped into SM with (SM+C) or without (SM-C) additional cutaneous lesions, and their classification is often challenging. This study was purposed to highlight variations in the salivary proteome of patients with different mastocytosis subtypes and compared to healthy controls. A top-down proteomics approach coupled to a label-free quantitation revealed salivary profiles in patients different from those of controls and a down-regulation of peptides/proteins involved in the mouth homeostasis and defense, such as statherin, histatins, and acidic proline-rich proteins (aPRPs), and in innate immunity and inflammation, such as the cathepsin inhibitors, suggesting a systemic condition associated with an exacerbated inflammatory state. The up-regulation of antileukoproteinase and S100A8 suggested a protective role against the disease status. The two SM forms were distinguished by the lower levels of truncated forms of aPRPs, statherin, P-B peptide, and cystatin D and the higher levels of thymosin &#x3b2;4 and &#x3b1;-defensins 1 and 4 in SM-C patients with respect to SM+C. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017759.

### Keywords
Mastocytosis, Salivary proteins, Hplc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences - Biomedical Section
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Simone Serrao

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences - Biomedical Section


