### Accession
PXD026263

### Title
Multiple regulatory intrinsically disordered motifs control FOXO4 transcription factor binding and function

### Description
Transcription factors harbour defined intrinsically disordered regulatory regions, which raises the question of how they mediate binding to structured co-regulators and how this regulates activity. Here, we present a detailed molecular regulatory mechanism of Forkhead box O4 (FOXO4) by the structured transcriptional co-regulator β-catenin. We find that the largely disordered FOXO4 C-terminal region, which contains its transactivation domain binds β-catenin through two defined interaction sites, and this is regulated by combined PKB/AKT- and CK1-mediated phosphorylation. Binding of β-catenin competes with the auto-inhibitory interaction of the FOXO4 disordered region with its DNA-binding forkhead domain, and thereby enhances FOXO4 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we show that binding of the β-catenin inhibitor protein ICAT is compatible with FOXO4 binding to β-catenin, suggesting that ICAT acts as a molecular switch between anti-proliferative FOXO and pro-proliferative Wnt/TCF/LEF signalling. Together these data illustrate how the interplay of intrinsically disordered regions, post-translational modifications and co-factor binding contribute to transcription factor function.    Highlights  • The interaction network between FOXO4 and β-catenin was deciphered • FOXO4 auto-inhibition interferes with DNA binding and is counter-acted by β-catenin  • FOXO4 exists in multiple conformations regulated by phosphorylation and co-factors • ICAT switches between FOXO4 and TCF/LEF transcription factors

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins were denatured with 8 M Urea in 1 M Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) reduced with TCEP (10 mM) at room temperature for 30 minutes after which the cysteines were alkylated with Chloroacetamide (40 mM end concentration) for 30 minutes. After four-fold dilution with ABC, proteins were on-bead digested overnight at room temperature with 150 ng of Trypsin/LysC (Promega), after which peptides were bound to an in house made c18 material stage tip washed with buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid (FA)) and stored at 4˚C until LC/MS-MS analysis. After elution from the stage tips with buffer B (80% acetonitrile 0.1% FA), acetonitrile was removed from the samples using a SpeedVac and the remaining peptide solution was diluted with buffer A before loading. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 3 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using a 140 minute gradient (7% to 80% acetonitrile 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a LTQ-Verlos-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed in data-dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 60,000, after which the top 10 peaks were selected for collision-dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the Iontrap with a target setting of 5000 ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.3.0.5 with deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. The Human protein database of Uniprot was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The LFQ algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes). Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides were filtered for reverse hits induced and standard contaminants. LFQ intensities, were log2 transformed after which identified proteins were filtered for at least three valid values in a group and missing values were replaced by imputation. After a standard t-test in Perseus, p-values were plotted against the difference of the mean log2 transformed LFQ values using the program R.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors harbor defined regulatory intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), which raises the question of how they mediate binding to structured co-regulators and modulate their activity. Here, we present a detailed molecular regulatory mechanism of Forkhead box O4 (FOXO4) by the structured transcriptional co-regulator &#x3b2;-catenin. We find that the disordered FOXO4 C-terminal region, which contains its transactivation domain, binds &#x3b2;-catenin through two defined interaction sites, and this is regulated by combined PKB/AKT- and CK1-mediated phosphorylation. Binding of &#x3b2;-catenin competes with the autoinhibitory interaction of the FOXO4 disordered region with its DNA-binding Forkhead domain, and thereby enhances FOXO4 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we show that binding of the &#x3b2;-catenin inhibitor protein ICAT is compatible with FOXO4 binding to &#x3b2;-catenin, suggesting that ICAT acts as a molecular switch between anti-proliferative FOXO and pro-proliferative Wnt/TCF/LEF signaling. These data illustrate how the interplay of IDRs, post-translational modifications, and co-factor binding contribute to transcription factor function.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, -catenin, Transcription factors, Phosphorylation, Wnt signalling, Intrinsically disordered proteins, Nmr spectroscopy, Foxo signalling, Structural biology, Icat

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



2Oncode Institute and Department of Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Boudewijn M.T. Burgering
2Oncode Institute and Department of Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


