### Accession
PXD042582

### Title
WT and FAP256-KO Cilia Proteome from Tetrahymena thermophila

### Description
Cilia are essential organelles that protrude from the cell body. Cilia are made of a microtubule-based structure called the axoneme. In most types of cilia, the ciliary tip is distinct from the rest of the cilium. By analysing Tetrahymena thermophila cells lacking a ciliary tip-enriched protein CEP104/FAP256 by mass spectrometry, we discovered candidates for the central pair cap complex and explained the potential functions of CEP104/FAP256. These data provide new insights into the function of the ciliary tip and the mechanisms of ciliary assembly and length regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 25-30 μg of membranated cilia was loaded on the SDS-PAGE gel from three biological replicates. The electrophoresis run was terminated before the proteins entered the resolving gel. The band containing all proteins was cut out and subjected to in-gel digestion. After that, the peptides were separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC and loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75 μm ID × 2 cm with 3 μm C18 beads) precolumn and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75 μm × 25 cm with 2 μm C18 beads) analytical column. and separated with a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a gradient of 2–35% solvent (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) over 2 hours. Peptides of charge 2+ or higher were recorded using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectro­meter operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1, 15,000 for MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data were analyzed using Mascot (v 2.5, Matrix Science). MS data were analysed by Scaffold_5.1.2 (Proteome Software Inc.). The data was searched against Tetrahymena thermophila protein dataset from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Cilia are essential organelles that protrude from the cell body. Cilia are made of a microtubule-based structure called the axoneme. In most types of cilia, the ciliary tip is distinct from the rest of the cilium. Here, we used cryo-electron tomography and subtomogram averaging to obtain the structure of the ciliary tip of the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila. We show that the microtubules at the tip are highly crosslinked with each other and stabilized by luminal proteins, plugs, and cap proteins at the plus ends. In the tip region, the central pair lacks typical projections and twists significantly. By analyzing cells lacking a ciliary tip-enriched protein CEP104/FAP256 by cryo-electron tomography and proteomics, we discovered candidates for the central pair cap complex and explained the potential functions of CEP104/FAP256. These data provide new insights into the function of the ciliary tip and the mechanisms of ciliary assembly and length regulation.

### Keywords
Cep104, Fap256, Tetrahymena, Cu428, Cilia

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Canada
McGill University

### Submitter
Thibault Legal

### Lab Head
Dr Khanh Huy Bui
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Canada


