### Accession
PXD041521

### Title
Identifying proteins of mealworms, crickets and chicken breast by LC-MS analysis after tryptic-in gel digestion

### Description
Edible mealworms and crickets are high protein food sources, which have recently emerged on the European market. As the production of edible insects is more sustainable than conventional livestock proteins, they are a promising alternative protein source for human consumption. Protein compositions of mealworms and crickets that underwent different food processing and preparation steps were assessed by LC-MS analysis after tryptic in-gel digestion, and were compared to proteins from chicken breast.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from mealworms, crickets and chicken breast were extracted by mixing with buffer-1 (Tris 100 mmol/L, SDS 1 %, pH = 7.4) or buffer-2 (buffer 1, 1,4-dithiothreitol 1 %), sonication and 1-2 precipitation steps with either actetone or methanol. After 1-2 centrifugation steps (17’949 x g, 4°C, 10 min), pellets were resuspended with buffer-1, sonicated, centrifuged and supernatants collected. Extracted proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (polyacrylamide 15 %) and gels stained with colloidal coomassie. Gel pieces with protein bands of interest were manually excised, washed by alternating destaining buffer (ammonium bicarbonate 25 mmol/L, acetonitrile 50 % v/v) and digestion buffer (ammonium bicarboncate 25 mmol/L) and proteins digested with trypsin at 25 °C for 48 hours. Peptides were analyzed on a Rheos 2200 HPLC (Flux Instruments AG, Switzerland) with an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 1.0 mm, Waters, USA), hyphenated to a linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ, Thermo Scientific, Switzerland) using an electron spray ionization interface.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Uniprot databases by submitting fragmentation data to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK) with the search settings set to: database: Swissprot or Trembl; enzyme: trypsin; maximum miscleavages: 1; peptide and MS/MS tolerance: 0.8; variable modifications: deamidated (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M); significance threshold: p < 0.05; ions score cutoff: 20. The identification results were manually validated and proteins assigned to corresponding gel band.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptide mass fingerprinting; insect; tenebrio molitor; acheta domesticus; chicken

### Affiliations
Agroscope Schwarzenburgstrasse 161 3003 Bern Switzerland
Agroscope

### Submitter
Reto Portmann

### Lab Head
Dr Reto Portmann
Agroscope Schwarzenburgstrasse 161 3003 Bern Switzerland


