### Accession
PXD018657

### Title
The RNA Polymerase II subunit RPB-9 directs transcriptional elongation at piRNA loci in C. elegans

### Description
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are genomically-encoded small RNAs that regulate germ cell development and guarantee germline integrity. Mature piRNAs engage Piwi Argonaute proteins to silence complementary transcripts, including transposable elements and endogenous genes. To date, piRNA biogenesis mechanisms are still unclear. Here, we show that the RNA Polymerase II subunit RPB-9 is required to promote transcription elongation at piRNA loci. Through genetic and biochemical experiments, we demonstrate that rpb-9-mediated piRNA production is needed to repress two DNA transposon families and a subset of somatic genes in the C. elegans germline.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated on a 4%–12% NOVEX NuPage gradient SDS gel (Thermo) for 10 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo). Proteins were fixated and stained with coomassie G250 brilliant blue (Carl Roth). The gel lanes were cut, minced into pieces, and transferred to an Eppendorf tube. Gel pieces were destained with a 50% ethanol/50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) solution. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1h at 56°C and then alkylated with 5 5mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel by two incubations with 30% ABC/acetonitrile and three subsequent incubations with pure acetonitrile. The acetonitrile was subsequently evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and loaded on StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2016) for desalting and storage. For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 20 cm self-packed column with 75-µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr.Maisch GmbH) mounted to an EASY HPLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) and sprayed online into an Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). We used a 94 min gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 225 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated with a top 10 MS/MS data-dependent acquisition scheme per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011) integrated into MaxQuant suite 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Uniprot C.elegans database (August 2014; 27,814 entries). In both analyses, carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Match between run option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; pirna

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


