### Accession
PXD032316

### Title
Synergistic efficacy of combined SUMOylation and proteasome inhibition in multiple myeloma

### Description
Relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (r/r MM) is a disease with often poor prognosis. Hyperactive SUMO signaling is involved in both cancer pathogenesis and cancer progression. A state of increased SUMOylation has been associated with aggressive cancer biology. Here, we found that r/r MM is characterized by a SUMO-high state, and high expression of SUMO E1 ligase (SAE1/UBA2) was associated with poor overall survival. Induced resistance to the second generation proteasome inhibitor (PI) carfilzomib (CFZ) enhanced SUMO pathway activity. Accordingly, CFZ-pretreated patients showed enhanced SUMO pathway activity in the MM compartment. Treatment of MM cell lines with subasumstat, a novel small-molecule SUMO E1 activating enzyme inhibitor, showed synergistic treatment efficacy with CFZ in both PI-sensitive and PI-resistant MM cell lines irrespective of the TP53 state. Combination therapy was effective in two murine MM xenograft models, where in vivo growth was significantly inhibited, and in patient-derived primary MM cells in vitro. Mechanistically, combined subasumstat and CFZ treatment enhanced DNA stress and apoptosis. In summary, our findings reveal activated SUMOylation as a therapeutic target in MM and point to combined SUMO/proteasome inhibition as a novel potent strategy for the treatment of patients with MM.

### Sample Protocol
OPM2 cells treated for 16h with subasumstat were analyzed with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) as described previously. In brief, cells were lysed with 8M urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl) containing protease inhibitors (2 µg/ml aprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylflourid). Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark.  Proteins were digested with sequencing grade LysC (Wako) at a ratio of 1:50 for 2 h and subsequently diluted 1:4 with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a ratio of 1:50 and digestion was completed overnight. Samples were acidified with formic acid and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cc Cartridges (Waters). Dried samples were resuspended in 10mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and peptide concentration was determined. 50 µg peptides of each sample were labeled with TMTpro 16 plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into one TMT plex. An internal reference sample composed of equal amounts of peptide material from all samples was included to provide a standard for relative quantification.  Labeled samples were combined, dried and resuspended in high pH buffer A (5mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN) prior to offline high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 1290 Infinity II HPLC system. The separation was performed on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 3.5μm; 2.1mm x 250mm) column (Waters) with a 96 minute multi-step gradient from 0 to 60% high pH buffer B (5mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN). Samples were collected into 96 fractions (1min/fraction) that were pooled into 28 fractions. Pooled fractions were evaporated to dryness. Mass spectrometry raw data was acquired on an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). HpH fraction were resuspended in LC buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in water) and separated online on a 25cm column packed in-house with C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120). A gradient of LC buffer A and LC buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile in water) was used to separate the samples online at a flow rate of 250 µl/min. LC buffer B was ramped from 4% to 30% in the first 88 min, followed by an increase to 60% B in 10 min and a plateau of 90% B for 5 min. Temperature of the column was kept constant at 45 °C and spray voltage static at 2kV. MS data was acquired with a Top-Speed method (1s cycle time) in data-dependent acquisition. Full scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60.000, RF lens at 55%, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and AGC target set to 300%. Monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptide and intensity threshold filter to 5.0e4. Isolation window for MS2 scans was set to 0.4 m/z and normalized HCD collision energy to 31 %. MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode at a resolution of 45.000. First mass set to 110 m/z, AGC Target was at 100% and maximum injection time was 86 ms. Unknown charge states and charge states of 1 or > 6 were excluded from fragmentation.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s and 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43)  with default parameters unless otherwise stated. Data was searched against the human reference proteome downloaded from UniProt in 07/2018 and default protein contaminants included in MaxQuant. Quantitation type was set to reporter type MS2 and reporter ion correction factors were entered as supplied by the manufacturer. PIF filter was set to 0.5. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of C. Variable modifications were set to M-oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini including neo protein N-terms after cleavage of first methionine. A maximum of 5 modification per peptide were allowed. N-terminal acetylation and M-oxidation were used in protein quantification (unmodified counterpart discarded). Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. MaxQuant output was further analyzed with the R statistical software environment. Protein groups were filtered for ≥ 1 unique peptides and ≥ 2 detected peptides and contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Corrected reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and the internal standard channel was subtracted, followed by median-MAD normalization. Significance was assessed with a 2-sided moderated 2 sample t-test (treatment vs DMSO). Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Fold changes were subjected to FGSEA analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteasome inhibitor, Myeloma, Sumoylation inhibitor

### Affiliations
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin
Proteomics Platform, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Evelyn Ramberger

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Proteomics Platform, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany


