### Accession
PXD035928

### Title
The spliceosome factor USP39 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma malignancy through regulating mRNA splicing

### Description
Abnormal alternative splicing (AS) caused by alterations to splicing factors contributes to tumor progression. Nonetheless, the relevant targets and mechanisms remain elusive in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we reported that overexpression of Ubiquitin-specific protease 39 (USP39), a spliceosome component of the U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP complex, is associated with poor clinical outcomes and proliferative signaling. Functionally, hepatocyte-specific USP39 knockin mice exhibited enhanced hepatocarcinogenesis. In vitro, USP39 promoted HCC cell proliferation and cell cycle progression in a spliceosome-dependent manner. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that USP39 depletion led to comprehensively impaired constitutive splicing and intriguingly, selective AS of hundreds of genes. USP39-mediated splicing switch of KANK2-S to KANK2-L increased the tumorigenic potential of HCC cells through accelerating KANK2 translation. Mechanistically, USP39 modulates exon inclusion/exclusion via interaction with SRSF6 or hnRNPC in a position-dependent manner. These findings highlight a role for USP39 as a splicing regulator in HCC biology and establishing its position-dependent splicing model.

### Sample Protocol
PLC-8024 cells were growthed in desired conditions and cross linked with 4% Formaldehyde for 15 minutes. Then the cells were lysed and pre-cleared cell lysates were incubated with a set of biotinylated DNA probes targeted the exon1-2 junction, the exon1-3 junction of KANK2 or their antisense sequences, followed by additional incubation with streptavidin beads overnight, Subsequently, the beads were washed several times with pre-cold PBS and collected for on-beads digestion. And after desalting, extracted peptides were LC-MSMS analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software were used for data processing and quantitative analysis

### Publication Abstract
Abnormal alternative splicing (AS) caused by alterations in spliceosomal factors is implicated in cancers. Standard models posit that splice site selection is mainly determined by early spliceosomal U1 and U2 snRNPs. Whether and how other mid/late-acting spliceosome components such as USP39 modulate tumorigenic splice site choice remains largely elusive. We observed that hepatocyte-specific overexpression of USP39 promoted hepatocarcinogenesis and potently regulated splice site selection in transgenic mice. In human liver cancer cells, USP39 promoted tumor proliferation in a spliceosome-dependent manner. USP39 depletion deregulated hundreds of AS events, including the oncogenic splice-switching of KANK2. Mechanistically, we developed a novel RBP-motif enrichment analysis and found that USP39 modulated exon inclusion/exclusion by interacting with SRSF6/HNRNPC in both humans and mice. Our data represented a paradigm for the control of splice site selection by mid/late-acting spliceosome proteins and their interacting RBPs. USP39 and possibly other mid/late-acting spliceosome proteins may represent potential prognostic biomarkers and targets for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing; kank2; srsf6; hnrnpc; constitutive splicing

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China

### Submitter
Yan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Li
Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China


