### Accession
PXD002150

### Title
An integrated systems biology approach reveals positive and negative effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) on HIV reactivation from latency

### Description
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) has been assessed in clinical trials as part of a “shock and kill” strategy to cure HIV-infected patients. While it was effective at inducing expression of HIV RNA "shock" , treatment with SAHA did not result in the reduction of reservoir size "kill". We therefore utilized a systems biology approach to dissect the mechanisms of action of SAHA that may explain its limited success in “shock and kill” strategies. CD4+ T cells from HIV seronegative donors were treated with 1 uM SAHA or its solvent dimethyl sulfoxide for 24 hours. Differential protein expression and post-translational modification was measured with two-dimensional liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry iTRAQ proteomics. Gene expression changes were assessed by Illumina microarrays. Using limma package in the R computing environment, we identified 185 proteins, 18 phosphorylated forms, 4 acetylated forms and 2,982 genes, whose expression was modulated by SAHA. A protein interaction network integrating these 4 data types identified the transcriptional regulator HMGA1 to be upregulated by SAHA at the transcript, protein and acetylated protein levels. HMGA1 has been shown to repress HIV transcription, which is not optimal with respect to a shock and kill strategy. Further functional category assessment of proteins and genes modulated by SAHA identified gene ontology terms related to NFB signaling, protein folding and autophagy, which are all relevant to HIV reactivation. In summary, this study identified a number of host factors that may be therapeutically targeted to achieve more potent HIV reactivation in the “shock and kill” treatment, when using SAHA, either through modification of SAHA itself or through combination with other latency reversing agents. Finally, proteome profiling highlighted a number of potential adverse effects of SAHA, which transcriptome profiling alone would not have identified.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and iTRAQ labeling. Proteins were isolated from SAHA or DMSO treated samples for 4 donors (N=8) as described (Papachristou et al., 2013). Cells were lysed in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) with pulse probe sonication. Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo-Pierce). One hundred micrograms of protein from each sample were reduced with 50mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 60°C and alkylated with 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 15 minutes at room temperature, as per the iTRAQ kit manufacturer’s instructions (ABSciex). Proteins were digested in the dark at room temperature overnight with 3 µg proteomics grade trypsin (Roche). Peptides were labeled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) 8-plex, as per manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were assigned to the following labels: 113; Donor 1 DMSO, 114; Donor 1 SAHA, 115; Donor 2 DMSO, 116; Donor 2 SAHA, 117; Donor 3 DMSO, 118; Donor 3 SAHA, 119; Donor 4 DMSO, 121; Donor 4 SAHA.  Reactions were terminated with 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes at room temperature.  Peptide pre-fractionation with high-pH reverse-phase C8 chromatography. Labeled peptides were lyophilized and serially reconstituted in 100 µl of 2% acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher), 0.1% NH4OH (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were resolved using a C8 column (150 x 3 mm (inner diameter (ID)), 3.5 μm particle size) (XBridge, Waters) at 300 µl/min with a LC-20AD HPLC system (Shimazdu). Peptide fractions were collected in a peak-dependent manner over a 100 minute, high pH gradient: Mobile phase A (aqueous); 0.1% NH4OH, mobile phase B (organic); 99.9% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH (0-10 mins; 2% B, 10-20 mins 5% B, 20-90 mins; 5-85% B, 90-100 mins; 85% B). All other conditions were as described previously (Al-Daghri et al., 2014). UHPLCLow pH Ultra HPLC-nESI nano electrospray ionization-FTMSOrbitrap MS. Approximately 1 µg of peptides were loaded by a Dionex Ulitmate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) at 20 µl/min for 4 minutes onto a C18 PepMap100 trapping cartridge (100 5μm mm × 300 500 µm ID, 5 μm particle) (Thermo Scientific) in mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Seventy peptide fractions were eluted at 300 nl/min over a gradient of 2-35% (105 mins) and 35-85 % (25 mins) organic phase (95% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in aqueous phase (2% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA). Peptides were resolved on an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 3 μm particle) retrofitted to a PicoTip nESI emitter (New Objective). Electrospray ionization was conducted at 2.4 kV and precursor ions were characterized with an Obitrap Elite –Velos pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at 120,000 mass resolution. The top 15 +2 and +3 precursor ions per MS scan (minimum intensity 1000) were characterized by HCD (30,000 mass resolution, 1.2 Da isolation window, 40 keV normalized collision energy) and CID (ion trap MS, 2 Da isolation window, 35 keV) with a dynamic exclusion (±5 ppm) of 200 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Target-decoy searching was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 software using SequestHT, with Percolator used to estimate false discovery rate (FDR) with a threshold of ≤ 0.01. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides allowing 1 missed cleavage, a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a minimum peptide length of 6. Spectra were first searched allowing for a single variable modification of oxidation (M), iTRAQ (Y) or deamidation (N,Q), with Methythio (C) and iTRAQ (K and N-terminus) set as fixed modifications. Spectra not reaching a match of <1% FDR were then searched for iTRAQ (K), oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) as variable modifications (maximum of 2), with methylthio (C) and iTRAQ (N-terminus) as fixed modifications. Fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for the FT-acquired HCD spectra and 0.5 Da for the CID spectra. Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB SwissProt human proteome (March 2014). Reporter ions were extracted with a tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) has been assessed in clinical trials as part of a "shock and kill" strategy to cure HIV-infected patients. While it was effective at inducing expression of HIV RNA ("shock"), treatment with SAHA did not result in a reduction of reservoir size ("kill"). We therefore utilized a combined analysis of effects of SAHA on the host transcriptome and proteome to dissect its mechanisms of action that may explain its limited success in "shock and kill" strategies. CD4+ T cells from HIV seronegative donors were treated with 1&#x3bc;M SAHA or its solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 24h. Protein expression and post-translational modifications were measured with iTRAQ proteomics using ultra high-precision two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Gene expression was assessed by Illumina microarrays. Using limma package in the R computing environment, we identified 185 proteins, 18 phosphorylated forms, 4 acetylated forms and 2982 genes, whose expression was modulated by SAHA. A protein interaction network integrating these 4 data types identified the HIV transcriptional repressor HMGA1 to be upregulated by SAHA at the transcript, protein and acetylated protein levels. Further functional category assessment of proteins and genes modulated by SAHA identified gene ontology terms related to NF&#x3ba;B signaling, protein folding and autophagy, which are all relevant to HIV reactivation. In summary, SAHA modulated numerous host cell transcripts, proteins and post-translational modifications of proteins, which would be expected to have very mixed effects on the induction of HIV-specific transcription and protein function. Proteome profiling highlighted a number of potential counter-regulatory effects of SAHA with respect to viral induction, which transcriptome profiling alone would not have identified. These observations could lead to a more informed selection and design of other HDACi with a more refined targeting profile, and prioritization of latency reversing agents of other classes to be used in combination with SAHA to achieve more potent induction of HIV expression.

### Keywords
Human, Saha, Hiv latency, Cd4 t-cells, Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK
Spiros D. Garbis, PhD Faculty of Medicine, Cancer Sciences and CES Units, Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton 3001, Life Sciences Building 85, Highfield Campus Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK Tel: 0044 02380593483

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Spiros D. Garbis, PhD Faculty of Medicine, Cancer Sciences and CES Units, Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton 3001, Life Sciences Building 85, Highfield Campus Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK Tel: 0044 02380593483


