### Accession
PXD014329

### Title
Targeting of Tumor Cells by the Adenovirus E4orf4 protein via Par3 Polarity Protein-Regulated Nuclear Envelope Rupture

### Description
The protein product of the Early region 4 open reading frame 4 (E4orf4) of human adenovirus 2 is reported to exhibit a tumor-selective cell killing activity.  Here, we show that E4orf4’s tumoricidal activity correlated with changes in perinuclear actomyosin contractility that are controlled by an interaction with the Par3 polarity protein. Surprisingly, E4orf4 enhanced apical-basal polarity in non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. In contrast, in tumorigenic cells, it induced a high incidence of actin-dependent nuclear bleb rupture. This process, which was regulated by the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex, promoted nuclear efflux of E4orf4 and the breakdown of the nuclear compartment. Significantly, Par3 also regulated the incidence of transient nuclear envelope rupture due to the reduced nuclear rigidity in cells depleted of lamins, in absence of E4orf4. Thus, using E4orf4 as a probing tool, we uncovered a so far un-appreciated role for Par3 in controlling the actin-dependent forces acting on the nuclear envelope to remodel nuclear shape, which might be a defining feature of tumor cells that is harnessed by E4orf4.

### Sample Protocol
For AP-MS experiments, MDA-MB-231 cells plated on 150 mm Petri dishes (8 dishes per condition), were infected with Ad-Flag-E4orf4(WT)mCherry or control Ad-lacZ recombinant adenoviruses, using 75 plaque-forming units of viral particles per cell (pfu/cell). Cells were then collected and lysed in digitonin buffer 16 h post-infection. Immunoprecipitations were performed using anti-Flag M2 antibody and proteins were eluted using the Flag peptide (100 µg/ml), overnight at 4°C with gentle agitation. The eluate was collected and concentrated on a Vivaspin 500 Protein Concentrator 10 kDa Column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) to decrease the volume to < 100 µl, and then diluted into the appropriate amount of 3X SDS sample buffer. The Dynabeads were diluted in the same volume of SDS sample buffer. Both the eluate and the Dynabeads samples were loaded on a 6%-10% gradient polyacrylamide gel and allowed to migrate until the migration front reached 10 cm. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue (50% methanol v/v, 10% acetic acid v/v, 0.1% Coomassie blue w/v) and washed in de-staining solution (10% methanol v/v, 10% acetic acid v/v) overnight at RT with gentle agitation. Bands of interest were extracted from small pieces of gels that had been cut to cover all protein samples and placed in 96-well plates and then processed for MS/MS analyses.  Tryptic digestion was performed on a MassPrep liquid handling robot (Waters, Milford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed by the Proteomics platform of the CR-CHU de Québec-Université Laval on a TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex) mass spectrometer equipped with an ion source (NanoSpray III; AB Sciex) and coupled to a nanopump; and by the Proteomics And Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry of the Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Montreal University, Quebec, Canada on a quadrupole/TOF Q-STAR (AB Sciex) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
We used data from 3 independent AP-MS experiments. A significance analyses was performed using MDA-MD-231 cells infected with Ad-LacZ as a negative control and the SAINT algorithm as described Choi, H., Larsen, B., Lin, Z. Y., Breitkreutz, A., Mellacheruvu, D., Fermin, D., Qin, Z. S., Tyers, M., Gingras, A. C., and Nesvizhskii, A. I. (2011) SAINT: probabilistic scoring of affinity purification-mass spectrometry data. Nature methods 8, 70-73 Choi, H., Liu, G., Mellacheruvu, D., Tyers, M., Gingras, A. C., and Nesvizhskii, A. I. (2012) Analyzing protein-protein interactions from affinity purification-mass spectrometry data with SAINT. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics Chapter 8, Unit8 15. (Choi et al., 2011). Only proteins with a SAINT score > 0.9 calculated relative to Ad-LacZ (Ctl) are displayed.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor cell-selective killing activity of the adenovirus type 2 early region 4 ORF4 (E4orf4) protein is poorly defined at the molecular level. Here, we show that the tumoricidal effect of E4orf4 is typified by changes in nuclear dynamics that depend on its interaction with the polarity protein Par3 and actomyosin contractility. Mechanistically, E4orf4 induced a high incidence of nuclear bleb formation and repetitive nuclear ruptures, which promoted nuclear efflux of E4orf4 and loss of nuclear integrity. This process was regulated by nucleocytoskeletal connections, Par3 clustering proximal to nuclear lamina folds, and retrograde movement of actin bundles that correlated with nuclear ruptures. Significantly, Par3 also regulated the incidence of spontaneous nuclear ruptures facilitated by the downmodulation of lamins. This work uncovered a novel role for Par3 in controlling the actin-dependent forces acting on the nuclear envelope to remodel nuclear shape, which might be a defining feature of tumor cells that is harnessed by E4orf4.

### Keywords
Live cell dynamics, Actin, Lamin a/c, Nuclear bleb, Polarity proteins, E4orf4

### Affiliations
CRC quebec
Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer de l‘Université Laval,Oncology, Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Canada, G1R 3S3

### Submitter
Kevin Jacquet

### Lab Head
Dr Josée, N., Lavoie
Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer de l‘Université Laval,Oncology, Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Canada, G1R 3S3


