### Accession
PXD003223

### Title
Oncogenic KRAS Regulates Tumor Cell Signaling via Stromal Reciprocation

### Description
Oncogenic mutations in tumor cells regulate signaling both within tumor cells and heterotypic stromal cells. However, whether oncogenes regulate tumor cell signaling via stromal cells is poorly understood. Here we show that oncogenic KRAS (KRAS-G12D) uniquely regulates tumor cell signaling via stromal cells. By combining cell-specific proteome labeling with phosphoproteomic multiplexing we conducted a multivariate analysis of heterocellular KRAS-G12D signaling in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDA) cells. By engaging heterotypic fibroblasts, KRAS-G12D drives unique reciprocal signaling in tumor cells to employ additional kinases and double the number of regulated signaling nodes from cell-autonomous KRAS-G12D. Heterocellular signaling produces a distinct tumor cell phosphoproteome, total proteome, and increase mitochondria capacity via an IGF1R/AXL-AKT axis. Reciprocal KRAS-G12D phenotypes require a heterocellular context and are unreachable by cell-autonomous KRAS-G12D alone. These results demonstrate oncogene signaling should be viewed as a heterocellular process and our existing homocellular perspective underrepresents the extent of oncogene signaling in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC samples were run on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a NanoLC-Ultra 2D (Eksigent). Reverse-phase chromatographic separation was performed on a 100 µm i.d. x 20 mm trap column packed in house with C18 (5 µm bead size, Reprosil-Gold, Dr Maisch), a 75 µm i.d. x 30 cm column packed in house with C18 (5 µm bead size, Reprosil-Gold, Dr Maisch) using a 120 minute linear gradient of 0-50% solvent B (MeCN 100% + 0.1% formic acid (FA)) against solvent A (H2O 100% + 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 106 ions. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and dynamically excluded for 8 seconds. For phosphopeptide samples the 10 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 8 seconds. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.120025) as an internal calibrant. CTAP and TMT samples were run on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was performed on a C18 PepMap 300 Å trap cartridge (0.3 mm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 μm bead size; loaded in a bi-directional manner), a 75 μm i.d. x 50 cm column (5 μm bead size) using a 120 minute linear gradient of 0-50% solvent B (MeCN 100% + 0.1% formic acid (FA)) against solvent A (H2O 100% + 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 106 ions. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Fragmented ions were scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (CTAP) or 35,000 (TMT) at m/z 400. For TMT samples the isolation window was reduced to 1.2 m/z and a MS/MS fixed first mass of 120 m/z was used. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.120025) as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
Raw files produced in Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt mouse (2011_03 release, 15,082,690 entries) database using Mascot (v2.2). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine / glutamine, isotopomeric labeled lysine (+4.025107 Da and +8.014199 Da), isotopomeric labeled arginine (+6.020129 Da and +10.008269 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. For heterocellular multivariate analysis custom CTAP+TMT10 lysine (+237.213146 Da) and SILAC+TMT10 lysine (+237.177131 Da) modifications were used to identify lysine-heavy residues bound to amine-reactive TMT. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold <0.05, a peptide ion Score >20 and a FDR <0.01 (evaluated by Percolator). Phospho-site localization probabilities were calculated with phosphoRS 3.1 (>75%, maximum 4-PTM/peptide). Only lysine containing peptides were included in the CTAP quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic mutations regulate signaling within both tumor cells and adjacent stromal cells. Here, we show that oncogenic KRAS (KRAS(G12D)) also regulates tumor cell signaling via&#xa0;stromal cells. By combining cell-specific proteome&#xa0;labeling with multivariate phosphoproteomics, we analyzed heterocellular KRAS(G12D) signaling in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) cells. Tumor cell KRAS(G12D) engages heterotypic fibroblasts, which subsequently instigate reciprocal signaling in the tumor cells. Reciprocal signaling employs additional kinases and doubles the number of regulated signaling nodes from cell-autonomous KRAS(G12D). Consequently, reciprocal KRAS(G12D) produces a tumor cell phosphoproteome and total proteome that is distinct from cell-autonomous KRAS(G12D) alone. Reciprocal signaling regulates&#xa0;tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis and increases mitochondrial capacity via an IGF1R/AXL-AKT axis. These results demonstrate that oncogene signaling should be viewed as a heterocellular process and that our existing cell-autonomous perspective underrepresents the extent of oncogene signaling in cancer. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Kras pda phosphoproteomics tmt ape silac ctap

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Christopher Tape

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute


