### Accession
PXD030483

### Title
Proteomic comparison of summer and winter Apis mellifera workers shows reduced protein abundance in winter samples

### Description
Apis mellifera workers in temperate climates display two castes; short lived summer bees that engage in nursing, hive maintenance and foraging, and long lived  winter bees (diutinus bees) which remain within the hive and are essential for  thermoregulation. Label free quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted on A. mellifera workers sampled in June and December to compare the proteomes of  summer and winter  bees. Proteomic analysis was completed on head, abdominal and venom sac samples which revealed an elevated level of protein abundance in summer bees  but and a decrease in protein abundance in winter bees. Head and abdominal samples displayed an increase in cuticular proteins in summer samples whereas an increase in xenobiotic proteins was observed in winter samples. Several carbohydrate metabolism pathways which have been linked to energy production and longevity in insects were observed to be increased in abundance in winter samples in comparison to summer samples. Proteomic analysis of the venom sacs an increased abundance and expression of bee venom associated proteins in comparison to winter workers. These data provides an insight into the adaptions of A. mellifera workers in summer and winter and may aid in future treatment and disease studies on honeybee colonies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected from three hives in June and December and stored at -80 until ready for protein extraction. Heads were removed from the body and the honey stomach and intestines and venom sac were removed from the abdomens. Samples were homogenised using a hand held pestle and proteins extracted with 300ul (head), 400ul (abdomen) and Samples were collected from three hives in June and December and stored at -80 until ready for protein extraction. Heads were removed from the body and the honey stomach and intestines and venom sac were removed from the abdomens. Samples were homogenised using a hand held pestle and proteins extracted with 300ul (head), 400ul (abdomen) and 200 µl (venom sac) respectively. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min. All supernatant was collected and acetone precipitated overnight. Samples were resuspended in resuspension buffer 120ul (head), 350ul (abdomen) and 50 µl (venom sac)  respectively. Samples were digested using ammonium bicarbonate, 0.5M dithiothreitol, 0.5M iodoacetamide and Sequence Grade Trypsin (0.5ug/ml). Digested samples were purified using C18 spin columns and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator for 2 hours. 1ug of head proteins and .75ug of abdomen protein samples were loaded onto the mass spec for 2 and 1 hours respectively respectively. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min. All supernatant was collected and acetone precipitated overnight. Samples were resuspended in resuspension buffer 120ul (head) and 350ul (abdomen) respectively. Samples were digested using ammonium bicarbonate, 0.5M dithiothreitol, 0.5M iodoacetamide and Sequence Grade Trypsin (0.5ug/ml). Digested samples were purified using C18 spin columns and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator for 2 hours. 1ug of head proteins and .75ug of abdomen protein samples were loaded onto the mass spec for 2 and 1 hours respectively

### Data Protocol
The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. FDR were set to 1 % for both peptides and proteins, and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed. MaxQuant data was analysed in Perseus v. 1.6.6.0. label-free quantification intensities were log2 transformed and proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were used in statistical analysis following the imputation of representative numbers based on the lowest value for each data set, which was calculated as a 1.8 downshift from the mean value allowing for 0.3 width in the downshift for the standard deviation. ANOVA significance was calculated for the experimental groups using a p-value of 0.05, only ANOVA significant proteins were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Apis mellifera workers display two stages; short lived summer bees that engage in nursing, hive maintenance and foraging, and long lived winter bees (diutinus bees) which remain within the hive and are essential for thermoregulation and rearing the next generation of bees in spring before dying. Label free quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted on A. mellifera workers sampled in June and December to compare the proteomes of summer and winter bees. Proteomic analysis was performed on head, abdominal and venom sac samples and revealed an elevated level of protein abundance in summer bees. Head and abdominal samples displayed an increased abundance in cuticular proteins in summer samples whereas an increase in xenobiotic proteins was observed in winter samples. Several carbohydrate metabolism pathways which have been linked to energy production and longevity in insects were increased in abundance in winter samples in comparison to summer samples. Proteomic analysis of the venom sacs of summer samples showed an increased abundance of bee venom associated proteins in comparison to winter workers. These data provides an insight into the adaptions of A. mellifera workers in summer and winter and may aid in future treatment and disease studies on honeybee colonies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030483.

### Keywords
Apis mellifera, Workers, Proteomic comparison

### Affiliations
Maynooth Univeristy
Lab Head, Medical Mycology, Maynooth Univeristy

### Submitter
Rachel Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Lab Head, Medical Mycology, Maynooth Univeristy


