### Accession
PXD030451

### Title
An mTORC1-CK2 axis controls starvation induced ER-phagy via FAM134C

### Description
The degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via selective autophagy is driven by the ER-phagy receptors that facilitate the incorporation of ER-fragments into nascent autophagosomes. How these receptors are regulated, in response to ER-phagy-inducing stimuluses, is largely unknown. Here we propose that starvation, as well as mTOR inhibition, triggers ER-phagy primarily through the activation of the ER-phagy receptor FAM134C. In physiological, nutrient reach, conditions FAM134C is phosphorylated by the Casein kinase 2 (CK2) protein at specific residues negatively affecting FAM134C interaction with the LC3 proteins, thereby preventing ER-phagy. Pharmacological or starvation-induced mTORC1 inhibition limits phosphorylation of FAM134C by CK2, hence promoting FAM134C activation and ER-phagy. Moreover, inhibition of CK2 or the expression of a phospho-mutant FAM134C protein is sufficient to stimulate ER-phagy. Conversely, starvation induced ER-phagy is inhibited in cells and mice that lack FAM134C or expressing a phospho-mimetic FAM134C protein. Overall, these data describe a new mechanism regulating ER-phagy and provides an example of cargo selectivity mechanism during starvation induced autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteomes in FAM134s over-expressing cells and IP-MS interactomes, proteins were precipitate in acetone and then reduced and alkylated in a solution of 6M Guanidine-HCl, 5mM TCEP, and 20mM chloroacetamide. Peptides were obtained digesting proteins with LysC (WAKO) for 3h at 37°C and with the endopeptidase sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Collected peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003). For full proteomes in RCS cells, peptides were obtained using the iST Kit from PreOmics. For phospho-proteomes U2OS cells were lysed in (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloracetamide), heated at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with Sonics Vibra-Cell (1 s ON/ 1 s OFF pulse for 30 sec using 30% amplitude). The equivalent of 1 mg of protein lysate was precipitated by methanol/chloroform using four volumes ice-cold methanol, one volume chloroform and 3 volumes water. The mixture was centrifuged at 20,000g for 30 min and the upper aqueous phase was removed and three volumes ice-cold methanol added. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and washed twice with one volume ice-cold methanol and air dried. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 8M Urea with 10mM EPPS pH 8.2. For digestion, 300 µg proteins were diluted to 1M Urea and incubated 1:50 (w/w) ratio with LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 3 h and 1:100 (w/w) ratio with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) over-night. The reaction was acidified using TFA (0.5%) and purified using Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, 50mg) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphopeptides were enrichment using Titansphere Phos-TiO beads (GL Sciences Inc) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphopeptides were cleaned up by C8 stage tip and fractionated using C18 stage tips. After washing (80% acetonitrile), and equilibration step with 0.1% TFA, peptides were loaded on C18 stage tips in 0.1% TFA solution and washed twice with 0.1% TFA in water. Samples were vacuum-dried for LC-MS measurements.  Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a home-made chromatographic column, 75mm ID, 8Um tip, bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9mm particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size, using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min after loading were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90 min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt Homo Sapiens and Rattus Norvegicus database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus and phosphorylation STY (in the case of phospho-proteomes) were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 0.7 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. For full proteomes and IP-interactomes, the LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 3 in at least one group). Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. For phospho-proteomes, intensity values were filter for the sites that have localization probability > 0.75. After this, the values were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 3 in at least one group). Finally, the intensities were normalized by subtracting the median intensity of each sample. Significantly regulated proteins between conditions were determined by student t-test using FDR < 0.05 as threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Selective degradation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via autophagy (ER-phagy) is initiated by ER-phagy receptors, which facilitate the incorporation of ER fragments into autophagosomes. FAM134 reticulon family proteins (FAM134A, FAM134B, and FAM134C) are ER-phagy receptors with structural similarities and nonredundant functions. Whether they respond differentially to the stimulation of ER-phagy is unknown. Here, we describe an activation mechanism unique to FAM134C during starvation. In fed conditions, FAM134C is phosphorylated by casein kinase 2 (CK2) at critical residues flanking the LIR domain. Phosphorylation of these residues negatively affects binding affinity to the autophagy proteins LC3. During starvation, mTORC1 inhibition limits FAM134C phosphorylation by CK2, hence promoting receptor activation and ER-phagy. Using a novel tool to study ER-phagy in vivo and FAM134C knockout mice, we demonstrated the physiological relevance of FAM134C phosphorylation during starvation-induced ER-phagy in liver lipid metabolism. These data provide a mechanistic insight into ER-phagy regulation and an example of autophagy selectivity during starvation.

### Keywords
Human, Fam134c, Mtorc1, Rat, Er-phagy, Ck2, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM)
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University, Naples, Italy

### Submitter
Giorgia Di Lorenzo

### Lab Head
Dr Carmine Settembre
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University, Naples, Italy


