### Accession
PXD030696

### Title
β-catenin-controlled tubular cell-derived exosomes play a key role in fibroblast activation via the OPN-CD44 axis

### Description
Tubular injury and peripheral fibroblast activation are the hallmarks of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and renal fibrosis, suggesting intimate communication between the two diseases. However, the underlying mechanisms remain to be determined. Exosomes play a role in shuttling proteins and other materials to recipient cells. In our study, we found that tubular cell-derived exosomes were aroused by β-catenin in kidney fibrogenesis. Osteopontin (OPN), especially its N-terminal fragments (N-OPN), was encapsulated in β-catenin-controlled tubular cell-derived exosome cargo, and subsequently passed to fibroblasts. Through binding with CD44, exosomal OPN promoted fibroblast proliferation and activation. Gene deletion of β-catenin in tubular cells (Ksp-β-catenin−/−) or gene ablation of CD44 (CD44−/−) greatly ameliorated renal fibrosis. Notably, N-OPN was secreted by exosome into the urine of patients with CKD, and negatively correlated with kidney function. The urinary exosomes from patients with CKD greatly accelerated renal fibrosis, which was blocked by CD44 deletion. These results suggest that exosome-mediated activation of the OPN/CD44 axis plays a key role in renal fibrosis, which is controlled by β-catenin.

### Sample Protocol
Differential centrifugation at 4°C was used to isolate exosomes. The differential centrifugation process was as follows: centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min to collect the supernatant, 2000 g for 20 min to collect the supernatant, and 10,000 g for 30 min to collect the supernatant; after removing the cell and debris, followed by filtration with a 0.22μm filter  to remove microvesicles. Then the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 160,000 g for 2 h (Type 70 Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter Optima L-XP) at 4 °C. Pellets were resuspended with 1 × PBS buffer, and were centrifuged again at 200,000 g before resuspending and quantifying the exosomes.

### Data Protocol
The primary experimental procedures for 4D-Label free proteomics analysis include protein extraction, trypsin digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis, and data analysis. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Rat UniProt database (29940 entries) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. GO enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed protein in exosomes from patients with CKD and OPN-interacted proteins was identified by the clusterProfiler R package. The OPN-interacted protein was analysed by STRING database and mapped using Cytoscape software. The proteomics analysis in our research is supported by Jingjie PTM BioLabs (Hangzhou, China).

### Publication Abstract
Tubular injury and peripheral fibroblast activation are the hallmarks of chronic kidney disease (CKD), suggesting intimate communication between the two types of cells. However, the underlying mechanisms remain to be determined. Exosomes play a role in shuttling proteins and other materials to recipient cells. In our study, we found that exosomes were aroused by &#x3b2;-catenin in renal tubular cells. Osteopontin (OPN), especially its N-terminal fragment (N-OPN), was encapsulated in &#x3b2;-catenin-controlled tubular cell-derived exosome cargo, and subsequently passed to fibroblasts. Through binding with CD44, exosomal OPN promoted fibroblast proliferation and activation. Gene deletion of &#x3b2;-catenin in tubular cells (Ksp-&#x3b2;-catenin<sup>-/-</sup> ) or gene ablation of CD44 (CD44<sup>-/-</sup> ) greatly ameliorated renal fibrosis. Notably, N-OPN was carried by exosome and secreted into the urine of patients with CKD, and negatively correlated with kidney function. The urinary exosomes from patients with CKD greatly accelerated renal fibrosis, which was blocked by CD44 deletion. These results suggest that exosome-mediated activation of the OPN/CD44 axis plays a key role in renal fibrosis, which is controlled by &#x3b2;-catenin.

### Keywords
Β-catenin, Renal fibrosis, Opn, Exosomes, Cd44

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Disease, Division of Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

### Submitter
tian letian

### Lab Head
Dr Shuangqin Chen
State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Disease, Division of Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


