### Accession
PXD012027

### Title
Screening for insulin-independent pathways that modulate glucose homeostasis identifies androgen receptor antagonists

### Description
Pathways modulating glucose homeostasis independently of insulin would open new avenues to combat insulin resistance and diabetes. Here, we report the establishment, characterization and use of a vertebrate 'insulin-free' model to identify insulin-independent modulators of glucose metabolism. insulin knockout zebrafish recapitulate core characteristics of diabetes and survive only up to larval stages. Utilizing a highly efficient endoderm transplant technique, we generated viable chimeric adults that provide the large numbers of insulin mutant larvae required for our screening platform. Using glucose as a disease-relevant readout, we screened 2233 molecules and identified 3 that consistently reduced glucose levels in insulin mutants. Most significantly, we uncovered an insulin-independent beneficial role for androgen receptor antagonism in hyperglycemia, mostly by reducing fasting glucose levels. Our study proposes therapeutic roles for androgen signaling in diabetes and, more broadly, offers a novel in vivo model for rapid screening and decoupling of insulin-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the three biological replicates within a genotype, protein was extracted from pools of 600 larvae at 5 dpf using 4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6 and a tissue disrupting sterile pestle (Axygen) for lysis. After heating to 70°C at 800 rpm for 10 min and DNA shearing by sonication, cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14.000 x g for 10 min and retaining the supernatant. Using a DC protein assay (BioRad), 7 mg of solubilized proteins per sample were acetone-precipitated at -20°C overnight, followed by centrifugation at 14.000 x g for 10 min and washing the pellet using 90% acetone. After evaporation of residual acetone, samples were dissolved in urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), followed by enzymatic peptidolysis as described (Graumann et al., 2008 doi:10.1074/mcp.M700460-MCP200; Kim et al., 2018 doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06833-7) with the following modifications: 10 mM dithiothreitol, 55 mM iodoacetamide and 100:1 protein to enzyme ratio of the proteolytic enzymes were used. For phosphoproteomics (note that the publication covering the proteomics dataset does not contain the phosphoproteomic analysis) 14mg of peptides were subjected to fractionation on the ResourceS 1ml SCX column using an Äkta Purifier (GE Heathcare). A binary buffer system, consisting of solvent A (7 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN, pH = 2.65) and solvent B (7 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCI, 30% ACN, pH= 2.65), was used to gradually elute the phosphorylated peptides with an increasing salt concentration over 60 min. For each biological replicate a flow-through sample and 10 elution fractions were collected based on the UV 280 nm signal. Samples were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator. Fractions were adjusted to 80% Acetonitrile, 6% TFA. Appropriate amounts (1:3 protein to TiO2 beads) of TiO2 beads (SLSC Science) in order to provide binding conditions of phosphopeptides to Titanium dioxide beads (TiO2) and incubated on a rotating wheel for 30 min. The enrichment procedure was repeated. Titanium dioxide beads were pooled and washed with binding buffer (80% ACN/6% TFA) and transferred into tips containing C8 material. Beads were washed twice with binding buffer and twice with washing buffer (80% ACN/3% TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted by incubation thrice with 25 µl of 40% Ammonia (pH=11.6) / Acetonitrile and concentrated to 2 µl. Finally, phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA)/H2O for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent sample processing and data analyses were performed as described previously (Sokol et al., 2018 doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007743). For the phosphorylated samples, phospho-STY sites were considered as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Pathways modulating glucose homeostasis independently of insulin would open new avenues to combat insulin resistance and diabetes. Here, we report the establishment, characterization, and use of a vertebrate 'insulin-free' model to identify insulin-independent modulators of glucose metabolism. <i>insulin</i> knockout zebrafish recapitulate core characteristics of diabetes and survive only up to larval stages. Utilizing a highly efficient endoderm transplant technique, we generated viable chimeric adults that provide the large numbers of <i>insulin</i> mutant larvae required for our screening platform. Using glucose as a disease-relevant readout, we screened 2233 molecules and identified three that consistently reduced glucose levels in <i>insulin</i> mutants. Most significantly, we uncovered an insulin-independent beneficial role for androgen receptor antagonism in hyperglycemia, mostly by reducing fasting glucose levels. Our study proposes therapeutic roles for androgen signaling in diabetes and, more broadly, offers a novel in vivo model for rapid screening and decoupling of insulin-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

### Keywords
Insuline mutant, Chemical screen, Glucose homeostasis, Zebrafish, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Genetics Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research Ludwigstrasse 43 61231 Bad Nauheim Germany
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany

### Submitter
Anna Sokol

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Y. R. Stainier
Department of Developmental Genetics Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research Ludwigstrasse 43 61231 Bad Nauheim Germany


