### Accession
PXD002111

### Title
Analysis of signaling endosome composition and dynamics using SILAC in embryonic stem cell-derived neurons

### Description
Neurons require efficient transport mechanisms such as fast axonal transport to ensure neuronal homeostasis and survival. Neurotrophins and their receptors are conveyed via fast axonal retrograde transport of signaling endosomes to the soma, where they elicit transcriptional responses. Despite the essential roles of signaling endosomes in neuronal differentiation and survival, little is known about their molecular identity, dynamics and regulation. Gaining a better mechanistic understanding of these organelles and their kinetics is crucial, given the growing evidence linking vesicular trafficking deficits to neurodegeneration. Here, we exploited an affinity purification strategy using the binding fragment of tetanus neurotoxin (HCT) conjugated to monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs), which in motor neurons, is transported in the same carriers as neurotrophins and their receptors. To quantitatively assess the molecular composition of HCT-containing signaling endosomes, we have developed a protocol for triple Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) in embryonic stem cell-derived motor neurons. After HCT internalization, retrograde carriers were magnetically isolated at different time points and subjected to mass-spectrometry and gene ontology analyses. This purification strategy is highly specific, as confirmed by the presence of essential regulators of fast axonal transport in the make-up of these organelles. Our results indicate that signaling endosomes undergo a rapid maturation with the acquisition of late endosome markers following a specific time-dependent kinetics. Strikingly, signaling endosomes are specifically enriched in proteins known to be involved in neurodegenerative diseases and neuroinfection. Moreover, we highlighted the presence of novel components, whose precise temporal recruitment on signaling endosomes might be essential for proper sorting and/or transport of these organelles. This study provides the first quantitative proteomic analysis of signaling endosomes isolated from motor neurons and allows the assembly of a functional map of these axonal carriers involved in long-range neuronal signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Signaling endosome purification – Amino-derivatized monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs, Kisker) were conjugated to cysteine-rich HA-tagged HCT or glutathione-S-transferase (GST) as previously described (6,27). Briefly, 5 mg of MIONs were activated with 1 mM EDTA and 3 mM succinimidyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxylate (Life Technologies) for 30 min at 22 °C. After having repeated this step once, activated MIONs were purified on a PD10 desalting column (GE Healthcare), concentrated and divided into two batches, which were labeled for 2 days at 4 °C with 110 µM  of HCT or GST, both previously reduced with 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Pierce) for 30 min at 22 °C. The reaction was blocked by incubation with 2 mM reduced glutathione (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 22 °C. Conjugated MIONs were purified on Sephacryl S100HR (GE Healthcare).  The purification of MNs signaling endosomes was performed as previously described (6,27) with minor modifications. HCT-MIONs and GST-MIONs were incubated with DIV3 ES-derived MN for 60 min at 37 °C or pulsed for 10 min at 37 °C and then chased for 10, 30 and 60 min in complete MN medium. After internalization, MNs were cooled on ice, acid-washed, washed with Hank’s balanced buffered salt solution (HBSS) pH 7.4 and finally with breaking buffer (BB, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM magnesium acetate and protease inhibitors). Neurons were mechanically lysed in BB by passing them 15 times through a cell cracker device (18 m clearance; EMBL) and clarified by centrifugation at 690 x g for 10 min at 4 °C (28).  For the SILAC experiment, the protein concentration of the three post-nuclear supernatants (PNS) was determined using a BCA protein quantification assay (Life Technologies), and the three PNS were mixed in 1:1:1 ratio. MS columns were placed inside a SuperMACS II (both from Miltenyi Biotech) and equilibrated with BB supplemented with 0.4 % bovine serum albumin (BSA). The sample was then passed 3 times through the column. After several washes with BB, the columns were removed from the magnetic field and the elution was performed using 1 ml BB containing 300 mM KCl. Endosomal proteins were then precipitated and separated by SDS-PAGE using 10 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies).  In-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS – Polyacrylamide gel slices were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using the Janus liquid handling system (Perkin-Elmer). Briefly, the excised protein gel piece was placed in a well of a 96-well microtiter plate and destained with 50 % acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with 6 ng/l trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2 % formic acid, 1 % acetonitrile. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were loaded on 50 cm Easy Spray PepMap column (75 m inner diameter, 2 m particle size, Thermo Fisher) equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher) with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % dimethylsufoxide (DMSO), and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO. The in-gel digested samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2- 40 %) in 65 min, total run time of 90 min including column conditioning. The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=17,500) after an MS1 scan (R=70,000) on the ten most abundant ions using MS1 target of 1 × 106 ions, and MS2 target of 5 × 104 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 0.120 s, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 28, the dynamic exclusion was set at 10 s, and the peptide match and isotope exclusion functions were enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS Data processing and analysis - Raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant/Andromeda software (version 1.3.0.5). Parent ion and tandem mass spectra were searched against UniprotKB Mus musculus database (August 2012). A list of 247 common laboratory contaminants provided by MaxQuant/Andromeda was also added to the database. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 6 ppm for the main search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as fixed modification, oxidized methionines and N-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve 1 % false discovery rate on protein and peptide levels. Raw data are available via the PRIDE database (www.proteomexchange.org, project accession: PXD002111).

### Publication Abstract
Neurons require efficient transport mechanisms such as fast axonal transport to ensure neuronal homeostasis and survival. Neurotrophins and their receptors are conveyed via fast axonal retrograde transport of signaling endosomes to the soma, where they elicit transcriptional responses. Despite the essential roles of signaling endosomes in neuronal differentiation and survival, little is known about their molecular identity, dynamics, and regulation. Gaining a better mechanistic understanding of these organelles and their kinetics is crucial, given the growing evidence linking vesicular trafficking deficits to neurodegeneration. Here, we exploited an affinity purification strategy using the binding fragment of tetanus neurotoxin (HCT) conjugated to monocrystalline iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs), which in motor neurons, is transported in the same carriers as neurotrophins and their receptors. To quantitatively assess the molecular composition of HCT-containing signaling endosomes, we have developed a protocol for triple Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) in embryonic stem cell-derived motor neurons. After HCT internalization, retrograde carriers were magnetically isolated at different time points and subjected to mass-spectrometry and Gene Ontology analyses. This purification strategy is highly specific, as confirmed by the presence of essential regulators of fast axonal transport in the make-up of these organelles. Our results indicate that signaling endosomes undergo a rapid maturation with the acquisition of late endosome markers following a specific time-dependent kinetics. Strikingly, signaling endosomes are specifically enriched in proteins known to be involved in neurodegenerative diseases and neuroinfection. Moreover, we highlighted the presence of novel components, whose precise temporal recruitment on signaling endosomes might be essential for proper sorting and/or transport of these organelles. This study provides the first quantitative proteomic analysis of signaling endosomes isolated from motor neurons and allows the assembly of a functional map of these axonal carriers involved in long-range neuronal signaling.

### Keywords
Motor neurons, Signalling endosomes, Silac, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics and Metabolomics STP The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Vesela Encheva

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius P. Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics and Metabolomics STP The Francis Crick Institute


