### Accession
PXD023488

### Title
Non-lethal stress-induced discrete proteolysis is caspase-3/7 dependent

### Description
Cells are in constant adaptation to environmental changes to insure their proper functioning. When exposed to stresses, cells activate specific pathways to elicit adaptive modifications. Those changes can be mediated by selective modulation of gene and protein expression as well as by post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation and proteolytic processing. Protein cleavage, as a controlled and limited post-translational modification, is involved in diverse physiological processes such as the maintenance of protein homeostasis, activation of repair pathways, apoptosis and the regulation of proliferation. Here we assessed by quantitative proteomics the proteolytic landscape in two cell lines subjected to low cisplatin concentrations used as a mild non-lethal stress paradigm. This landscape was compared to the one obtained in the same cells stimulated with cisplatin concentrations inducing apoptosis. These analyses were performed in wild-type cells and in cells lacking the two main executioner caspases: caspase-3 and caspase-7. Ninety proteins were found to be cleaved at one or a few sites (discrete cleavage) in low stress conditions compared to four hundred and forty in apoptotic cells. Many of the cleaved proteins in stressed cells were also found to be cleaved in apoptotic conditions. As expected in apoptotic cells, ~80% of the cleavage events were dependent on caspase 3/caspase 7. Strikingly, upon exposure to non-lethal stresses, no discrete cleavage was detected in cells lacking caspase-3 and caspase-7. This indicates that the proteolytic landscape in stressed viable cells fully depends on the activity of executioner caspases. These results suggest that the so-called executioner caspases fulfill important stress adaptive responses distinct from their role in apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116, DKO HCT116 and U2OS cells were cultured in SILAC-compatible DMEM medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ref. n°89985) supplemented with either “light” (L) or “heavy” (H) stable isotope-labeled L-arginine and 150 mg/l of L-lysine to obtain a final concentration of 50 mg/l and 150 mg/l respectively. These amino acids were purchased from Sigma: proline 0 (ref. n° P-5607), arginine 0  (ref. n° A-8094), lysine 0 (ref. n° L5501), lysine+8 (ref. n° CNLM-291-H0.1), arginine +10 (ref. n° CNLM-539-H0.1). The media were supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich, F0392, lot n° 16M280-A) and L-proline 0 (final concentration of 200 mg/l). The addition of L-proline 0 is to prevent the conversion of arginine to proline. Cells went through 6 cell cycle of divisions before assessing, by mass spectrometry, the levels of labelled amino acids in actin. At this point, labelling was higher than 95% and no proline conversion was detected. Two more cell divisions were allowed to proceed to enrich the labeling further. Cells were seeded at a density of 120’000 cells/well in 6 well plates (Corning, ref. n° 3516). The following day, cells were treated or not with 4 µM cisplatin (non-lethal stress condition) or 32 µM (apoptotic condition) for 48 hours. Cells were then lysed in FASP buffer (4% of sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS], 0.1 M of DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM of Tris pH 7.5). The lysates were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes and sonicated for 3 cycles of 5 seconds followed by centrifugation at 16’000 g for 10 minutes to pellet nuclei and cellular debris. Then, the soluble cell extracts were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Proteins present in the gel were detected with Coomassie staining. Gels were imaged and protein concentrations were determined by densitometry scanning of the whole lane of SDS/PAGE gels. Lysates of light and heavy amino acid-labeled cells were mixed at a quantitative ratio of 1:1. A total of 120 μg of protein from mixed lysates was migrated on a pre-cast 4-12% Novex NuPAGE Bis-Tris SDS Mini Gel (Invitrogen). Entire lanes were cut into 46 identical gel slices using GridCutter (Gelcompany). In-gel proteolytic cleavage with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was performed as described. The peptides from the digestion were dried and redissolved in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile for analysis with liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry. Samples were injected on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer interfaced via a nano EASY-Spray source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). After loading onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Scientific), peptides were separated on a reversed-phase Easy Spray C18 column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). A 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 65 minutes) was used for the separation with a flow of 250 nl/minute. Full MS survey scans were performed at 70'000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Scientific), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27%) and analyzed in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60 s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed and quantified using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.3), and the Andromeda search engine set to mine the human proteome in the UniProt database (UniProt proteome ID: UP000005640, version of July 2017, number of sequences: 20’987). Trypsin was defined in MaxQuant as the enzyme used to digest the proteins (selected setting: “cleavage after lysine and arginine”). As complete protein digestion often does not occur, peptides with up to two uncut arginine/lysine (i.e. 2 missed cleavages) were taken into account. As proteins were subjected to DTT to reduce their disulfide bonds, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate established against a reversed database, according to default MaxQuant parameters. Sets of protein sequences which could not be discriminated based on identified peptides were listed together as protein groups. MaxQuant analysis used an experimental design file in which every dataset corresponding to a gel slice was quantified separately as a distinct experiment, numbered as the gel slice it corresponded to.

### Publication Abstract
Cells are in constant adaptation to environmental changes to insure their proper functioning. When exposed to stresses, cells activate specific pathways to elicit adaptive modifications. Those changes can be mediated by selective modulation of gene and protein expression as well as by post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation and proteolytic processing. Protein cleavage, as a controlled and limited post-translational modification, is involved in diverse physiological processes such as the maintenance of protein homeostasis, activation of repair pathways, apoptosis and the regulation of proliferation. Here we assessed by quantitative proteomics the proteolytic landscape in two cell lines subjected to low cisplatin concentrations used as a mild non-lethal stress paradigm. This landscape was compared to the one obtained in the same cells stimulated with cisplatin concentrations inducing apoptosis. These analyses were performed in wild-type cells and in cells lacking the two main executioner caspases: caspase-3 and caspase-7. Ninety-two proteins were found to be cleaved at one or a few sites (discrete cleavage) in low stress conditions compared to four hundred and fifty-three in apoptotic cells. Many of the cleaved proteins in stressed cells were also found to be cleaved in apoptotic conditions. As expected, ~90% of the cleavage events were dependent on caspase-3/caspase-7 in apoptotic cells. Strikingly, upon exposure to non-lethal stresses, no discrete cleavage was detected in cells lacking caspase-3 and caspase-7. This indicates that the proteolytic landscape in stressed viable cells fully depends on the activity of executioner caspases. These results suggest that the so-called executioner caspases fulfill important stress adaptive responses distinct from their role in apoptosis. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023488.

### Keywords
Proteomics; qexactive; human; proteolysis; apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Biomedical Sciences University of Lausanne Bugnon 7 1005 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Widmann
Department of Biomedical Sciences University of Lausanne Bugnon 7 1005 Lausanne Switzerland


