### Accession
PXD029270

### Title
Cysteine 253 of UCP1 regulates energy expenditure and adipose tissue inflammation

### Description
Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is thought to be a major regulator of whole-body energy expenditure and metabolic homeostasis. However, the widely employed UCP1 loss of function model has recently been shown to have destructive effects on the entire electron transport chain of thermogenic fat. As such, the role of UCP1 in metabolic regulation in vivo remains unclear. We recently identified cysteine-253 as an allosteric site on UCP1 that elevates protein activity upon covalent modification. Here we examine the physiological importance of this site through the generation of a UCP1 cysteine-253 null mouse (UCP1 C253A), the first genetic model for selective disruption of UCP1 in vivo. UCP1 C253A mice exhibit significantly compromised thermogenic responses but display no measurable effect on fat accumulation in an obesogenic environment. Unexpectedly, instead we find that lack of cysteine-253 results in substantial immune cell infiltration and inflammatory pathology in adipose tissues of male, but not female mice. Together, our results establish the UCP1 cysteine-253 activation site as a regulator of acute thermogenesis and sex-dependent adipose tissue inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 1p/15ml protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo). The mixture was clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was subjected to BCA protein concentration measurement, and reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then purified using the methanol-chloroform precipitation method and reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS at pH 8.5 and digested by Lys-C and trypsin overnight 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio and an additional 6 h by trypsin the next day. Resulting peptides were labeled by TMT10plex or TMT-pro 16plex (Thermo) following the SL-TMT protocol(Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018), and quench by adding 5% hydroxylamine. A ratio-check is then performed by mixing 1% sample from each TMT channel, and the TMT-labeled peptides were evenly mixed based on the ratio-check. The mixture was desalted using Sep-pak cartridges (Waters), dried, and fractionated using an Agilent 1100 quaternary HPLC system. Peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, into a total of 96 fractions that were consolidated into 12 fractions. Alternatively, samples were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo, Cat 84868) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were dried and desalted via StageTip and reconstituted in 5% formic acid and 5% ACN for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.  Protein abundance was measured using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Orbitrap Eclipse instrument. For measurements on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument, samples were analyzed using 180 min gradients at 500 nl/min flow rate. Fractionated peptides were injected. Tandem mass spectra (MS2) were matched in real time to targeted proteins(Schweppe et al., 2020).  When a peptide match was observed to a targeted protein, a quantitative SPS-MS3 scan was acquired(McAlister et al., 2014). For protein abundance measurements on the Orbitrap Eclipse instrument coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump, all samples were analyzed with a 180 min gradient consisting of 2%–23% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate. A FAIMSPro (Thermo) device for FAIMS separation of precursors(Schweppe et al., 2019). The FAIMS device was operated with default settings and multiple compensation voltages (40V/-60V/-80V). Under each FAIMS voltage, peptide ions were collected in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 400 – 1600 using 2 sec cycles. Resolution for MS1 was set at 120,000, with standard automatic gain control (AGC) target. Multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation at 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2 with a dynamic exclusion of 120 s. Quantification was performed using multinotch SPS-MS3 as described previously(McAlister et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
The Comet algorithm(Eng et al., 2013) was used to search all MS/MS spectra against a database containing sequences of mouse (Mus Musculus) proteins downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org). Reversed sequences were appended as decoys for FDR filtering, and common contaminant proteins (e.g. human keratins, trypsin) were included. Peptides were searched using following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMT 10plex (+229.162932) or TMT 16plex (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N-terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. The target-decoy method was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR)(Elias and Gygi, 2007; Huttlin et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2003). To distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was used to control peptide-level FDR to less than 1%. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids were discarded. Protein-level FDR was also controlled to 1% and as a result the number of peptide reverse hits were further decreased. Peptides were matched to the least number of proteins. TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise ratios for all quantified peptides matched to the same protein or site were summed up to report protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipose, Thermogenesis, Ucp1, Sex-dependent, Inflammation

### Affiliations
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.


