### Accession
PXD031352

### Title
A proteomic view of artificially aged seeds of three rice lines of Kasalath with different anti-aging ability guided by miR164c

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in various aspects of plant physiology and metabolism. The expression level of miR164c is negatively correlated with seed vigor in rice (Oryza sativa L.); however, the mechanism of seed vigor regulation by miR164c remains unknown.  Here, we studied the proteomic difference between artificially aged seeds of the wild-type rice cultivar ‘Kasalath’ and its transgenic derivatives, miR164c-silenced line (MIM164c) and miR164c overexpression line (OE164c), with significant differences in anti-aging capacity. We hope that it can provide new insights into the mechanism of miRNA on regulating seed vigor.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from the excised embryos. Briefly, embryos were first ground in liquid nitrogen for 30 min and then sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at -20°C for 4 h. The sample was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 3 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The protein pellet was washed three times with cold acetone, and then redissolved in a buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide. Protein digestion and TMT labeling were conducted according to the method of Wang et al. (2018). The protein sample was then fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm internal diameter [i.d.], 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated into 80 fractions with a gradient of 2–60% ACN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 9.0) over 80 min. Then, peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA; Fluka) and then directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo). The gradient comprised an increase from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) in 26 min, 25% to 40% B in 8 min, 40% to 80% B in 3 min, and then holding at 80% B for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. Peptides were subjected to an NSI source, followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled with UPLC online. Intact peptides were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting of 28, and ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan, with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap, and 5E4 ions were accumulated to generate the MS/MS spectra. MS scans were performed at a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) ranging from 350 to 1,800, and the fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.  Reference Wang, Z. K., Zhang, R., Liu, F. J., Jiang, P., Xu, J., Cao, H. J., et al. (2018). TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals proteomic changes involved in longevity. Proteomics Clin Appl 13, e1800024. doi: 10.1002/prca.201800024

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the transcriptome database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (Cys) residues was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (Met) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. To perform protein quantification, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot. The FDR was adjusted to <1% at the protein, peptide, and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level. To ensure that the sample preparation met the standard requirements, the mass error of all identified peptides was first checked. The distribution of mass error should be approximately zero and the concentration of most of the peptides should be <10 ppm, which enable the mass accuracy of MS data to fit the requirements. Then, the length of peptides was verified; most peptides should be 8–16 amino acids (aa) in length, which is consistent with the property of tryptic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mir164c; oryza sativa; anti-aging ability; tmt; kasalath

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University
Hunan Normal University

### Submitter
Kerui Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaocheng Jiang
College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University


