### Accession
PXD010070

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry analyses of three different kinetochore protein complexes (KMN, NDC80C, MIS12C) using an MS-cleavable cross-linker, BuUrBu (DSBU)

### Description
In order to develop a simplified cross-linking mass spectrometry protocol, we applied one-step size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) for peptide purification after proteolysis with Lys-C and trypsin. Three benchmark protein complexes (KMN, NDC80C, MIS12C) from human kinetochore were cross-linked with an MS-cleavable cross-linker (BuUrBu). After proteolysis, digested peptides were purified with SEC omitting the step of C18 column to avoid loss of cross-linked peptides. Our protocol showed improvement of existing protocols, and we could successfully identify over 700 cross-links per experiment of each of the three protein complexes. We also observed that about half of the non-redundant cross-links were not lysine-lysine cross-links but cross-links between lysine and side chains with alcohols (serine, threonine, tyrosine).

### Sample Protocol
KMN, NDC80C and MIS12C were expressed and purified from insect cells. Purified complexes were cross-linked with BuUrBu, precipitated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted and fractionated by SEC prior to the analysis with a Q-Exactive Plus. All fractions were analysed with a standard MS-MS/MS top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive Plus were converted to MGF (Mascot generic files) format with program msConvert GUI from ProteoWizard Toolkit version 3. Program MeroX version 1.6.6.6 was used for cross-link identification.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry (MS) is a powerful approach to identify and map protein-protein interactions. Its applications support computational modeling of three-dimensional structures and complement classical structural methodologies such as X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and electron microscopy (EM). A plethora of cross-linkers, MS methods, and data analysis programs have been developed, but due to their methodological complexity application is currently reserved for specialized mass spectrometry laboratories. Here, we present a simplified single-step purification protocol that results in improved identifications of cross-linked peptides. We describe an easy-to-follow pipeline that combines the MS-cleavable cross-linker DSBU (disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea), a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, and the dedicated software MeroX for data analysis to make cross-linking MS accessible to structural biology and biochemistry laboratories. In experiments focusing on kinetochore subcomplexes containing 4-10 subunits (so-called KMN network), one-step peptide purification, and enrichment by size-exclusion chromatography yielded identification of 135-228 non-redundant cross-links (577-820 cross-linked peptides) from each experiment. Notably, half of the non-redundant cross-links identified were not lysine-lysine cross-links and involved side chains with hydroxy groups. The new pipeline has a comparable potential toward the identification of protein-protein interactions as previously used pipelines based on isotope-labeled cross-linkers. A newly identified cross-link enabled us to improve our 3D-model of the KMN, emphasizing the power of cross-linking data for evaluation of low-resolution EM maps. In sum, our optimized experimental scheme represents a viable shortcut toward obtaining reliable cross-link data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Protein complex, Dsbu, Q-exactive, Kinetochore, Buurbu, Ms-cleavable cross-linker, Cross-linking ms, Merox

### Affiliations
1. Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund 2. Department for Systems Chronobiology, Institute of Medical Psychology, LMU Munich, Goethe-Str. 31, 80336 Munich
Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology,
9 Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund

### Submitter
Dongqing  Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Bange
1. Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund 2. Department for Systems Chronobiology, Institute of Medical Psychology, LMU Munich, Goethe-Str. 31, 80336 Munich


