### Accession
PXD011181

### Title
Rat atria-2D LC-MS/MS -  Atrial electrophysiological and molecular remodelling induced by obstructive sleep apnoea

### Description
To understand the molecular change occurring in the atria during obstructive sleep apnea, we have implemented a rat model of OSA involving the surgical implantation of a tracheal obstructive device, allowing the rats to remain conscious and free-roaming throughout 2 weeks of apnea administration. Rats were divided into severe and moderate apnea groups, receiving a 23 second or 13 second apneas per minute, respectively. The two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D PAGE) of atrial homogenates to compare the dysregulations in the protein pattern in severe and moderate apnea when compared to control.

### Sample Protocol
Apneas lasting 13 or 23 seconds were delivered to rats in the moderate and severe apnea groups, respectively. Apneas (inflations) were delivered randomly via computer-controlled compressed air system. The rats were given 13 or 23 second apneas 60 times per hour for 8 hours in a day. Apnea induction was confirmed using both MouseOx pulse oximetry and direct observation of increased respiratory effort upon device inflation. Electrocardiogram (ECG) readings were also recorded. Control rats received tracheal surgery, but no device inflations. The rat hearts were rapidly removed, washed in chilled Tyrode’s solution, and was perfused according to the Langendorff technique. Atrial tissue was then flash frozen with liquid N₂ and ground with a mortar and pestle. Tissue was placed in 300 μl of lysis solution. Atrial homogenates of control (n=2), moderate (n=2), and severe (n=2) apnea were used for analysis. For each sample condition and its biological replicate, coomassie and silver stained gels were obtained which were loaded with 550µg and 150µg of protein respectively. 2-D electrophoresis was performed by Kendrick Labs, Inc. (Madison, WI) according to the carrier ampholine method of Isoelectric focusing (IEF). Spots which had a fold increase or decrease of ≥1.7 and a P-value ≤0.05, or a fold increase or decrease of ≥3.0 were selected and excised for in-gel trypsin digestion and peptide extraction for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, version 2.4, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) software with the following parameters: background subtraction of polynomial order 5 adaptive with a threshold of 35%, two smoothings with a window of three channels in Savitzky–Golay mode, and centroid calculation of the top 80% of peaks based on a minimum peak width of 4 channels at half-height. The Mascot Daemon software (Matrix Science) was employed for database searches. Search parameters used were: propionamide as fixed modification for cysteine, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and precursor and product/ fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.5 Da and 0.8 Da respectively against enzyme trypsin with one missed cleavage. The pkl files with the mentioned parameters were search against NCBInr  rat (rattus) database.

### Publication Abstract
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) affects an estimated 20% of adults worldwide and has been associated with electrical and structural abnormalities of the atria, although the molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we used two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D PAGE) coupled with nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) to investigate the proteins that are dysregulated in the atria from severe and moderate apnea when compared to control. We found enzymes involved in the glycolysis, beta-oxidation, electron transport chain and Krebs cycle to be down-regulated. The data suggested that the dysregulated proteins may play a role in atrial pathology developing via chronic obstructive apnea and hypoxia. Our results are consistent with our previous 1D-PAGE and nanoLC-MS/MS study (Channaveerappa et al, J Cell Mol Med. 2017), where we found that some aerobic and anaerobic glycolytic and Krebs cycle enzymes were down-regulated, suggesting that apnea may be a result of paucity of oxygen and production of ATP and reducing equivalents (NADH). The 2D-PAGE study not only complements our current study, but also advances our understanding of the OSA. The complete mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011181.

### Keywords
Protein dysregulations, Rat, Atria

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Proteomics group, Department of Chemistryand Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, NY, USA
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Devika Channaveerappa

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Biochemistry and Proteomics group, Department of Chemistryand Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, NY, USA


