### Accession
PXD023241

### Title
Identification of SUMO targets required to maintain human stem cells in the pluripotent state.  - Characterisation of 6His-SUMO-KGG-mCherry ChiPS4 cells

### Description
To determine the role of SUMO modification in the maintenance of pluripotent stem cells we used ML792, a potent and selective inhibitor of SUMO Activating Enzyme. Treatment of human induced pluripotent stem cells with ML792 initiated changes associated with loss of pluripotency such as reduced expression of key pluripotency markers. To identify putative effector proteins and establish sites of SUMO modification, cells were engineered to stably express either SUMO1 or SUMO2 with TGG to KGG mutations that facilitate GlyGly-K peptide immunoprecipitation and identification. A total of 976 SUMO sites were identified in 427 proteins. STRING enrichment created 3 networks of proteins with functions in regulation of gene expression, ribosome biogenesis and RNA splicing, although the latter two categories represented only 5% of the total GGK peptide intensity. The remainder have roles in transcription and chromatin structure regulation. Many of the most heavily SUMOylated proteins form a network of zinc-finger transcription factors centred on TRIM28 and associated with silencing of retroviral elements. At the level of whole proteins there was only limited evidence for SUMO paralogue-specific modification, although at the site level there appears to be a preference for SUMO2 modification over SUMO1 in acidic domains. We show that SUMO is involved in the maintenance of the pluripotent state in hiPSCs and identify many chromatin-associated proteins as bona fide SUMO substrates in human induced pluripotent stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Crude cell extracts were prepared in triplicate from wt ChiPS4 cells, ChiPS4-6His-SUMO1-KGG-mCherry and ChiPS4-SUMO2-KGG-mCherry cells and fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Crude cell extracts were made to a protein concentration of between 1 and 2 mg.ml-1 by addition of 1.2x LDS sample buffer containing 60mM DTT (NuPAGETM ThermoFisher Scientific) to PBS washed cells followed by sonication. For each replicate 25ug protein was fractionated by SDS-PAGE (NuPage 10% polyacrylamide, Bis-Tris with MOPS buffer— Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie blue. Each lane was excised into four roughly equally sized slices and peptides were extracted by tryptic digestion (Nat Protoc. 2006;1(6):2856-60. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M.) including alkylation with chloroacetamide. Peptides were resuspended in 35 uL 0.1% TFA 0.5% acetic acid and 10uL of each analysed by LC-MS/MS. This was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45ºC. A 240 minute elution gradient with a top 10 data-dependent method was applied. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 ions with maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value of 500,000 ions and maximum injection time of 60 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’, a 40 second dynamic exclusion list was applied and ions were ignored if they had unassigned charge state 1, 8 or >8.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis used MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox, J. and Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 2008, 26, pp 1367-72.). Default setting were used except the match between runs option was enabled, which matched identified peaks among slices from the same position in the gel as well as one slice higher or lower. The uniport human proteome database (downloaded 24/02/2015 - 73920 entries) and a sequence database containing the two 6His-SUMO-KGG-mCherry constructs digested with Trypsin/P were used as search space. LFQ intensities were required. Two MaxQuant runs were performed; the first aggregating all slices per lane into a single output (“by lane”), and the second considering each slice separately (“by slice”). The former was used to determine cell-specific changes in protein abundance from the proteinGroups.txt file, and the latter used the peptides.txt file to monitor differences in abundance of SUMO-specific peptides between samples, to infer overexpression levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Stem cells, Ml792

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Molecular Biology. Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee ,Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Thomas Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology. Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee ,Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


