### Accession
PXD039481

### Title
Probing antigen–antibody interactions using limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) mediate multiple essential functions and regulatory events in living organisms. The physical interactome of a given protein can be abnormally altered in response to external and internal cues, thus modulating cell physiology and contributing to human pathologies including neurodegenerative diseases. Despite substantial efforts, current approaches cannot pinpoint structure-specific PPIs or their interaction interfaces on a proteome-wide scale. To address this limitation, we have adapted the structural proteomics method known as limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry to identify PPIs by probing protein structural alterations within cellular extracts upon treatment with a protein of interest. We demonstrate the feasibility of our method by analysis of well-characterized PPIs between the respiratory syncytial virus F glycoprotein and its site-specific antibodies. Known antigenic sites were identified directly in complex biological matrices.

### Sample Protocol
Antibodies and RSVF proteins used in this study were provided by Fabian Sesterhenn. Prior to LiP experiments, antibodies were diluted in PBS buffer, pH 7.0 to a concentration of 1 µg/µL. The InVivoMAB human IgG1 isotype control antibody (BioXCell) was diluted in PBS buffer, pH 7.0 to a concentration of 1 µg/µL. Cell pellets of HEK293T were resuspended in 400 µL LiP buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2) and lysed using a pellet pestle in ten cycles of 10 s of homogenization and 1-min pause at 4 °C. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (1,000 x g at 4 °C) for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and the remaining pellet was further resuspended in 200 µL LiP buffer. The lysis step was repeated as described and supernatants were combined. The total lysate protein concentration was determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat #23225) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RSVF proteins were incubated with site-specific and human isotype control antibodies at a molar ratio of 1:1 (protein:antibody) for 10 min at 25 °C and subjected to LiP. Proteinase K (PK) from Tritirachium album (Sigma Aldrich) was added simultaneously to all four replicates of protein samples per condition (n = 4 for all experiments) with the aid of a multichannel pipette, at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated at 25 °C for 5 min. Proteolytic reactions were stopped by heating samples for 5 min at 99 °C in a heat block. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing an equal volume of 10% sodium deoxycholate.  The HEK293T cell extract (n = 3, 100 µg), supplemented with 1 µg of postfusion RSVF, was exposed to a 5-dosage concentration series of motavizumab (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 µg). Upon 10-min incubation at 25 °C, the samples were then subjected to LiP as described above. Additionally, untreated control and one condition of treated samples in this experiment were subjected to trypsin digestion only to control for potential protein abundance changes. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP-HCl for 45 min at 37 °C. Alkylation was carried out in 40 mM IAA followed by incubation at RT in the dark for 30 min. Thereafter, samples were diluted in four volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin (both at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Digests were acidified by addition of FA to a final concentration of 2% and sodium deoxycholate precipitate was removed by filtration using a centrifugation filter at 1,000g for 5 min. Peptides were desalted using a 96-well C18 MACROspin plate with 10-100 µg capacity according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying, samples were resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The iRT kit (Biognosys AG) was added to all proteome samples as instructed by the manufacturer. Digests of RSVF and antibodies were analyzed in DIA mode on a Thermo Scientific Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were separated on a 25 cm x 0.75 µm i.d. analytical column (Thermo Fisher) packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads using a linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (95% ACN in 0.1% FA) over 30 min and a flow rate of 300 nL/min under ambient conditions. Full MS1 scans were acquired between 350 and 1400 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target of 8×105 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. Forty-one variable-width windows were utilized to measure fragmented precursor ions. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and an AGC target of 2×105 and an injection time of 54 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 30.  Proteome digests were analyzed in DDA and DIA modes on a Thermo Scientific Eclipse mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were loaded onto a 40 cm × 0.75 µm i.d. analytical column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120) and separated by a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with increasing buffer B (95% ACN in 0.1% FA) from 3% to 30%. For DDA, a full MS1 scan was acquired over a mass range of 350–1400 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 100 ms. DDA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 54 ms. To maximize parallelization, a duty cycle time was 3 s. For DIA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 100 ms. Forty-one variable-width windows were used to measure fragmented precursor ions. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 400% and an injection time of 54 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 30.

### Data Protocol
Prior to DIA spectra processing, all spectral libraries were generated using the library generation functionality of Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys AG) using the default settings with minor adaptations. In brief, the DIA and/or DDA files were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database (updated 2020-03-20), the MaxQuant contaminants FASTA database (245 entries), the Biognosys’ iRT peptides FASTA database, and the prefusion or postfusion RSVF FASTA database. For LiP–MS datasets, digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and semi-specific. For trypsin-only treated controls, a digestion enzyme was Trypsin/P with specific cleavage rules. The minimum allowed peptide length was set to 5 amino acids with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. DIA spectra were further processed with Spectronaut 15 using the default settings with a few modifications. In short, dynamic retention time extraction was applied with a correction factor of 1. The identification of peptides and proteins was controlled by the false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The machine learning algorithm and Q-value calculations were run across the entire experiment. Peptide quantification was carried out on the modified peptide sequence level using precursor ions. Protein quantification included only proteotypic peptides and global median normalization was applied. Peptide reports provided by Spectronaut were processed using an in-house R script in R version 4.2.0. Raw abundances of proteotypic RSVF peptides were normalized using variance stabilizing normalization with the vsn package (version 3.64.0). The normalized log2-transformed peptide abundances from treated samples with site-specific antibodies against RSVF were compared to control, i.e., anti-Human IgG1 kappa antibody with RSVF. The log2 FC and the statistical significance (represented by p-values adjusted by multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg method) were computed using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test provided by the limma package (version 3.52.4). Peptides with at least three measured peptide abundances for each condition, fulfilling the defined criteria (|log2 FC| > 1, q-value < 0.01), were considered significant. Significant peptides were mapped onto 3D structures of prefusion (PDB: 4JHW) and postfusion (PDB: 3RRR) RSVF. Peptide reports generated in Spectronaut were processed using an in-house R script in R version 4.2.0. In brief, proteins with at least two peptide precursors were considered. Only proteotypic peptides were covered. Raw peptide abundances were normalized using variance stabilizing normalization with the vsn package (version 3.64.0). We used an outlier detection method based on the interquartile range (IQR) to define boundaries outside of the first (Q1) and third (Q3) quartile for peptide abundances within each condition per peptide precursor. Peptide abundances that are more than 1.5 times the IQR below Q1 or more than 1.5 times above Q3 are considered outliers. This approach ensured that potential outliers are removed prior to dose-response analysis. Subsequently, we considered only peptide precursors that were measured in at least 3 replicates, covering at least 5 conditions. Filtered data, consisting of normalized log2-transformed peptide abundances, were scaled to a range between 0 and 1 and subjected to dose-response analysis using the protti package (version 0.5.0) that utilizes the log-logistic model with four parameters (LL.4) from the drc package (version 3.0-1). The Pearson’s correlation coefficient r was used to assess the strength of the sigmoidal trend of dose-response profiles. Only peptides that fulfilled the Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected p-values (q-values) < 0.01 obtained from an analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson’s correlation coefficients r > 0.85 were considered significant. Unscaled peptide abundances were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant peptides using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package (version 3.52.4). The resulting p-values were adjusted by multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg method. The output of the statistical analysis was filtered using the following cutoffs: q-value < 0.01 and |log2 FC| > 0.75. The final list of peptides that fulfilled all the defined criteria represented differentially altered peptides. Significant peptides were mapped onto the three-dimensional structure of postRSVF (PDB: 3RRR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibody-antigen interaction, Structural proteomics, Lc-msms, Interactome, Proteomics, Limited proteolysis, Mass spectrometry, Respiratory syncytial virus fusion glycoprotein, Protein-protein interactions, Mammalian cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Aleš Holfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


