### Accession
PXD009513

### Title
Combined phosphoproteome analysis of the response to mycobacterial cord factor reveals a dichotomy of Mincle-dependent and -independent signaling in macrophages

### Description
Sensing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by the immune system relies on recognition by macrophages. Mycobacterial cord factor, trehalose-6,6’-dimycolate (TDM), is the most abundant cell wall glycolipid and binds to the C-type lectin receptor Mincle. To explore the kinase signaling linking the TDM-Mincle interaction to gene expression, we employed quantitative phosphoproteome analysis using dimethyl-labeling and high-resolution mass spectrometry. TDM caused upregulation of 6.7% and suppressed 3.8% of the 14k phospho-sites identified in 3727 proteins. Mincle-dependent phosphorylation was observed for several canonical players of CLR signaling (e.g. PLC, PKC), and was enriched for PKC and GSK3 kinase motifs. Mincle-dependent activation of the PI3K-AKT-GSK3 pathway contributed to TDM-induced inflammatory gene expression and required the PI3K regulatory subunit p85. Unexpectedly, a substantial fraction of TDM-induced phosphorylation was Mincle-independent, a finding which was paralleled by RNAseq-based transcriptome data. GO and pathway enrichment analysis of both datasets concurred in the requirement for Mincle in “innate immune response”. In contrast, Mincle-independent phosphorylation and transcriptome responses to TDM were linked to “cell cycle” and to the DNA damage response. Collectively, our global analyses show substantial reprogramming of macrophages by mycobacterial cord factor and reveal a dichotomy of Mincle-dependent and –independent signaling linked to distinct biological responses

### Sample Protocol
Protein amount in WT and Mincle-/- macrophages with or without glycolipid compounds (TDM and ISO, respectively) were determined by EZQ protein assay (Pierce). An equivalent of 4 mg of protein was reduced (10 mM TCEP, 30 min, 56C) and alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min, @RT in dark) prior to trypsin digestion (Worthington, Trypsin TPCK treated). Peptides were desalted via C18Sep-Pak SPE (Waters) and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Peptides samples were re-suspended in 100 L of 100 mM TEAB and Dimethyl labelling as follows: WT-Iso and Mincle-/--TDM were labelled with the light isotope-coded chemicals (12CH2O and NaBH3CN) while the intermediate isotope-coded dimethyl chemicals (12CD2O and NaBH3CN) was used for the labelling of WT-TDM samples. The chemical reaction was quenched by the addition of 1% ammonium hydroxide and further neutralized by the addition of 50% TFA. Labelled peptides were desalted via C18 Sep-Pak SPE (Waters) and dried under vacuum centrifugation and analysed individually by LC-MS/MS to ensure > 95% labelling efficiency. The three different conditions were combined in 1:1 ratio as follows, WT-TDM (Intermediate) vs. WT-Iso (light) and WT-TDM (intermediate) vs. Mincle-/--TDM (light), and subjected to fractionation by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC; REF McNulty & Annan, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics MCP, 2008 PMID: 18212344). Peptides were collected in 13 fractions and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 spin columns before LC-MS/MS analysis (REF Larsen MR et al, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics MCP, 2005 PMID: 15858219).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.1.7 (Cox & Mann, 2008 PMID: 19029910) with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus), deamidation (NQ), hydroxyproline (P), quantitation labels Dimethyl and Dimethyl:2H4 on N-terminal and/or lysine, and trypsin as enzyme with 2 missed cleavages. Search was conducted using the Uniprot-Trembl Mouse database (51,373 entries, downloaded February 19th, 2014), including common contaminants. Mass accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5 amino acids. Quantification of identified proteins referred to razor and unique peptides and required a minimum ratio count of 2. Dimethyl-based relative ratios were extracted for each protein/conditions and were used for downstream analyses

### Publication Abstract
Immune sensing of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> relies on recognition by macrophages. Mycobacterial cord factor, trehalose-6,6'-dimycolate (TDM), is the most abundant cell wall glycolipid and binds to the C-type lectin receptor (CLR) MINCLE. To explore the kinase signaling linking the TDM-MINCLE interaction to gene expression, we employed quantitative phosphoproteome analysis. TDM caused upregulation of 6.7% and suppressed 3.8% of the 14,000 phospho-sites identified on 3727 proteins. MINCLE-dependent phosphorylation was observed for canonical players of CLR signaling (<i>e.g.</i> PLC&#x3b3;, PKC&#x3b4;), and was enriched for PKC&#x3b4; and GSK3 kinase motifs. MINCLE-dependent activation of the PI3K-AKT-GSK3 pathway contributed to inflammatory gene expression and required the PI3K regulatory subunit p85&#x3b1;. Unexpectedly, a substantial fraction of TDM-induced phosphorylation was MINCLE-independent, a finding paralleled by transcriptome data. Bioinformatics analysis of both data sets concurred in the requirement for MINCLE for innate immune response pathways and processes. In contrast, MINCLE-independent phosphorylation and transcriptome responses were linked to cell cycle regulation. Collectively, our global analyses show substantial reprogramming of macrophages by TDM and reveal a dichotomy of MINCLE-dependent and -independent signaling linked to distinct biological responses.

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mouse, Macrophages, Phosphoprotoemic

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Institute for cell and Molecular biology (ICAMB), Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, NewcastleUpon Tyne, UK

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Matthias Trost
Institute for cell and Molecular biology (ICAMB), Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, NewcastleUpon Tyne, UK


