### Accession
PXD024233

### Title
Reading ADP-ribosylation signalling using chemical biology and interaction proteomics

### Description
In this project, we describe a global, proteome-wide screening for ADP-ribosylation interactome. Our data reveals novel MAR and PAR readers. We identify both cell type-dependent and independent ADPr interactors. In addition, we quantify apparent binding affinities of large number of ADPr readers. We also identify proteins, whose interaction with ADPr modifications is regulated upon DNA damage induction.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were on-bead tryptic digested. Peptides were separated on an reverse-phase EASY-nLC connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Q-Exactive, Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 or Fusion mass spectrometer. In all the LFQ experiments, peptides were separated using a gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), followed by washes at 50% and 95% buffer B for a total data collection time of either 140- or 240-min. Peptides generated in MAR and PAR PAQMAN assays were separated using a 240-min gradient of buffer B, as described in Gräwe C., et al., Methods, 2020. Spectra recording was done in CID mode.

### Data Protocol
For label free quantification, MaxQuant version 1.5.0.1 was used to analyze the raw files with default settings and searching against the UniProt human proteome. Additionally, match between runs, label-free and IBAQ quantifications were enabled.  PAQMAN experiments were analysed as shown by Grawe C., et al., Methods, 2020.  For TMT-based quantification, spectral matching to peptides, peptide identification grouping into proteins, and isobaric label quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The pre-defined processing workflow “PWF_Fusion_Reporter_Based_Quan_SPS_MS3_SequestHT_Percolator” and the consensus workflow “CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_Quan_Results” were used. The TMT 10-plex quantification method was enabled with the 131 mass set as the control channel. For the Sequest HT search, database parameters were set to: tryptic digestion allowing two missed cleavages, peptide length between 6 and 144 amino acids. The search was performed against the UniProt human proteome. A precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6Da were used. The following modifications were included: cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021Da, static modification), methionine oxidation (15.995Da, dynamic modification) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.011Da, dynamic modification). Moreover, the 6-plex TMT reagent mass (229.163Da) was included as a dynamic modification on lysine, histidine, serine, and threonine residues, as well as the N-terminus of the peptide. A strict target FDR of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.05 were set up for FDR filtering. Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping, and unique peptides were used for quantification. No peptide quantification normalization was applied.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribose (ADPr) readers are essential components of ADP-ribosylation signaling, which regulates genome maintenance and immunity. The identification and discrimination between monoADPr (MAR) and polyADPr (PAR) readers is difficult because of a lack of suitable affinity-enrichment reagents. We synthesized well-defined ADPr probes and used these for affinity purifications combined with relative and absolute quantitative mass spectrometry to generate proteome-wide MAR and PAR interactomes, including determination of apparent binding affinities. Among the main findings, MAR and PAR readers regulate various common and distinct processes, such as the DNA-damage response, cellular metabolism, RNA trafficking, and transcription. We monitored the dynamics of PAR interactions upon induction of oxidative DNA damage and uncovered the mechanistic connections between ubiquitin signaling and ADP-ribosylation. Taken together, chemical biology enables exploration of MAR and PAR readers using interaction proteomics. Furthermore, the generated MAR and PAR interaction maps significantly expand our current understanding of ADPr signaling.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Adpr-binding proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands


