### Accession
PXD023361

### Title
The Cdk8 kinase module regulates Mediator-RNA polymerase II interaction

### Description
We use biochemically reconstituted transcription initiation components including the Mediator core and Cdk8 kinase modules (CKM) to investigate the function of the CKM in regulating the Mediator-RNA polymerase II interaction in a highly purified system. We use cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry to map the interaction of the CKM and core Mediator, and in vitro phosphorylation assays followed by phosphopeptide enrichment coupled to mass spectrometry to identify Cdk8 phosphorylation targets in this context and biochemically dissect their functions. Finally, we investigate the function of phosphorylation by Cdk8 on transcription in vivo. Based on that, we propose a model to integrate the phosphorylation-dependent and -independent functions of the CKM in transcription initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for crosslinking experiment was performed as follows: Recombinant Cdk8 kinase (CKM) module and core Mediator (c-Med) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae were mixed at 1:1 ratio, dialyzed into a lower salt buffer. The complex was crosslinked with BS3, the reaction was quenched with Tris. The crosslinked complex was separated on Native-PAGE, two full lanes containing the c-Med CKM complex were excised and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed.Extracted peptides were dried, resuspended in buffer containing 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA and were subjected to HPLC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system. Peptides were loaded on a Pepmap 300 C18 column (Thermo Fisher), peptides were separated on an in house packed (ReproSil- Pur 120Å, 1.9 μm, C18-AQ, 30 cm column with 75 mm inner diameter) during a 120-minute LC gradient. The parameters during mass spectrometric measurement were as follows: data dependent top 20 method was used. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000, automatic gain control was set to 5E5. Precursors between 380 and 1580 m/z with the charge state of +2 to +7 or +3 to +7 were chosen. MS2 resolution were set to and 30,000 and AGC target was set to 2E5. Precursors selected for MS2 were fragmented using 30% normalized collision energy, higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Maximum injection time was set to 60 ms and 200 ms for MS1 and MS2 acquisition respectively, dynamic exclusion was set to 10 seconds. Sample preparation for phosphopeptide enrichment was performed the following way: Pol II preinitiation complex(PIC)-cMed was assembled on an immobilized template, and incubated with CKM(A) and ATP, or PIC components and cMed were incubated with CKM(A) and ATP without prior PIC formation, respectively, and unbound, elution fractions were run on separate lanes and extracted for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phoshopeptide enrichment was performed using TiO2 beads.Enriched peptides were submitted to HPLC-MS/MS analysis on a Q-Exective HF quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system. Peptides were separated on a in house made 30 cm main column (ReproSil- Pur 120Å, 1.9 μm, C18-AQ, 75 mm inner diameter.) The chromatographic separation took 60 minutes. The parameters used during mass spectrometric measurement were as follows: data dependent top 15 acquisition method, MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired with 120,000 and 30,000 resolution respectively. Automatic gain control was set to 1E6 for MS1 and 1E5 for MS2. Precursors between 350 and 1600 m/z with charge state between +2 to +6 were chosen. For MS2 fragmentation higher higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 28% normalized collision energy was used. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and 110 ms for MS1 and MS2 acquisition respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The .raw files were searched by pLink 2, version 2.3.1, customized protein database was used containing the recombinant proteins. During crosslinked peptide identification the following parameters were used: BS3 was set as crosslinker, trypsin with 3 missed cleavages as protease. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was defined as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Protein-protein crosslinks were filtered with a 1 % FDR on the PSM level. Database search for the phospho site identification was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Yeast protein sequence data including TrEMBL sequences was downloaded from Uniprot (July 2014, 108460 entries). During database search the following parameters were used: MS1 tolerance 4.5 ppm, MS2 tolerance 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fix modification. Variable modifications were as follows: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation serine, threonine and tyrosine. 1% FDR was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk8, Transcription, Rna polymerase ii, Mediator

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen,Germany and Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Fanni Laura Bazso

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen,Germany and Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany


