### Accession
PXD013801

### Title
CD22 interactome

### Description
CD22 (Siglec-2) is a member of the Siglec family. It is an inhibitory co-receptor of the B-cell-receptor (BCR) and inhibits B–cell activation. Upon BCR stimulation ITIMs in the cytoplasmic tail of CD22 are phosphorylated. This triggers CD22 signalling pathways, which lead to a decreased calcium mobilization in the B cell and thus an inhibition of BCR signalling. Although some CD22 binding partners, such as the phosphatase SHP-1, have already been identified, we deciphered the CD22 interactome in more detail, to gain a deeper understanding of CD22 molecular mechanisms and signalling events after BCR activation. Stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in combination with mass spectrometry analysis enabled the identification of specific CD22 interaction partners in a quantitative proteomics approach. Hereby, several new CD22 associated proteins were identified that have not been linked to CD22 yet. One of those interacting proteins is cullin 3, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. It was revealed that cullin 3 is important for clathrin-dependent CD22 internalization after BCR stimulation and CD22 surface expression. Further analysis of B-cell specific cullin 3 deficient mice showed an important role of cullin 3 in B cell development. These mice have strongly reduced numbers of mature B cells in the periphery, which are characterized by increased CD22 expression and additionally by pre-activated and apoptotic phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation:  CD22-TST-DT40 and WT DT40 cells were metabolically labelled using the SILAC method. Therefore cells were cultivated for 10 days in SILAC RPMI (Gibco) supplemented with 10 % dialysed FCS (Pan), 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 µM beta-mercaptoethanol, 100 U/ml Pen/Strep, 200 mg/l L-arginine and 40 mg/l L-lysine. Arginine and lysine were either supplemented as natural isotopes (light labelling) or heavy amino acid isotopes 13C615N4 arginine and 13C6 lysine (heavy labelling). 1x108 cells of each CD22-TST-DT40 and WT DT40 were starved for 1 h, washed twice with PBS (Gibco) and resuspended in PBS. If applicable, BCR was stimulated with 2 µg/ml anti-chicken-IgM (clone M4, kind gift from Prof. Jürgen Wienands, University of Göttingen) for 5 min at 37 °C. Afterwards cells were pelleted by centrifugation (1300 rpm, 5 min, 4 °C) and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (138 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 10 % glycerine, 1 mM sodium-orthovanadate, 0.5 mM EDTA pH8.0, 2% NP40; freshly supplemented with leupeptin, sodium-orthovanadate, PSMF and aprotinin) for 30 min on ice. CD22-TST and bound proteins were purified from cell lysate via Twin-Strep-Tag using Strep-Tactin Type3 XT bead suspension (IBA) . Elution was performed in 12 µl Rotiload (Roth) at 96 °C. Eluates of the samples to be compared (e.g. unstimulated CD22-TST-DT40 and unstimulated WT DT40) were combined and separated via SDS-PAGE. Colloidal coomassie staining of the proteins was performed with PageBlue protein staining solution (Thermo Scientific). In Gel Digestion and Peptide Extraction: Each protein lane was excised and separated into nine to ten gel slices. Slices were washed three consecutive times with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 5 mM ABC / 50 % EtOH (v/v) each. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min followed by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. Gel slices were then successively washed and dehydrated with 10 mM ABC followed by 100 % EtOH three times each. Slices were dried in vacuo for complete dehydration. Tryptic digestion (Promega, sequencing grade, 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) was performed overnight  in 10 mM ABC at 37 °C. For peptide extraction two consecutive times 0.05 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile were added to each slice an incubated in an ice-cold ultrasonic bath for ten min. Extracted peptides were dried in vacuo and stored at -80°C until LC-MS analysis. LC-MS Analysis:  LC-MS analyses were performed with an Ultimate 3000 RCLCnano HPLC system coupled online to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). The UHPLC system was equipped with two C18 µ-precolumns (Ø 0.3 mm x 5 mm; PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (Ø 75 µ m x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Resuspended peptides (0.1 % TFA, v/v) were loaded and washed for 5 min one precolumn. Peptide separation was performed at 40 °C and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of solvent A [2 % DMSO (v/v)/0.1 % formic acid (FA) (v/v) ] and solvent B [86 % acetonitrile (ACN) (v/v), 2 % DMSO (v/v), 0.1 % FA(v/v)]. applying a linear gradient from 3 % to 39 % solvent B in 30 min. Afterwards, the gradient increased from 39 % to 95 % solvent B in 5 min and was kept constant at 95 % for 5 min. Subsequently,  the system was re-equilibration at 3 % solvent B for 14 min. The QExactive Plus was operated in positive mode and externally calibrated using standard compounds. Peptides were ionized with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and either stainless steel (Thermo Scientific) or fused silica emitters (New Objective) with a spray voltage of 1.8 and 1.5 kV, respectively.  The transfer capillary temperature was set to 200 °C. Full scans were measured in a scan range between 375 – 1700 m/z and with a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 ions with a maximum ion time of 60 ms. For MS/MS measurements the top 12 most intense ion signals exceeding the intensity threshold of 5.8e3 were selected and subjected to higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 28. Fragment spectra were measured with a resolution of 35,000 (at 200 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5 ions and a maximum ion time of 120 ms. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursor ions was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The Andromeda/MaxQuant software pipeline (version 1.5.3.30) was used for LC-MS raw data analysis (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al, 2011). The UniPort ProteomeSet of Gallus Gallus including isoforms (17,902 entries, downloaded in February 2015) was extended by the three mouse CD22 isoforms. This database and a set of common contaminations provided by MaxQuant were used to generate peak lists from MS/MS spectra. The MaxQuant database search was performed with the following parameters: sample multiplicity two (Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels); tryptic specificity allowing up to three missed cleavages; acetylation of the N-termini and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; mass tolerances of 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search of precursor ions. For identification a false discovery rate of 1 % was applied and the following parameters altered: maximal peptide mass 5,600 Da; minimal unique peptides: one. Furthermore the “re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were enabled. For quantification a minimal ratio count of two unique peptides was selected. .Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) was used for statistical analysis of MaxQuant data from 6 biological replicates. In brief, entries only identified by site, reverse or potential contaminants were removed. Data were further filtered for at least 3 valid values, normalized SILAC ratios from label-switch experiments were inverted and log2-transformed mean ratios were calculated. A one sample t-test was applied to identify reproducible identified proteins (p < 0.05). Proteins with a significant p-value and a mean log2 ratio > 1 were considered as enriched

### Publication Abstract
B lymphocytes are important players of the adaptive immune system. However, not just activation of B cells but also regulation of B cell signaling is important to prevent hyperactivity and dysregulation of the immune response. Different mechanisms and proteins contribute to this balance. One of these is CD22, a member of the Siglec family. It is an inhibitory coreceptor of the BCR and inhibits B cell activation. Upon BCR stimulation, CD22-dependent inhibition of BCR signaling results in a decreased calcium mobilization. Although some CD22 binding partners have already been identified, the knowledge about the CD22 interactome is still incomplete. In this study, quantitative affinity purification-mass spectrometry enabled the delineation of the CD22 interactome in the B cell line DT40. These data will clarify molecular mechanisms and CD22 signaling events after BCR activation and revealed several new CD22-associated proteins. One new identified interaction partner is the E3 ubiquitin ligase cullin 3, which was revealed to regulate CD22 surface expression and clathrin-dependent CD22 internalization after BCR stimulation. Furthermore cullin 3 was identified to be important for B lymphocytes in general. B cell-specific cullin 3-deficient mice show reduced developing B cells in the bone marrow and a severe pro-B cell proliferation defect. Mature B cells in the periphery are also reduced and characterized by increased CD22 expression and additionally by preactivated and apoptotic phenotypes. The findings reveal novel functions of cullin 3 in B lymphocytes, namely regulating CD22 surface expression and internalization after B cell activation, as well as promoting proliferation of pro-B cells.

### Keywords
Qexactive plus, Dt40 cells, Silac, B cells, Cullin 3, Cd22

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


