### Accession
PXD021094

### Title
Proteomic profiles of control, AUF1-overexpressed, and CVB3-infected HeLa cells

### Description
CVB 3C protease (3Cpro) plays a specific cleavage role on AU-rich binding factor (AUF1, also called as hnRNP D), consequently disputes the regulations of AUF1 on downstream molecules stabilities and transcriptions. In our work, iTRAQ approach was firstly used to quantitatively identify differentially expressed cellular proteins in AUF1-overexpressed HeLa cells, which would provide us a new insight into the role of AUF1 on cellular progress. We identified 1290 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), including 882 upregulated and 408 downregulated DEPs at 24 h post infection (p.i.), The DEPs are involved in a variety of cellular functions such as metabolic processes, transcription, and RNA binding and exhibit different subcellular localization via GO term, protein interaction network, and series analysis. Among DEPs, DDX5, POLR2, and PPP2CA showed important roles in cellular metabolism. Especially, DDX5 was negatively regulated by AUF1 and increased during CVB infection, which in turns played an inhibitory effect on CVB replication. These findings are particularly important in the development new anti-viral therapy strategies targeting on series of new molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Transfected HeLa cells with EGFP-AUF-1 for 24h, and cells transfected with lipofectamine only were used ascontrol. cells in C3 group were infected with CVB3 (MOI=10, 6 h). Cell lysates were harvested by RIPA buffer. Sample was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 22% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive TM plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28, 32; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.28). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissprot Human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected in Mascot. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
Coxsackievirus B (CVB) 3C protease (3C<sup>pro</sup>) plays a specific cleavage role on AU-rich binding factor (AUF1, also called hnRNP D), which consequently disputes the regulation of AUF1 on downstream molecules. In our study, the iTRAQ approach was first used to quantify the differentially expressed cellular proteins in AUF1-overexpressing HeLa cells, which provides straightforward insight into the role of AUF1 during viral infection. A total of 1,290 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), including 882 upregulated and 408 downregulated proteins, were identified. The DEPs are involved in a variety of cellular processes via GO terms, protein-protein interactions, and a series of further bioinformatics analyses. Among the DEPs, some demonstrated important roles in cellular metabolism. In particular, DDX5 was further verified to be negatively regulated by AUF1 and increased in CVB-infected cells, which in turn promoted CVB replication. These findings provide potential novel ideas for exploring new antiviral therapy targets.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Auf1, Lysate, Human hela cells

### Affiliations
Harbin medical university
qingdao municipal hospital clinical research center

### Submitter
wu jingqi

### Lab Head
Dr Tianying Wang
qingdao municipal hospital clinical research center


