### Accession
PXD012723

### Title
Crosslinking RNF168(1-113) to Nucleosome core particels

### Description
The project aimed to identify interaction sites of RNF168 with the Nucleosomes. RNF168 interaction with the Nucleosome was probed by BS3 crosslinking to support structure modeling based on NMR and mutagenesis experiments

### Sample Protocol
Nucleosome core particles (NCP), reconstituted from Xenopus laevis histones and 601-DNA, and RNF1681-113 were crosslinked at final concentrations of 15 µM RNF168 and 5 µM NCP in 10 µL volume using a buffer containing 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl. The samples were incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. A 500-fold molar excess of BS3 (with respect to NCP concentration) was added and crosslinking proceeded for 20 minutes at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by addition of Tris pH 8 to a final concentration of 125 mM. The samples were then diluted to a volume of 100 µL using a buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8 and 150 mM NaCl. TCEP was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and the samples were incubated at 60 °C for 30 minutes. Chloroacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM and the samples were incubated in the dark for 20 minutes. The samples were the digested using trypsin at 37 °C overnight. The digest was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1 %. The digested samples were purified using 100 µl ZipTip pipette tips (Merck) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then concentrated to ~ 5 μL using a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted with 20 µL Buffer A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were analyzed by online nano-high-pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectromery (MS/MS) on an Q Exactive Plus Instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim C18 PepMap 100 nano Trap, 2 cmx 100 μm I.D., 5-μm particle size and 300-Å pore size; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 15 μL/min for 3 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC nanocolumn, 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 3-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size; Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 2.5% buffer B to 42.5% over 95 min. Data were collected in positive mode using a Data Dependent Acquisition m/z of 375–2000 as the scan range, and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for MS/MS of the 12 most intense ions with z 2-5. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70 000 resolution, MS maximum injection time 118 ms, AGC target 3E6, ion intensity threshold of 4.2e4 and dynamic exclusion set to 15 s. MS/MS resolution of 35000 at Orbitrap with the maximum injection time of 118 ms, AGC of 5e5 and HCD with Collision Energy=27%.

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis, Thermo raw files were analyzed using the pLink 2.3.4 search engine50, searching against the sequences of RNF1681-113, Histone H2A, H3, H4 and H2B in FASTA format. The default settings for searches were used. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl on Cysteins as a fixed modification. False discovery rates of 1% for peptide spectrum match level were applied by searching a reverse database. Reproducible crosslinks were identified from three replicate experiments and manually verified. Crosslinks within the histone core were analyzed for compatibility with nucleosome structure by calculating the solvent accessible surface distance using Jwalk.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination of chromatin by modification of histone H2A is a critical step in both regulation of DNA repair and regulation of cell fate. These very different outcomes depend on the selective modification of distinct lysine residues in H2A, each by a specific E3 ligase. While polycomb PRC1 complexes modify K119, resulting in gene silencing, the E3 ligase RNF168 modifies K13/15, which is a key event in the response to DNA double-strand breaks. The molecular origin of ubiquitination site specificity by these related E3 enzymes is one of the open questions in the field. Using a combination of NMR spectroscopy, crosslinking mass-spectrometry, mutagenesis and data-driven modelling, here we show that RNF168 binds the acidic patch on the nucleosome surface, directing the E2 to the target lysine. The structural model highlights the role of E3 and nucleosome in promoting ubiquitination and provides a basis for understanding and engineering of chromatin ubiquitination specificity.

### Keywords
Rnf168, Nucleosome, Xl-ms

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. EMBL-Australia and the ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, Clayton, Australia.

### Submitter
Michael Uckelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Davidovich
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. EMBL-Australia and the ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, Clayton, Australia.


