### Accession
PXD010335

### Title
Biological Plasticity Rescues Target Activity in CRISPR Knock Outs

### Description
Systematic investigation of residual protein expression in frameshift KO mutations derived from CRISPR-Cas9 in clonal cell lines

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeled tryptic digest of E.coli lysate mixed at defined ratios spiked into TMT labeled human background. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the samples with TMT 126-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. TMT labeled tryptic digest of E.coli lysate mixed at defined ratios. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the samples with TMT 126-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. HAP1 cells with different frameshift mutations introduced by CRISPR-Cas9. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the samples with TMT 126-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. K562 cells with different NGLY frameshift mutations introduced by CRISPR-Cas9. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase. Labelling of the samples with TMT 126-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. HAP1 wild type label free analysis. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Gene knock outs (KOs) are efficiently engineered through CRISPR-Cas9-induced frameshift mutations. While the efficiency of DNA editing is readily verified by DNA sequencing, a systematic understanding of the efficiency of protein elimination has been lacking. Here we devised an experimental strategy combining RNA sequencing and triple-stage mass spectrometry to characterize 193 genetically verified deletions targeting 136 distinct genes generated by CRISPR-induced frameshifts in HAP1 cells. We observed residual protein expression for about one third of the quantified targets, at variable levels from low to original, and identified two causal mechanisms, translation reinitiation leading to N-terminally truncated target proteins or skipping of the edited exon leading to protein isoforms with internal sequence deletions. Detailed analysis of three truncated targets, BRD4, DNMT1 and NGLY1, revealed partial preservation of protein function. Our results imply that systematic characterization of residual protein expression or function in CRISPR-Cas9-generated KO lines is necessary for phenotype interpretation.

### Keywords
Crispr-cas9, Hap1

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


