### Accession
PXD026950

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative serum proteomic analysis in ischemic stroke patients

### Description
Hemorrhagic transformation (HT), which occurs with or without reperfusion treatments (thrombolysis and/or thrombectomy), deteriorates the outcomes of ischemic stroke patients. It is essential to find clinically reliable biomarkers that can predict HT. In this study, we screened for potential serum biomarkers from an existing blood bank and database with 243 suspected acute ischemic stroke (AIS) patients. A total of 37 patients were enrolled, who were diagnosed as AIS but did not receive reperfusion treatment. They were divided into two groups based on whether they accompanied with HT or not (5 HT and 32 non-HT). Serum samples were labeled by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and compared under NCBInr database. A total of 647 proteins in sera samples were captured and the levels of 17 proteins (12 up-regulated and 5 down-regulated) were significantly different. These differentially expressed proteins were further categorized with Gene Ontology functional classification annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes metabolic pathway analysis into biological processes. Further protein-protein interaction analysis using String database discovered that, among the differential expressed proteins, 10 pairs of proteins were found to have crosstalk connections, which may have direct (physical) and indirect (functional) interactions for the development of HT. Our findings suggest that these differentially expressed proteins could serve as potential biomarkers for predicting HT after ischemic stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Abundant protein depletion and quality testing  Abundant proteins in serum, including albumin, IgG and 10 other high-abundant proteins that can make up more than 70% of total serum protein, were removed according to the instruction of Pierce Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher). Samples were concentrated with 3KD ultrafiltration centrifugal tube (Millipore) and replaced using urea solution (8M, containing protease inhibitor) for 3 times. Total protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher). SDS-PAGE gel was stained using Coomassie blue of Biofuraw™ Fast Protein Stain (Tanon) to make sure the samples meet the requirement of iTRAQ analysis (diverse proteins without degradation).  iTRAQ labeling and reversed phase chromatography The sample labeling is shown in Table 3. The methods of sample digestion, iTRAQ labeling and high pH UPLC were described as previous studies(Wang et al., 2017). After reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion, the peptides were dried by vacuum and dissolved by 0.5m TEAB. iTRAQ reagent (AB SCIEX, Lot. 4390812) was added to each tube and incubated at room temperature for 2h. The equal amount of labeled products were mixed in one tube and drained by vacuum concentrator. The peptides were dissolved in UPLC loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, adjusted to pH 10 with ammonia) and loaded on a reversed-phase C18 column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm×150 mm, Waters，USA) and fractionated by a UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific Vanquish Flex, Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. Then fractions were collected for LC-mass spectrometer (MS)/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis The fractions were then separated by EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo, USA) and connected to Q_Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, USA). Briefly, the peptides were separated by a C18 column (75μm×25cm, Thermo Scientific, USA) in a linear gradient, from 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile to 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile at 200 nL/min for 120 min. A single Orbitrap MS scan from 350 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with AGC set at 3e6 was followed by up to 20 ms/ms scans at a resolution of 15,000 with AGC set at 5e4. The top 20 were selected for fragmentation per cycle with dynamic exclusion time of 20 s. Protein identification The raw data were analyzed using ProteomeDiscovererTM Software 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and the NCBInr and SwissProt/UniProt sequence databases.  A standard parameter set was used for the search, including Cys alkylation by iodoacetamide, dynamic modifications (Oxidation, Acetyl, iTRAQ8plex, Met-loss, Met-loss+Acetyl), Homo sapiens, trypsin digestion (max. missed cleavage sites≤2; FDR≤0.01).

### Data Protocol
Significant difference was calculated using t-test: p<0.05 and (fold cutoff <0.83 down-expression or >1.20 up-expression). The differential proteins were classified and analyzed using following databases: Gene Ontology (GO) for functional annotation analysis (http://www.geneontology.org/); Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) mapping for proteins signal enrichment analysis (http://www.kegg.jp/), and String database (http://string-db.org/) for searching known and predicted protein-protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Acute ischemic stroke, Hemorrhagic transformation, Itraq

### Affiliations
Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute and Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University
Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University

### Submitter
Zhifeng Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Zhifeng Qi
Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute and Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University


