### Accession
PXD014298

### Title
The C-terminal domains SnRK2-box and ABA-box have a role in sugarcane SnRK2s auto-activation and activity

### Description
Resistance to drought stress is fundamental to plant survival and development. Abscisic acid (ABA) is one of the major hormones involved in different types of abiotic and biotic stress responses. ABA intracellular signaling has been extensively explored in Arabidopsis thaliana and occurs via a phosphorylation cascade mediated by three related protein kinases, denominated SnRK2s (SNF1-related protein kinases). However, the role of ABA signaling and the biochemistry of SnRK2 in crop plants remains underexplored. Considering the importance of the ABA hormone in abiotic stress tolerance, here we investigated the regulatory mechanism of sugarcane SnRK2s - known as SAPKs (Stress/ABA-activated Protein Kinases). The crystal structure of ScSAPK10 revealed the characteristic SnRK2 family architecture, in which the regulatory SnRK2-box interacts with the kinase domain αC helix. To study sugarcane SnRK2 regulation, we produced a series of mutants for the protein regulatory domains SnRK2-box and ABA-box. Surprisingly, mutations in the SnRK2-box did not drastically affect sugarcane SnRK2 activity, in contrast to previous observations for the homologous proteins in Arabidopsis. Also, we found that the ABA-box might have a role in SnRK2 activation in the absence of PP2C phosphatase. Taken together, our results demonstrate that both C-terminal domains of sugarcane SnRK2 proteins play a role in protein activation and activity.

### Sample Protocol
ScSAPK8 WT phosphosite identification Purified ScSAPK8 WT and ∆ABA-box mutant (20 μM final concentration) were diluted in GF buffer supplemented with 10 mM MgCl2 and incubated with 1 mM ATP (Sigma – catalog A7699) overnight at 20 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 10 mM EDTA (final concentration) before samples flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen. Protein intact mass was determined by LC-MS and phosphosites were identified by LC-MS/MS. The sample was buffer-exchanged into 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and treated with 25µL of RapiGest SF (0.2% - Waters Corp. catalog # 186001861) for 15 min at 80 °C. Dithiothreitol (DTT - 100 mM stock prepared in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate) was added to a final concentration of 4 mM and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at 60 oC. Iodoacetamide (IAA - 300 mM stock prepared in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate) was added to the mixture at a final concentration of 12 mM. The mixture was protected from light and incubated for 30 min. Trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA - catalog # V511A) prepared in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate was added to the mixture (1:100 mass ratio of trypsin to protein) and incubated for 16 hr at 37 °C under agitation. To hydrolyze the RapiGest, Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA - Pierce, Waltham, MA, USA; catalog # 53102) was added and the mixture incubated for 90 min at 37 °C. The reaction was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 min at 6 °C and the supernatant transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube (Axygen, Union City, CA, USA) for subsequent LC-MSMS analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis For phosphosite identification, samples were analyzed by reverse phase nanoLC-ESI-MSMS using an Acquity M-class HPLC system coupled to an XEVO G2 Xs Q-ToF (both from Waters Corp.). A total of 2 μL sample in mobile Solvent A was applied onto a Trap column (V/M, Symmetry C18, 100Ǻ, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) connected to an HSS T3 C18 column (75 µm x 150 mm, 1.8 μm), kept at 45 °C. LC was performed at a flow rate of 400 nL/min, and the  elution of bound peptides was performed over a 47 min gradient as follows: 0-30.37 min from 7-40% Solvent B; 30.37-32.03 min from 40-85% Solvent B; 32.34-35.34 min at 85% Solvent B; 35.34-37 min from 85-7% Solvent B and 37-47 min at 7% B. The nano-ESI source was set with the following parameters: the capillary voltage was 2.5 kV, the sampling cone and the source offset was set at 30 V, the temperature source was 70 °C, the gas flow and the purge gas were set at 50 and 150 L/h, and the nano gas flow was maintained at 0.5 bar. Data were acquired at 0.5 scan/s, over the mass range of 50-2000 m/z in positive and sensitive mode. The MS data-independent acquisition mode was used with a low energy collision switched off and a high collision energy ramp 15-45 eV in the second function for fragmentation. For mass accuracy, the Glu-Fibrinopeptide (785.84261 Da 2+) was used as lock mass at a concentration of 100 fM (in 40:60 ACN/H2O, 0.1% FA) infused at a flow rate of 0.5 µL/min via a lock spray interface and an auxiliary pump. Lock mass scans were acquired every 30 s at a rate of 0.5 scan/s. Lockmass was acquired but not applied on the fly.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic raw data were processed using Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters Corp.) against the sugarcane protein database (UniProt release 2017_12). Data processing was performed in two steps. First, PLGS extracted all acquired spectra using the following parameters:  lock mass (charge 2= 785.84261 Da/e) window set to 0.4 Da; low energy threshold fixed at 500 counts; elevated energy threshold at 50 counts; chromatographic peak width and MS ToF Resolution were set to automatic. Then, a database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide and fragment tolerance were set to automatic; 2 fragments ion matches per peptide and 5 fragments ion matches per protein were fixed, as well as a minimum of 1 peptide match per protein; one missed cleavage was allowed; trypsin was set as the primary digestion; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr residues were set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to drought stress is fundamental to plant survival and development. Abscisic acid (ABA) is one of the major hormones involved in different types of abiotic and biotic stress responses. ABA intracellular signaling has been extensively explored in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and occurs <i>via</i> a phosphorylation cascade mediated by three related protein kinases, denominated SnRK2s (SNF1-related protein kinases). However, the role of ABA signaling and the biochemistry of SnRK2 in crop plants remains underexplored. Considering the importance of the ABA hormone in abiotic stress tolerance, here we investigated the regulatory mechanism of sugarcane SnRK2s-known as stress/ABA-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). The crystal structure of ScSAPK10 revealed the characteristic SnRK2 family architecture, in which the regulatory SnRK2 box interacts with the kinase domain &#x3b1;C helix. To study sugarcane SnRK2 regulation, we produced a series of mutants for the protein regulatory domains SnRK2 box and ABA box. Mutations in ScSAPK8 SnRK2 box aimed at perturbing its interaction with the protein kinase domain reduced protein kinase activity <i>in vitro</i>. On the other hand, mutations to ScSAPK ABA box did not impact protein kinase activity but did alter the protein autophosphorylation pattern. Taken together, our results demonstrate that both SnRK2 and ABA boxes might play a role in sugarcane SnRK2 function.

### Keywords
Abiotic stress, Kinase regulation, Abscisic acid, Snrk2, Crop plant, Sugarcane

### Affiliations
SGC/Unicamp
Structural Genomics Consortium, Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Instituto de Biologia,Centro de Química Medicinal (CQMED), Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética (CBMEG), Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, 13083-875, Brazil.

### Submitter
Dev Sriranganadane

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Miguez Couñago
Structural Genomics Consortium, Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Instituto de Biologia,Centro de Química Medicinal (CQMED), Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética (CBMEG), Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, 13083-875, Brazil.


