### Accession
PXD011535

### Title
Composition of the cerebrospinal fluid of normal and Mpdz-linked hydrocephalus-harboring mice

### Description
Though congenital hydrocephalus is heritable, it has been linked only to eight genes, one of which is MPDZ. Humans and mice that carry a truncated version of MPDZ incur severe hydrocephalus resulting in acute morbidity and lethality. We show by magnetic resonance imaging that contrast-medium penetrates into the brain ventricles of mice carrying a Mpdz loss-of-function mutation, whereas none is detected in the ventricles of normal mice, implying that the permeability of the choroid plexus epithelial cell monolayer is abnormally high. Comparative proteomic analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid of normal and hydrocephalic mice revealed up to a 53-fold increase in protein concentration, suggesting that transcytosis through the choroid plexus epithelial cells of Mpdz KO mice is substantially higher than in normal mice. These conclusions are supported by ultrastructural evidence, and by immunohistochemistry and cytology data. Our results provide a straightforward and concise explanation for the pathophysiology of Mpdz-linked hydrocephalus.

### Sample Protocol
Mice aged 18-21 days were anesthetized as described, their heads shaved, and immobilized stereotactically (Robot Stereotaxic, Neurostar) while maintaining body temperature at 37C (TCAT-2LV controller, Physitemp). Anesthetic depth was verified by assessing reflexes before and during surgery. After peeling off the skin to expose the cranium, a 1.0 mm-diameter hole was drilled above the left lateral ventricle at -0.1 mm relative to the bregma, -0.80 mm from the midline, and 2.5 mm beneath the dura. A volume of 3-5 L CSF was drawn from normal mice by a 10 L syringe (Hamilton) at a rate of 1l/min and stored immediately on dry ice. CSF was drawn identically from hydrocephalic mice aside from the location of the hole that was drilled 2 mm left of the peak of the skull. A volume of 2 L of each sample was reconstituted in 50 μL 6 M urea/100 mM Tris, pH 8.0 and digested by 3 μg trypsin overnight at room temperature. Samples were desalted by spin columns (Pierce™ C18, TFS) and reconstituted in 30 μL 1 percent acetic acid. Volumes of 50 μL of each sample were injected into a reversed-phase capillary chromatography column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18, Dionex), eluted by acetonitrile/0.1 percent formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min into the intake of a linear trap quadrupole (Orbitrap Elite™, TFS) hybrid mass-spectrometer and electro-sprayed at 1.9 kV. Amino acid sequences were determined from peptide molecular weights and ion collision-induced dissociation spectra by searching the Uniprot mouse protein database with MaxQuant (V1.5.2.8) application. CSF protein concentrations were measured by spectrometry of a 1:10 diluted CSF sample (NanoDrop, TFS).

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant V1.5.2.8 with the search engine Andromeda which is integrated in MaxQuant software and the parameters used were default settings for an Orbitrap instrument. The database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 85,299 protein sequences. CID spectra collected in the experiment were used for peptide sequencing and protein identification, and the full scans were used for peptide precursor intensity calculations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Choroid plexus, Hydrocephalus, Mouse, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mpdz

### Affiliations
University of Rouen
Cardeza Center for Vascular Biology Sidney Kimmel Medical College Thomas Jefferson University

### Submitter
Arie Horowitz

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Horowitz
Cardeza Center for Vascular Biology Sidney Kimmel Medical College Thomas Jefferson University


