### Accession
PXD008348

### Title
Comprehensive identification of crosslinked peptides from methyltransferase Hmt1 and its substrate Npl3: use of multiple crosslinkers, mass spectrometry approaches and software platforms

### Description
Chemical-Crosslinking Mass Spectrometry (XLMS) using MS-cleavable crosslinkers is fast becoming an established technique in the study of protein-protein interactions for both small and large scale samples. With the increased uptake of XLMS as a technique, different combinations of crosslinker types, fragmentation strategies and analysis programs are being applied to a diverse array of biological samples. This study is focused on understanding how the three variables of an XLMS experiment – crosslinker type, fragmentation and program – could generate differences in identifications, leading to increased biological coverage of a sample. Here we probe for the first time, the known enzyme:substrate interaction between yeast arginine methyltransferase Hmt1p and its substrate, heterologous nucleolar protein Npl3p. We use this known interaction as a platform to compare two analysis programs, MeroX and XlinkX2.0, using two crosslinker types, DSSO and DSBU, and two mass-spectrometry fragmentation strategies, CID/ETD and SteppedHCD. Through these we also compare different algorithm strategies, Precursor and Reporter-Ion, as well as assess the impact of restricting data searches to lysine only crosslinks versus the inclusion of serine, threonine and tyrosine as reactive residues. From this analysis we show direct evidence of Hmt1p in contact with its known methylation sites on Npl3p, the intrinsically disordered “SRGG” region. We also show through our multi-crosslinker, multi-fragmentation and multi-software approach that two approaches leads to greater understanding and depth of a crosslinked sample, and this is due to some combinations of experimental variables creating greater coverage of crosslinks than others.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein production –Strain and culturing information was as per 24. Briefly, ORFs encoding N-terminally tagged 6xHis Hmt1p and 6xHis Npl3p were cloned into plasmid pet15b, and heterologous expression was achieved by culturing transformed E. coli to OD 600nm of 0.5, and inducing with 0.5 mM IPTG. Recombinant Hmt1p and Npl3p, were then purified on a Ni2+ charged Bio-Scale-Mini Profinity cartridge, attached to a Bio-Rad Profinia purification system according to manufacturer’s instructions.   In-vitro crosslinking with DSSO or DSBU – Equimolar (~5 μM) amounts of 6xHis-tagged Npl3p and Hmt1p were incubated for 1h at 25 °C in 20mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 10mM DTT, 50uM AdoMet and 1mM of either DSSO or DSBU. Following incubation, crosslinked proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin (Promega) as per 14. Tryptic peptide solutions were then desalted using C18 Sep-Pak (Waters) cartridges according to 14, elutions were dried by SpeedVac, and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.   LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides - Samples containing crosslinked Npl3p/HMT1p peptides were analysed in technical duplicate using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System 25 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to either a Tribrid Fusion Lumos or a Q Exactive Plus. Liquid chromatography conditions for both instruments were as follows: Solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in 2% v/v CH3CN), Solvent B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 45% (v/v) CH3CN. Gradients were 0-4min 0.1% TFA wash, 4-160 min linear gradient to 45% Solvent B, 160-164 min, linear gradient to 80% Solvent B, 164-165 min 80% Solvent B, 165-179 min linear gradient to 2% Solvent B. Peptides were ionized using nanospray ionization in positive ion mode (2 kV) for both instruments.   The Tribrid Fusion Lumos was used for MS2 CID+ETD fragmentation with parameters for CID+ETD analysis adapted from 13. Precursor ion scans were performed using Orbitrap acquisition at 60,000 FWHM, m/z range 375 to 1575. Automatic Gain Control target was set to 4×105 with a maximum inject time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection was placed in peptide mode with dynamic exclusion set to: n times =1, exclusion duration 18 s, ± 5ppm. Ions with charge states >2 were isolated in the quadrupole and fragmented using both collision induced dissociation (CID) and electron-transfer dissociation (ETD). Data-dependent product scans using CID were measured in the Orbitrap at 15,000 FWHM using a normalised collision energy of 25 ± 5% HCD. Automatic Gain Control target 5.0e4, with parallelization on. Max inject time: 120 ms. Data-dependent ETD product scans using ETD were performed using an ETD reagent target of 2×105 with calibrated Charge-Dependent ETD parameters on.   Experiments utilizing Stepped HCD were performed on a Q Exactive Plus. Precursor ion scans were performed using 70,000 FWHM, Automatic Gain Control target 1×106 for a maximum inject time of 50 ms. Filters included, dynamic exclusion, default charge state of 3-10, m/z range 375-1575, and intensity threshold 1.2×105. The top 10 peaks were then selected for MS2 Stepped HCD. Fragment ion spectrum were acquired using 17,500 FWHM, AGC target 1e5, maximum inject time 125 ms and an isolation window 2.5 m/z. HCD normalised collision energies were 25, 30, 35.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis – Raw files were converted to .mgf format using two pipelines in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. MGF files to be used for MeroX analysis were grouped according to their singly charged mass, and CID+ETD scans were combined together, according to scan number. For XlinkX, the MS2 Processor node was used to de-isotope, and de-convolute the data. CID and ETD scans were selected individually, and converted to MGF files.   Software Parameters - Where possible, the same search parameters were used in MeroX and XlinkX. Both program files were searched using the following: protease: trypsin, peptide length: 5, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (Cys), Variable modifications: Oxidation (max 2 per peptide).  Mass tolerances were left according to default parameters; these were: Precursor mass tolerance: 10ppm, Fragment mass tolerance: 20ppm. Thresholding values, such as intensity and score cut-offs, were set to 0 for MeroX and an n-score 10e-4 for XlinkX. This was done to allow post-match analysis of “high confidence” and “low confidence” hits. Each file was searched using both types of crosslinking identification algorithms: Reporter-ion algorithms, which reduce the search space by utilization of crosslinker fragments; and Precursor algorithms, which use precursor masses only (non-RISE and Enumeration)14, 15. FDRs for MeroX and XlinkX were set at 5%. Differences in parameters between programs were unavoidable due to program restrictions. These were as follows: MeroX, no maximum peptide length was used, XlinkX, maximum peptide length 60; MeroX, targeted crosslinked residues KSTY, XlinkX, targeted residue K.

### Publication Abstract
This study investigated the enzyme-substrate interaction between Saccharomyces cerevisiae arginine methyltransferase Hmt1p and nucleolar protein Npl3p, using chemical cross linking/mass spectrometry (XL/MS). We show that XL/MS can capture transient interprotein interactions that occur during the process of methylation, involving a disordered region in Npl3p with tandem SRGG repeats, and we confirm that Hmt1p and Npl3p exist as homomultimers. Additionally, the study investigated the interdependencies between variables of an XL/MS experiment that lead to the identification of identical or different cross-linked peptides. We report that there are substantial benefits, in terms of biologically relevant cross-links identified, that result from the use of two mass-spectrometry-cleavable cross-linkers [disuccinimido sulfoxide (DSSO) and disuccinimido dibutyric urea (DSBU)], two fragmentation approaches [collision-induced dissociation and electron-transfer dissociation (CID+ETD)] and stepped high-energy collision dissociation (HCD)], and two programs (MeroX and XlinkX). We also show that there are specific combinations of XL/MS methods that are more successful than others for the two proteins investigated here; these are explored in detail in the text. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008348.

### Keywords
Ms-cleavable linkers, Crosslinking-mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Daniela-Lee Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia


