### Accession
PXD027838

### Title
Short duplex RNAs induce potent immunostimulation via Hoogsteen  G-G base pairing-mediated dimerization

### Description
Here we describe a new class of immunostimulatory short duplex RNAs that potently induce production of type I interferon (IFN-I), and particularly IFN-β, in a wide range ofhuman cell types via end-to-end dimerization, direct binding to RIG-I, and activation of the RIG-I/IRF3 pathway. These RNAs require a minimum of 20 base pairs, lack any sequence or structural characteristics of known immunostimulatory RNAs, and instead require a unique conserved sequence motif (sense strand: 5’-C, antisense strand: 3’-GGG) that mediates the self-assembly of end-to-end RNA dimers by Hoogsteen G-G base-pairing. The presence of terminal hydroxyl or monophosphate groups, blunt or overhanging ends, or terminal RNA or DNA bases also did  not affect their ability to induce IFN-I production. Immune stimulation mediated by these duplex RNAs results in broad spectrum inhibition of infections by many respiratory viruses with pandemic potential, including SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and influenza A, as well as the common cold virus HCoV-NL63 in cell lines and in human Lung Chips that mimic organlevel lung pathophysiology. These novel immunostimulatory motifs potentially could be harnessed to create broad-spectrum antiviral therapeutics, but they should be avoided when designing siRNAs to minimize immunological side effects.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells were transfected with two RNAs and a scrambled dsRNA control, collected at 48 h.Cells were harvested on ice. Cells pellets were syringe-lysed in 8 M urea and 200 mM  EPPS pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor. BCA assay was performed to determine protein  concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM  iodoacetamide, and quenched with 15 mM DTT. 100 µg protein was chloroform-methanol  precipitated and re-suspended in 100 µL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C  at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio with Lys-C. After digestion, 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. 200 µg TMT reagent (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C) in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 2 µL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Total intensities were determined in each channel to calculate normalization factors. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, eleven samples were combined in 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors. The mixture was desalted by solid-phase extraction and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), collected onto a 96 six well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Detailed instrumentation method were described in the method part of the paper.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were  converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all  entries from the Human UniProt database (downloaded: 2014-02-04) This database was  concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product  ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static  modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable  modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described  previously (23), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion  quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR of < 0.1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT  reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100, or having no MS3 spectra were excluded  from quantification. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins  and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all tested samples.

### Publication Abstract
The current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic highlights the need for broad-spectrum antiviral therapeutics. Here we describe a new class of self-assembling immunostimulatory short duplex RNAs that potently induce production of type I and type III interferon (IFN-I and IFN-III). These RNAs require a minimum of 20 base pairs, lack any sequence or structural characteristics of known immunostimulatory RNAs, and instead require a unique sequence motif (sense strand, 5'-C; antisense strand, 3'-GGG) that mediates end-to-end dimer self-assembly. The presence of terminal hydroxyl or monophosphate groups, blunt or overhanging ends, or terminal RNA or DNA bases did not affect their ability to induce IFN. Unlike previously described immunostimulatory small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), their activity is independent of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7/8, but requires the RIG-I/IRF3 pathway that induces a more restricted antiviral response with a lower proinflammatory signature compared with immunostimulant poly(I:C). Immune stimulation mediated by these duplex RNAs results in broad-spectrum inhibition of infections by many respiratory viruses with pandemic potential, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-2, SARS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), human coronavirus (HCoV)-NL63, and influenza A virus in cell lines, human lung chips that mimic organ-level lung pathophysiology, and a mouse SARS-CoV-2 infection model. These short double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) can be manufactured easily, and thus potentially could be harnessed to produce broad-spectrum antiviral therapeutics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Immune stimulation, Type i interferon, Lung chips, Short duplex rna

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School


