### Accession
PXD025360

### Title
Membrane substrates of HtrA from Helicobacter pylori

### Description
High temperature requirement A (HtrA) is a serine protease secreted by the group-I carcinogen Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). The human cell adhesion protein and tumor suppressor E-cadherin (hCdh1) expressed on the surface of gastric epithelial cells was identified as the first HtrA substrate. HtrA-mediated hCdh1 cleavage and subsequent disruption of intercellular adhesion are considered as important steps in H. pylori pathogenesis. In this study, we performed a proteomic profiling of H. pylori HtrA (HpHtrA) to decipher the complex mechanism how H. pylori can interfere with epithelial barrier integrity.

### Sample Protocol
MKN-28 cells were detached using an enzyme-free cell dissociation solution (Millipore). Cells were washed with PBS, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH=7.4) containing 1 mM EDTA and 4 µM recombinant HpHtrA and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. As a negative control, cells were treated with proteolytically inactive mutant of HpHtrA. After the incubation, the supernatant was collected (sample was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 500 g, supernatant was removed and centrifuged again for 5 minutes at full speed) and separated on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (Lonza). The gel was stained with Comassie Brilliant Blue and each protein lane was cut into 6 bands (6 samples), which were destained using destaining solution (25 mM NH4HCO3 (Fluka Biochemica), 50% acetonitrile (JT Baker)). The gel pieces were washed with acetonitrile and vacuum dried before rehydrating the gel pieces in reducing solution (10 mM DTT (Fluka Biochemica), 25 mM NH4HCO3) followed by an incubation at 56 °C for 45 minutes before exchanging to an alkylating solution (55 mM iodoacetamide (Amersham Biosciences), 25 mM NH4HCO3). The reaction was allowed to proceed in the dark for 30 minutes before washing the gel pieces with 25 mM NH4HCO3 using intense vortexing. Afterwards, the gel pieces were washed with acetonitrile and vacuum dried before rehydrating in 80 µl of trypsinization buffer (25 mM NH4HCO3) containing 1 µg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsine (Promega) per sample. The gel pieces were allowed to rehydrate on ice for 15 minutes before adding more trypsinization buffer to cover the gel pieces completely. Trypsin was then left to digest overnight at 37 °C. Next day, the trypsin solution was collected and remaining peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using extraction solution (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (JT Baker)). Trypsin solution was added to extraction solution and concentrated by vacuum drying to a final volume of about 20 µl.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with an EASY-nanoLC II HPLC unit (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptide sample was first loaded on a C18 trapping column (Proxeon EASY-ColumnTM, 2 cm (length), 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm 120Å, C18-A1 beads) and then separated on a 10 cm long C18 PicoFritTM AQUASIL analytical column, (75 µm internal diameter, 5 μm 100 Å, C18 beads) (New Objective) using forward flushing. Peptides were eluted with a 90 minute linear gradient of 5-50% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-2000 m/z and 30000 resolution. MS/MS spectra were obtained by HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy at 35) of the nine most intense precursor ions from the full MS scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 2 and 120 seconds exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
The database search and quantification by spectral counting were performed using the MaxQuant proteomics software (version 1.6.3.4), with imbedded Andromeda search engine. Search was performed against the Uniprot human protein database (20,399 sequences, download date 21.12.2018), using the trypsin cleavage specificity with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as static, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 6 and 20 ppm. Reversed database search was performed and false discovery rate (FDR), was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Substrate, Helicobacter pylori, Protease, Desmoglein, Membrane, Htra

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemicstry and Molecular and Structural Biology Jozef Stefan Institute Jamova cesta 39 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of Biochemicstry and Molecular and Structural Biology Jozef Stefan Institute Jamova cesta 39 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia


