### Accession
PXD046265

### Title
2D-PAGE coupled with nLC-MS/MS-based identification of differentialy expressed proteins and tumorigenic pathways in MCF7 breast cancer cell line transfected for JTB protein silencing

### Description
Identification of new cancer-associated genes/proteins, characterization of their expression vari-ation, the interactomics-based assessment of differentially expressed genes/proteins (DEGs/DEPs), and understanding the tumorigenic pathways and biological processes involved in BC genesis and progression are necessary and possible by rapid and recent advances in bioin-formatics and molecular profiling strategies. Taking into account the opinion of other authors, as well as based on our own team’s in vitro studies, we sustain that JTB protein might be consid-ered as a tumor biomarker for BC and should be studied as a target for BC therapy. In this study we have identified the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), carcinogenic pathways and bio-logical processes associated with JTB silencing, using 2D-PAGE coupled with nano-liquid chro-matography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) proteomics applied to MCF7 breast cancer cell line, for complementing and completing our previous results based on SDS-PAGE, as well as in-solution proteomics of MCF7 cells transfected for JTB downregulation. The functions of significant DEPs have been analysed using GSEA and KEGG analysis. Almost all DEPs exert protumorigenic effects in JTBlow condition, sustaining the tumor suppressive function of JTB. Thus, the identified DEPs are involved in several signaling and metabolic pathways that exert protumorigenic roles: EMT, ERK/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, Wnt/β-catenin, mTOR, C-MYC, NF-κB, IFN-γ and IFN-α response, UPR, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. These pathways sustain cancer cell growth, adhesion, survival, proliferation, invasion, metastasis, resistance to apoptosis, cytoskeleton reorganization, maintenance of stemness, metabolic reprogramming, survival into a hostile environment, and a poor clinical outocome. In conclusion,  JTB silencing might increase the neoplastic phenotype and behavior of MCF7 BC cell line.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Cell Culture MCF7 cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (HTB – 22 ATCC) and grown in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 0.2% Gentamicin, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin and 0.2% Amphotericin (growth media) at 37ﹾC. The cells were grown until they reached 70-80% confluency and were transiently transfected with JTB shRNA plasmid for downregulation.  2.2. Plasmids for Downregulation Four plasmids were custom made by Creative Biogene, Shirley, NY, USA. Three shRNA plasmids containing GCTTTGATGGAACAACGCTTA sequence, with forward sequencing primer of 5'-CCGACAACCACTACCTGA-3' and reverse primer of 5'-CTCTACAAATGTGGTATGGC-3', GCAAATCGAGTCCATATAGCT sequence, with forward primer 5'-CCGACAACCACTACCTGA-3' and reverse primer of 5'-CTCTACAAATGTGGTATGGC-3', and GTGCAGGAAGAGAAGCTGTCA sequence with 5'-CCGACAACCACTACCTGA-3' and reverse primer of   5'-CTCTACAAATGTGGTATGGC-3', all targeting the hJTB mRNA respectively. The fourth plasmid was a control plasmid with a scramble sequence GCTTCGCGCCGTAGTCTTA with forward primer 5'-CCGACAACCACTACCTGA-3' and reverse primer of 5'-CTCTACAAATGTGGTATGGC-3'. These plasmids were further customized to have an eGFP tag with Puromicin antibiotic resistance gene. 2.3. Transfection into MCF7 Cells  As stated in [11], Lipofectamine™ 3000/DNA and DNA/Plasmid (10µg/µl) complex-es were prepared in Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Media (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) for each condition and added directly to the cells in culture medium. Cells were allowed to grow for 48 -72 hours after which they were collected. 70% transient tTransfection effi-ciency was confirmed by visualizing the green fluorescence emitted by the eGFP using a confocal microscope.  2.4. Western Blot Analysis Cell lysates from both control and downregulated JTB condition were collected using a lysis buffer. The lysates were then incubated on ice for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 20 minutes. The protein samples were quantified using Bradford Assay. Lysates containing 20µg of proteins were run in a 14% SDS- polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The blots were incubated with blocking buffer containing 5% milk and 0.1% tween-20 overnight at 4ﹾC with shaking. Primary antibody (JTB Polyclonal Antibody – PA5-52307, Invitrogen) was added and incubated for 1h with constant shaking. Secondary antibody (mouse anti-rabbit IgG-HRP sc-2357, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) was added and incubated for 1h with constant shaking. After each incubation, the blots were washed thrice with TBS-T (1X TBS buffer, containing 0.05% tween-20) for 10 minutes each with constant shaking. Finally, the enhanced chemi-luminescence substrate (Pierce™ ECL Western Blotting Substrate – 32106, Ther-moFisher) was added and the blot was analyzed using a CCD Imager. For normalization, Mouse GAPDH monoclonal antibody (51332, cell-signaling technology) was added and incubated for 1h, followed by the addition of goat anti-mouse IgG-HRP (sc-2005, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the addition of ECL substrate. Image J software was used for the detection and comparison of the intensity of the bands.

### Data Protocol
2.5. 2D-PAGE & Proteomic Analysis We used three biological replicates for the downregulated JTB condition. Two con-trols were used for the comparison: control (n=3), control_shRNA (n=3) and sh_JTB (n=3). These conditions were analyzed in 2D-PAGE by Kendrick Labs, Inc. (Madison, WI) and nanoLC-MS/MS as previously described [13]. The computer comparison was done for the average of three samples (3 vs 3) - control_shRNA vs sh_JTB (n=3) and Control vs sh_JTB (n=3).  The dysregulated spots were selected based on the criteria of having a fold in-crease or decrease of ≥ 1.7 and P value of ≤ 0.05. There were 131 dysregulated spots in con-trol_shRNA vs sh_JTB and 153 differences in control vs sh_JTB (Figures 2 and 3). A total of 284 spots were selected for Nano LC- MS/MS analysis, as previously described [15]. The data processing was done using PLGS software to convert them to pkl files and Mascot Daemon software was used to identify the dysregulated proteins. The quantitative analy-sis of dysregulated spots was done using Scaffold software. Finally, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) analysis was done to identify the identify the dysregulated pathways as previously described  [13].

### Publication Abstract
The identification of new cancer-associated genes/proteins, the characterization of their expression variation, the interactomics-based assessment of differentially expressed genes/proteins (DEGs/DEPs), and understanding the tumorigenic pathways and biological processes involved in BC genesis and progression are necessary and possible by the rapid and recent advances in bioinformatics and molecular profiling strategies. Taking into account the opinion of other authors, as well as based on our own team's in vitro studies, we suggest that the human jumping translocation breakpoint (hJTB) protein might be considered as a tumor biomarker for BC and should be studied as a target for BC therapy. In this study, we identify DEPs, carcinogenic pathways, and biological processes associated with JTB silencing, using 2D-PAGE coupled with nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) proteomics applied to a MCF7 breast cancer cell line, for complementing and completing our previous results based on SDS-PAGE, as well as in-solution proteomics of MCF7 cells transfected for JTB downregulation. The functions of significant DEPs are analyzed using GSEA and KEGG analyses. Almost all DEPs exert pro-tumorigenic effects in the JTB<sup>low</sup> condition, sustaining the tumor suppressive function of JTB. Thus, the identified DEPs are involved in several signaling and metabolic pathways that play pro-tumorigenic roles: EMT, ERK/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin, mTOR, C-MYC, NF-&#x3ba;B, IFN-&#x3b3; and IFN-&#x3b1; responses, UPR, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. These pathways sustain cancer cell growth, adhesion, survival, proliferation, invasion, metastasis, resistance to apoptosis, tight junctions and cytoskeleton reorganization, the maintenance of stemness, metabolic reprogramming, survival in a hostile environment, and sustain a poor clinical outcome. In conclusion, JTB silencing might increase the neoplastic phenotype and behavior of the MCF7 BC cell line. The data is available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD046265.

### Keywords
Breast cancer (bc); mcf7; jtb protein silencing; overexpressed jtb-interactome; downregulated jtb-interactome; tumorigenic pathways

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Animal Histology, Faculty of Biology, “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iasi, Carol I Bvd. No. 22, Iasi 700505, Romania
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Danielle Whitham

### Lab Head
Dr Anca-Narcia Neagu
Laboratory of Animal Histology, Faculty of Biology, “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iasi, Carol I Bvd. No. 22, Iasi 700505, Romania


