### Accession
PXD012859

### Title
Sloth collagen phylogenetics - The living tree sloths Choloepus and Bradypus are the only remaining members of Folivora, a major xenarthran radiation that occupied a wide range of habitats in many parts of the western hemisphere during the Cenozoic, including both continents and the West Indies (Antilles)

### Description
The living tree sloths Choloepus and Bradypus are the only remaining members of Folivora, a major xenarthran radiation that occupied a wide range of habitats in many parts of the western hemisphere during the Cenozoic, including both continents and the West Indies (Antilles). To date, molecular evidence has played only a minor role in folivoran systematics, as most recently-extinct species lived in places not conducive to DNA preservation. Here we utilize collagen sequence information to assess the relationships of tree sloths to a large sample (13 species) of extinct Quaternary folivorans.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples (15-30 mg) were demineralized in 250 µl 0.6M HCl for a minimum of 3 weeks at -20oC. After demineralization, the samples were rinsed once in 200 µl 0.01M NaOH, and three times in 200 µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic). The samples were gelatinized by being resuspended in 100 µl 50mM Ambic and heated at 65oC for 1 hour before being digested overnight at 37oC; 50 µl of the heated sample was digested using 1 µl of 0.5 µg/µl porcine trypsin in trypsin resuspension buffer (Promega, UK) and the other 50 µl was dried down and resuspended in 50 µl 100mM Tris solution to be digested with elastase (Worthington; USA) at the same concentration in 10% Tris solution. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a concentration of 0.5-1% of the total solution. Peptides were desalted using zip-tips and eluted in 100 µl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA (v/v).  Selected samples were analyzed using SDS PAGE. Bone samples were crushed to ~1 um sized particles using a Retsch PM100 ball mill. 50 mg of powdered sample was heated at 70oC for 10 minutes in 200 µl SDS solubilizing buffer (0.5M Tris base, 5% SDS, 130mM DTT), cysteines were alkylated by the addition of 6 µl 1M IAA at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes before the addition of 200 µl of dye solution (0.05% bromophenol blue, 5% glycerol). 20 µl of the samples were run on a Bis-Tris gel (NuPAGE) for 10 minutes to concentrate the samples into a gel plug which was briefly washed in a fixing solution (16% methanol, 10% acetic acid), before being washed twice in boiling water. The gel was stained using Coomassie stain. The gel plug was cut into approximately 1mm sized cubes and were washed in a de-staining solution (66% ammonium bicarbonate 33% acetonitrile) until no more dye could be seen before being washed in the following solvents for 10 minutes per solvent; ACN, HPLC grade water, ACN and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate65. The samples were digested overnight with 100 µl 3.125 µg/µl trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37oC and then the tryptic digest was pipetted into a cleaned Eppendorf tube. 100 µl of 70%ACN/1.7% formic acid/0.1% TFA was added to the gel pieces and the gel was heated at 37oC for 1 hour with the supernatant being collected and added to the tryptic digest. This step was repeated sequentially with 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and ACN. The extracted peptides were dried down and then resuspended in 5% Formic acid/0.1% TFA desalted and purified on C18 membranes (Empore) before being eluted in 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid. The purified peptides were spun to dryness ready for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files were converted to MGF files using Proteowizard and searched against a collagen database (which included common contaminants) in PEAKS v7.5. Mass tolerances were set at 0.5Da for the fragment ions and 10ppm for precursor ions and up to 3 missed cleavages were permitted. Searches allowed various post translational modifications (PTMs) including oxidation (MHW) and hydroxylation of proline (both +15.99), deamidation (NQ; +0.98) and pyro-glu from E (-18.01) as well as a fixed PTM of carbamidomethylation (+57.02) which occurs as part of the sample preparation. A maximum of 3 PTMs were allowed per peptide. Protein tolerances were set at 0.5% false discovery rate (FDR), >50% average local confidence (ALC; de novo only) and -10lgP score ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen, Proteomics, Phylogenetics, Sloth

### Affiliations
University of York
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York (Until 2018)

### Submitter
Samantha Presslee

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York (Until 2018)


