### Accession
PXD000011

### Title
TAP-GluN1, PSD95-TAP, WT (control) BNP-LC-MS/MS proteomics

### Description
TAP-GluN1 (840 kDa and 1.5 MDa), PSD95-TAP (1.5 MDa) and WT (control; 1.5 MDa) native complexes from Grin1^TAP/TAP, Dlg4^TAP/TAP, and WT mouse forebrain (cortex and hippocampus), respectively. Purified samples were seperated by blue native PAGE. Bands were excised, digested with trypsin. Peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The crude membranes from 5 P56-P70 Glun1TAP/TAP mouse forebrains were re-suspended in 12.5 ml buffer H and extracted with 12.5 ml 2% deoxycholate, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris.Cl pH8 for 1 h at 6 °C. Total extract was centrifuged at 120,000g. for 40 min at 8 °C. Conditions for immuno-capture, wash and peptide-antigen exchange elution were screened using a high-throughput purification robot (MAGic sample processor, Invitrogen). For 25 ml Glun1TAP/TAP extract supernatant, 80 μg mouse Flag antibody was coupled to 30 mg (500 μl) protein G magnetic beads (Invitrogen). Receptor was captured from extract supernatant for 2 h. The beads were washed three times with 5 ml wash buffer (0.37% w/v sodium deoxycholate, 0.05 mg.ml−1 lipids (1:1:3 POPC:POPE:POG), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris.Cl pH8). Flag captured complexes were eluted with 600 μl wash buffer supplemented with 0.2 mg.ml−1 Flag peptide for 2 h at 6 °C. Eluate was buffer exchanged to remove the Flag elution peptide and concentrated with a 100-kDa MWCO centrifugal filter (Amicon) to 35 μl 0.1–0.25 mg.ml−1 native NMDAR. BNP was run according to Schägger. Excised BNP gel slices containing the purified proteins were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by manual in situ enzymatic digestion. Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a well of a 96-well microtitre plate and de-stained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng μl−1 Trypsin (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. The digest was analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of ~300 nl min−1. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides before separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile. The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a modified nano-flow electrospray ionization source, with a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent analysis was carried out, using a resolution of 30,000 for the full MS spectrum, followed by 10 MS/MS spectra in the linear ion trap. MS spectra were collected over anm/z range of 300–2,000. MS/MS scans were collected using a threshold energy of 35 for collision induced dissociation. LC-MS/MS data were then searched against a protein database (UniProt KB) using the Mascot search engine programme (Matrix Science, UK)61 <http://staging-www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160420/ncomms11264/full/ncomms11264.html#ref61>. Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 5 p.p.m. and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed and variable modifications for oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine, tyrosine, tert-butyloxycarbonyl-lysine, norbornene-lysine and prop-2-yn-1-yloxycarbonyl-lysine were included. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold programme (Proteome Software Inc., USA). All data were additionally interrogated manually. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at >80.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm62 <http://staging-www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160420/ncomms11264/full/ncomms11264.html#ref62>. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm62 <http://staging-www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160420/ncomms11264/full/ncomms11264.html#ref62>. Using these stringent identification parameters, the rate of false-positive identifications is <1%. All non-mouse proteins that were detected but could not be matched to a mouse protein (in Swissprot-TrEMBL) were not included in the analysis below (foe example, human keratins). The composition of ~1.5 MDa complexes from TAP-GluN1, PSD95-TAP and WT control were compared using a stringent threshold of detection (equal to or greater than 2 unique peptides and equal to or grater than 1 unique peptide in equal to or greater than 2 replicate samples, respectively). This level of stringency was sufficient to detect 55 proteins in TAP-GluN1, 89 proteins in PSD95-TAP and only one protein in the WT control (IgG). Since it expected that the ‘tails’ of the bands may partially overlap, the differential composition of proteins in the ~0.8 and ~1.5 MDa TAP-GluN1 bands were validated by BNP immunoblot of TAP-purified complexes.

### Publication Abstract
How neuronal proteomes self-organize is poorly understood because of their inherent molecular and cellular complexity. Here, focusing on mammalian synapses we use blue-native PAGE and 'gene-tagging' of GluN1 to report the first biochemical purification of endogenous NMDA receptors (NMDARs) directly from adult mouse brain. We show that NMDARs partition between two discrete populations of receptor complexes and &#x223c;1.5&#x2009;MDa supercomplexes. We tested the assembly mechanism with six mouse mutants, which indicates a tripartite requirement of GluN2B, PSD93 and PSD95 gate the incorporation of receptors into &#x223c;1.5&#x2009;MDa supercomplexes, independent of either canonical PDZ-ligands or GluN2A. Supporting the essential role of GluN2B, quantitative gene-tagging revealed a fourfold molar excess of GluN2B over GluN2A in adult forebrain. NMDAR supercomplexes are assembled late in postnatal development and triggered by synapse maturation involving epigenetic and activity-dependent mechanisms. Finally, screening the quaternary organization of 60 native proteins identified numerous discrete supercomplexes that populate the mammalian synapse.

### Keywords
Synapse, Native complexes, Nmdar

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK

### Submitter
Rene Frank

### Lab Head
Dr Seth Grant
Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK


