### Accession
PXD004590

### Title
Characterisation of the human hemostatic O-glycoproteome

### Description
The hemostatic system comprises platelet aggregation, coagulation and fibrinolysis, and is critical to the maintenance of vascular integrity. Multiple studies indicate that glycans play an important role in maintaining the hemostatic system, however, most investigations have focused on N-glycans and little is known about the location and function of O-glycans. Here we performed the first systematic analysis of hemostatic O-glycosylation using lectin affinity chromatography coupled to LC-MS/MS to determine the precise location of O-glycans in human plasma, platelets, and endothelial cells. We identified the hitherto largest O-glycoproteome from native tissue, demonstrating that O-glycosylation is a ubiquitous modification of hemostatic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were sonicated, reduced and alkylated. Sialic acids were then removed using neuraminidase and protein mixtures subjected to digestion with either trypsin or chymotrypsin. O-glycopeptides were enriched using lectin weak affinity chromatography and enriched fractions desalted on C18 stage tips then analysed by LC-MSMS on a Velos or Fusion orbitrap FTMS instrument. Prior to LC-MSMS analysis plasma samples were subjected to further fractionation using IEF. For LC-MSMS each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in a gradient from 2 to 20 % B in 95 min, from 20 % to 80 % B in 10 min and 80 % B for 15 min at 200 nL/min (Solvent A, 100 % H2O; Solvent B, 100 % acetonitrile; both containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–1,700) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at the nominal resolution setting of 30.000 for Velos Pro and 120.000 for Fusion, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events. Supplemental activation of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. A 1min dynamic exclusion window was used to prevent repeated analysis of the same components.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were interrogated against the non-redundant human proteome using the SEQUEST-HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The search parameters were defined as follows: full enzymatic cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages, variable Ser, Thr or Tyr HexNAc, HexHexNAc  or Methionine (Met) oxidation and fixed Cysteine (Cys) carbamidomethyl modification. The initial search was performed on a 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance with a FDR of 1%. Only PSMs of rank 1 were used for further analysis. Identified peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered by precursor mass (10ppm Velos Pro, 5ppm Orbitrap Fusion). As an additional pre-processing procedure, all HCD data containing fragment ions at m/z 204.08 were extracted into a single .mgf file (signal intensity threshold, 1.5) and pre-processed to subtracted T and/or Tn glyco epitope mass form the precursor ions using a Microsoft Visual Basic 6.5 script. These pre-processed data files were submitted to a SEQUEST database search under the same conditions mentioned above. Glycosites identified using this HCD-subtraction method were annotated as ambiguous and only glycosylation range reported unless the peptide contained a unique Ser/Thr or Tyr in which case the glycan was assigned to this unique residue. .msf files obtained from Proteome Discoverer were then subjected to a second-round of analysis to ensure that the fragmentation pattern identified supported site assignment. Where insufficient data was available sites were re-assigned as ambiguous.

### Publication Abstract
The hemostatic system comprises platelet aggregation, coagulation, and fibrinolysis, and is critical to the maintenance of vascular integrity. Multiple studies indicate that glycans play important roles in the hemostatic system; however, most investigations have focused on <i>N</i>-glycans because of the complexity of <i>O</i>-glycan analysis. Here we performed the first systematic analysis of native-<i>O</i>-glycosylation using lectin affinity chromatography coupled to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS)/MS to determine the precise location of <i>O</i>-glycans in human plasma, platelets, and endothelial cells, which coordinately regulate hemostasis. We identified the hitherto largest <i>O</i>-glycoproteome from native tissue with a total of 649 glycoproteins and 1123 nonambiguous <i>O</i>-glycosites, demonstrating that <i>O</i>-glycosylation is a ubiquitous modification of extracellular proteins. Investigation of the general properties of <i>O</i>-glycosylation established that it is a heterogeneous modification, frequently occurring at low density within disordered regions in a cell-dependent manner. Using an unbiased screen to identify associations between <i>O</i>-glycosites and protein annotations we found that <i>O</i>-glycans were over-represented close (&#xb1; 15 amino acids) to tandem repeat regions, protease cleavage sites, within propeptides, and located on a select group of protein domains. The importance of <i>O</i>-glycosites in proximity to proteolytic cleavage sites was further supported by in vitro peptide assays demonstrating that proteolysis of key hemostatic proteins can be inhibited by the presence of <i>O</i>-glycans. Collectively, these data illustrate the global properties of native <i>O</i>-glycosylation and provide the requisite roadmap for future biomarker and structure-function studies.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Platelet, Hemostatic, Lc-msms, Endothelial, Serum, Orbitrap, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
University of Copenhagen Faculty Of Health and Medical Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Building 24.6.38 Nørre Alle 20, DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Sarah King

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wandall
University of Copenhagen Faculty Of Health and Medical Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Building 24.6.38 Nørre Alle 20, DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


