### Accession
PXD005749

### Title
SWATH-MS Proteomics Analysis of Persicaria minor herb upon Methyl Jasmonate elicitation

### Description
Stresses from either biotic or abiotic origins can have significant impact towards plant physiology and molecular regulation. Jasmonate acid (JA) and its derivative, methyl JA (MeJA) are hormonal cues released by plants which signal defensive response to curb the damage from such stresses. In an attempt to study the defensive response, a tropical herbal plant, Persicaria minor (P. minor) which is known for its pungent smell as well as various bioactivities including antimicrobial and anti-cancer, has been treated with MeJA to invoke the stress signaling. Such elicitation has been performed in various plants such as Arabidopsis, rice and hairy root cultures of certain herbs, yet how MeJA directly influenced the proteome of a herbal species particularly P. minor has not been previously elucidated. In this study, P. minor plants was exogenously treated with MeJA and its proteome was investigated using a new proteomics approach called SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Design  P. minor herbs were treated and prepared as per Rahnamaie Tajadod et al., (2016). The same samples were utilized for both transcriptomics (Rahnamaie Tajadod et al., 2016) and proteomics studies (this report). Total proteins were extracted from three biological replicates of each control and MeJA treated leaf samples (both 24 h after treatment). Each biological replicate was also extracted three times which were considered as the three technical replicates.  Total Protein Extraction  Samples (100 mg) were ground in the presence of liquid nitrogen before solubilized in 1mL TRI-reagent for 5 min followed by 200 ul chloroform for 15 min at room temperature (RT). Sample was then centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 min at 4oC and the supernatant discarded. The obtained pellet was dissolved in 300 ul 100 % ethanol (etOH) and incubated for 3 min at RT before centrifuged at 2000 g for 5 min at 4oC. The supernatant was transferred into new tubes. Three times acetone was added, inverted for 15 sec and incubated for 10 min at RT. Sample was centrifuged for 12000 g for 10 min at 4oC and the supernatant was removed. Pellet was washed with 1ml 0.3 M guanidine hydrochloride in 95 % ethanol and 2.5 % glycerol and incubated for 10 min at RT before centrifuged at 8000 g for 5 min at RT. Supernatant was discarded and the washing step was repeated twice. 1 ml of 100 % etOH in 2.5 % glycerol was added and incubated for 10 min at RT and centrifuged at 8000 g for 5 min at 4oC. Supernatants were discarded and pellet were dried for 10 min at RT and stored in -80oC until required. Samples were then sent for proteomic analysis at the Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF), Sydney.  Sample preparation  Samples were first solubilized in 1 % sodium deoxycholate with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and agitated with 5 short pulses using ultrasonic probe. Samples were then heated to 95oC for 5 min before centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min. Each sample was reduced with DTT (pH 9, 5 mM for 1 hour at 68oC), then alkylated with IAA (pH 9, 12.5 mM for 1 hour at RT) and digested with trypsin overnight at 37oC. Peptides were recovered from each samples using solid phase extraction with OMIX C18 (100 ul) tips and eluate was dried using vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were resolubilised in 40 ul 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid prior to LC/MS analysis.  SWATH LC-MS/MS Analysis Sample were analysed using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX Foster City, CA, USA) coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra 2Dplus system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA). Peptides were desalted using a 3.5cm peptide trap (packed with 2.7 µm, Halo C18 solid core, 100 µm × 3.5 cm) using 2 % acetonitrile (0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 2 µL per minute for 10 minutes. After desalting, the trap was switched in-line with a 20 cm C18 column (packed with 2.7 µm, Halo C18 solid core, 100 µm × 20 cm).  Peptides were eluted from the column at 50oC using a linear gradient from 95:5 mobile phase A/mobile phase B to 60:40 mobile phase A/mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% v/v formic acid; mobile phase B: 80% v/v ACN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid) over 80 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min.  All peptide separation steps were carried out at 50oC using a column oven. The LC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow analysis using an ion spray voltage, heater interface temperature, curtain gas flow and nebulizing gas flow of 2.5 kV, 150˚C, 25 and 30, respectively for the TripleTOF 5600.   IDA experiments were conducted on each biological replicate (controls and treated) using a survey scan (350-1500 Da) of 250 ms followed by 20 MS/MS product ion scans (350-1500 Da) at an accumulation time of 100 ms.  Product ion scans were collected for ions with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state and an ion intensity threshold of 150 counts per second (cps). SWATH experiments were conducted on each biological and technical replicate (controls and treated) using a TOF MS scan (350-1500 Da) of 40 ms followed by 60 TOF MS2 product ion scans in 12.5 Da windows from 400-1150 Da each at an accumulation time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Peak View Analysis Proteins were identified using the Paragon search algorithm in ProteinPilot Version 4.2.0.0 (AB SCIEX Foster City, CA, USA). A spectral library was constructed by combining searches for each of the 3 biological replicates for control and treated samples using the Polygonum minus in house transcriptome database. Searches were conducted using the thorough search mode and included biological modifications and false discovery analysis.   All SWATH files and the ProteinPilot spectral library were imported into PeakView (version 2.0.0.9257).  Protein level quantitation from SWATH data was performed using an extraction window of 10 minutes, an XIC width of 10ppm, and the following peptide filter settings: 25 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 99% peptide confidence, and a 1% False Discovery Rate threshold.    Statistical Analysis All statistical analysis was performed using protein level data from PeakView.  Peak areas were log-transformed and median-normalised to generate a normal data distribution (Supplementary 1). The data was further subjected to the Principle Component Analysis (PCA) and clustering (Supplementary 2). One technical replicate of the treated sample (T3 rep 1) was removed from subsequent analyses due to be an outlier.  Three statistical analyses were performed to determine the differentially expressed proteins. This is to ensure inconsistency between technical replicates were taken into account. Firstly, a t-test was done to compare control and treated samples by considering all replicates (both biological and technical) as independent samples. Secondly, a t-test using average values of biological replicates was performed.  Thirdly, the data was analysed using a mixed effect model (LME) by considering a technical replicate random effect and a treatment fixed effect. Only protein candidates that have P<0.05 for all the three statistical analyses were considered significantly different between control and treated samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kesum, Polygonum minus, Methyl jasmonate

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), University Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia

### Submitter
Wan Aizat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Wan Mohd Aizat
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), University Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia


