### Accession
PXD026183

### Title
STN7 kinase-dependent Light-harvesting complex (LHC) protein phosphorylations in the moss Physcomitrium (Physcomitrella) patens

### Description
Photosystem (PS) I and PSII enclose the reaction center subunits and cofactors responsible for the conversion of sunlight into chemical energy. In the thylakoid membrane of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms, PSII splits the water molecules and donates electrons to the electron transfer chain, and further via PSI to form NADPH. Proteins of the light-harvesting complexes (LHC) I and II are mainly associated with PSI and PSII, respectively, but also provide dynamics for the adjustments of the absorption cross-section of PSII and PSI upon changing light conditions. LHCII proteins N-terminal phosphorylation affects their interaction either with PSI or with PSII, and is a molecular mechanism present from green algae and early land plants to higher plants. The kinase STN7 is responsible for N-terminal phosphorylation of the LHCII proteins in algae and flowering plants model species, but the specific targets and role of STN7-dependent reversible phosphorylation in formation of various PS-LHC complexes in evolutionarily early land plants like mosses is poorly studied. The aim of this project was to identify the phosphorylated residues of the LHCII subunits of the moss Physcomitrium (Physcomitrella) patens (hereafter: P. patens), i.e. the LHCBM proteins, and to determine which of the phosphosites are phosphorylated by the STN7 kinase. Subsequently, the goal has been to identify which of the LHCBM subunits that are part of PSI-LHCI-LHCII complex (state complex), and of the moss-specific PSI-Large complex, are N-terminally phosphorylated in the STN7-dependent fashion.

### Sample Protocol
P. patens genome contains two genes encoding STN7: STN7.1 and STN7.2. In order to identify the targets of STN7, single stn7.1 knockout (KO) or stn7.2 KO and then double KO (dKO) mutants (STN7.1 in stn7.2 KO background and vice versa) were generated. P. patens wild type (WT) and the stn7 dKO lines were grown under controlled conditions: 16/8h photoperiod, light intensity 45 µmol photons m-2 s-1, 24°C. 11 days old cultures were used as starting material for short term treatments with different light intensity/quality, i.e. after over-night dark acclimation mosses were exposed to 2 h of low light (LL, about 7 µmol photons m-2 s-1) and then 2 h of high light (HL, about 500 µmol photons m-2 s-1). For single wavelength (sWL) treatments, 735nm, 660 nm, 630 nm LED lights were applied for 2 h with a light intensity close to the control light (CL) condition. For long term acclimation experiments, 4-days old cultures kept in CL were shifted for 7 days to either HL, LL or fluctuating light (FL, cycles of 5 min/1 min at 25/800 µmol photons m-2 s-1).  The protein composition of thylakoid membranes isolated from WT and stn7 dKO cultures was investigated either by mono-dimensional 12% acrylamide (AA) 6 M urea SDS-PAGE, or by large pore Blue Native (lpBN)-PAGE followed by SDS-PAGE as second dimension, in order to analyze the subunit composition of the protein complexes. The gels were stained with ProQ Diamond dye (ThermoFisher Scientifics) to selectively stain the phosphoproteins, and subsequently with Sypro dye (ThermoFisher Scientifics) to detect all proteins. The PSI-Large complex was purified from non appressed thylakoid membranes (S membranes) isolated after solubilization with the mild detergent digitonin and subsequent ultracentrifugation at 100.000 g.  To confirm the lack of STN7 protein in the dKO lines, the bands corresponding to the MW of STN7 were cut from mono-dimensional SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. The phosphorylated residues of the LHCBM subunits were identified by in-gel trypsin digestion of the spots corresponding to WT and stn7 dKO trimeric and monomeric LHCII in the 2D gels. Since the N-terminal peptide of the LHCBM isoforms was not identified by this approach, the identification of the STN7 targeted N-terminal LHCBM phosphorylations was achieved by excising the green bands corresponding to LHCII monomer (from CL), PSI-LHCI-LHCII (from LL) and PSI-Large (from CL and FL S membranes) from the lpBN-PAGE gels. The green bands were subsequently run for 5 mm in a 6% AA 6 M urea SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion. The phosphorylation of the minor antenna LHCB6 was identified in the corresponding 2D gel spot from 630 nm sWL samples. The excised gel pieces were cut in pieces of about 1 cubic mm, washed in MilliQ H2O and subsequently shrunk completely by incubating and removing 100 µl of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min for three times. Subsequently, the gel pieces were incubated in 25 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)/100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and, after shrinking as above, alkylated for 20 min with 55 mM of iodacetamide (IAA)/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 22°C in the dark. Next, after the two consecutive washes alternating 100% ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3, the gel pieces were completely shrunk as described above. For protein digestion, a solution of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN with 0.01 µg/µl of trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5111, Promega, Madison) was added and samples were incubated at 4°C until the gel pieces were completely re-hydrated. After adding 20 µl of  40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN, the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C in the Thermomixer (Eppendorf) shaking at 600 rpm for 13-14 hours. The tryptic peptides have been extracted by an equal volume of 100% ACN and incubating for 15 min at 37°C. The supernatant has been collected in a new Eppendorf and the gel pieces have been incubated two more times for 15 min with 50% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) to collect the remaining peptides. The supernatants have been pooled and dried in a speed-vac for 3 hours. Finally, the samples were dissolved in 2% FA and analyzed by nLC-ESI MS/MS. For the mass spectrometry analysis of spots, the peptides samples were separated on a C18 precolumn (5 × 0.3 mm, PepMap C18, LC Packings) and a C18 nanocolumn (15 cm × 75 μm, Magic 5 μm, 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources, Sacramento, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA, 2% ACN as a buffer A and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN as a buffer B. The gradient was either 8 to 43% B for 13 min, followed by 2 min increase to 100% and 5 min of 100% B, or 8 to 43% B for 28 min, followed by 2 min increase to 100% and 5 min of 100% B. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 120000 and scan range 300 to 1800 m/z for MS1 and resolution 15000 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 10 s and up to 15 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
The obtained spectra have been analyzed via Mascot (v.2.7.0) using Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the embedded ptmRS algorithm to validate the identified phosphorylations. The variable modifications allowed were Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Posterior error probabilities was evaluated by validating PSMs with Mascot identity threshold for strict and relaxed significance and allowing only PSMs with medium or high confidence. The MS/MS spectra were matched against a custom P. patens database based on Uniprot entries (www.uniprot.org) manually updated for the known subunits of PSII, PSI, ATPase and cytb6f complexes (Gerotto et al., Plant Phys 2019, 180 (3), 1582-1597). For each subunit sequence, the original Uniprot protein sequence was compared with the one retrieved in the last genome annotation (v3.3) from Phytozome (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) and with A. thaliana sequence. Uniprot sequences identified as incomplete from this approach were then substituted with the full-length sequence from Phytozome.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible thylakoid protein phosphorylation provides most flowering plants with dynamic acclimation to short-term changes in environmental light conditions. Here, through generating Serine/Threonine protein kinase 7 (STN7)-depleted mutants in the moss Physcomitrella (Physcomitrium patens), we identified phosphorylation targets of STN7 kinase and their roles in short- and long-term acclimation of the moss to changing light conditions. Biochemical and mass spectrometry analyses revealed STN7-dependent phosphorylation of N-terminal Thr in specific Light-Harvesting Complex II (LHCII) trimer subunits (LHCBM2 and LHCBM4/8) and provided evidence that phospho-LHCBM accumulation is responsible for the assembly of two distinct Photosystem I (PSI) supercomplexes (SCs), both of which are largely absent in STN7-depleted mutants. Besides the canonical state transition complex (PSI-LHCI-LHCII), we isolated the larger moss-specific PSI-Large (PSI-LHCI-LHCB9-LHCII) from stroma-exposed thylakoids. Unlike PSI-LHCI-LHCII, PSI-Large did not demonstrate short-term dynamics for balancing the distribution of excitation energy between PSII and PSI. Instead, PSI-Large contributed to a more stable increase in PSI antenna size in Physcomitrella, except under prolonged high irradiance. Additionally, the STN7-depleted mutants revealed altered light-dependent phosphorylation of a monomeric antenna protein, LHCB6, whose phosphorylation displayed a complex regulation by multiple kinases. Collectively, the unique phosphorylation plasticity and dynamics of Physcomitrella monomeric LHCB6 and trimeric LHCBM isoforms, together with the presence of PSI SCs with different antenna sizes and responsiveness to light changes, reflect the evolutionary position of mosses between green algae and vascular plants, yet with clear moss-specific features emphasizing their adaptation to terrestrial low-light environments.

### Keywords
N-terminal phosphorylation, Psi-large, Physcomitrella patens, Photosystem i, Physcomitrium patens, Light-harvesting complex ii

### Affiliations
Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources, National Research Council of Italy, Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Molecular Plant Biology, University of Turku

### Submitter
Andrea Trotta

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, University of Turku


