### Accession
PXD020414

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of insect larval and metamorphic molts

### Description
Molting is an essential biological process occurring characteristic times throughout the life cycle of holometabolous insects. However, it is not clear how insects determine whether the direction of molting is to remain status quo or to initiate metamorphosis. Here, we used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to identify the molecules involved in larval and metamorphic molting, and compare the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the two processes, to explore the functional factors that determine the direction of molts. There were 322 and 1140 DEPs identified in larval and metamorphic molting process, respectively. Bioinformatics analyses show that the amino sugar pathway was up-regulated in both processes. The up-regulated protease contributed to the metamorphosis. In addition, several proteins with different expression patterns in larval-larval and larval-pupal transitions, including Endochitinase, GRIM-19 (Genes associated with retinoid-IFN-induced mortality-19), IDE (Insulin-degrading enzyme), Sorcin (Soluble resistance related calcium binding protein), OBP (Odorant-binding protein-2 precursor), TRAP1(Tumor necrosis factor receptor associated protein-1), etc., were further identified by parallel reaction monitoring, which may play diverse functions in the determination of molting properties. These results provide a proteomic insight into molecules involved in larval and metamorphic molts, and will likely improve the current understanding of determination of direction of molts.

### Sample Protocol
The whole bodies of bleeding larvae at 5th instar feeding (5F), 5th instar molting (5M), 6th instar feeding (6F), 6th instar metamorphosis (6M) stages were grinded by liquid nitrogen into powder. Lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, and then sonication on ice. After centrifugation at 12, 000 g at 4C for 10 min, the supematant was collected and the protein concentration was detected with Sigma Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein-Determination Kit (St. Louis, MO, USA). After trypsin digestion, HPLC with Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 m particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length) was used to fract the tryptic peptides. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC.

### Data Protocol
InterProScan software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/, version 5.14-53.0) was used to perform Gene Ontology (GO) annotations. KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main, version 2.0) and KEGG Mapper (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html, version 2.5) were used to perform KEGG analysis. R Package pheatmap (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/, version 2.0.3) was used to generate the heat map of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Holometabolous insects; cotton worm; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Shandong University

### Submitter
Dujuan Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Dujuan Dong
Shandong University


