### Accession
PXD033413

### Title
Large-Scale Quantitative Proteomics of Retinal Mitochondrial Fractions from Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) Patients

### Description
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of blindness in seniors, with no effective treatment options available for most patients. AMD is characterized by the death of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptors, resulting in central vision loss causing tremendous difficulties in performing daily tasks requiring visualization of fine details visualization. Dysfunction of RPE mitochondria is a critical early event involved in AMD pathogenesis, and we previously reported that maintaining normal mitochondrial functions in RPE could be a viable option for AMD treatment. We hypothesize that dysregulation of RPE mitochondrial proteome is highly relevant to the loss of RPE mitochondrial function during the transition from healthy aging to early AMD. The hypothesis was examined by quantitative proteomics using UHR-IonStar.

### Sample Protocol
De-identified donor eyes were obtained from the Lions Gift of Sight (Saint Paul, MN). Eyes were obtained with written consent of the donor or donor’s family for use in medical research in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The Lions Gift of Sight is licensed by the Eye Bank Association of America (accreditation #0015204) and accredited by the FDA (FDA Established Identifier 3000718538). Donor tissue is exempt from the process of Institutional Review Board Approval.  RPE cell pellets were suspended in isolation buffer (70 mM sucrose, 200 mM mannitol, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4) and subjected to two freeze/thaw cycles prior to homogenization. Samples were centrifuged at 800×g for 8 min. The supernatant containing the organelles was centrifuged at 12,000×g for 10 min. The pellet containing the organelle-enriched fraction was resuspended in ice-cold Tris buffered saline and frozen at −80 °C. All samples were processed by a surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) protocol to derive tryptic peptides for LC-MS analysis. Peptides equivalent to 4 μg proteins were injected onto a trapping nano LC-Orbitrap MS system for data acquisition, as described previously.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were processed with the UHR-IonStar data processing pipeline to generate protein quantification results, which integrates UHR MS1 feature generation by narrow-window direct ion current extraction (DICE) and a series of post-feature generation quality control measures to achieve proteome-wide quantification with excellent accuracy and precision.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of blindness in the elderly, is characterized by the death of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptors. One of the risk factors associated with developing AMD is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) found within the gene encoding complement factor H (CFH). Part of the innate immune system, CFH inhibits alternative complement pathway activation. Multi-protein complexes called inflammasomes also play a role in the innate immune response. Previous studies reported that inflammasome activation may contribute to AMD pathology. In this study, we used primary human adult RPE cell cultures from multiple donors, with and without AMD, that were genotyped for the Y402H CFH risk allele. We found complement and inflammasome-related genes and proteins at basal levels in RPE tissue and cell cultures. Additionally, treatment with rotenone, bafilomycin A, and ATP led to inflammasome activation. Overall, the response to priming and activation was similar, irrespective of disease state or CFH genotype. While these data show that the inflammasome is present and active in RPE, our results suggest that inflammasome activation may not contribute to early AMD pathology.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Quantitative proteomics, Age-related macular degeneration, Label-free, Ionstar

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo


