### Accession
PXD016006

### Title
Proteomic and epi/proteomic response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to nitric oxide stress

### Description
Reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are the major antimicrobial molecules secreted by host cells to tackle Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection. Mtb respond and adapt to adverse environmental stressors by changes in gene expression, ensuring their survival. This adaptation process is mediated by a combination of transcriptional regulatory networks that result in altered gene expression and enzyme (protein) activities. Previous studies emphasized primarily on transcriptomic response of Mtb to different environmental stresses, including RNS. In this study, the proteomic response of Mtb to sublethal doses of RNS stress after 30 minutes, 2 hours, 6 hours and 20 hours was explored.  We used liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to elucidate the proteomic response of Mtb to RNS. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed identification of 2911 proteins and 6460 acylations in Mtb. A total of 581 unique proteins were found to be affected by RNS at different time points. Multiple-sample test revealed 297 differentially regulated proteins across the four time points. Furthermore, multiple-sample test identified 127 differentially acylated sites on 94 proteins. Marked changes in proteomic response was observed at later time points, most of which were compensatory responses involved in SOS response, iron homeostasis, energy metabolism and other stress responses.  This study provides an improved understanding of the dynamic proteomic response of Mtb to RNS and identification of key molecular switches, which is the basis of controlling bacterial growth in different environmental setting.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lysates from the late exponentially growing cultures were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as described in Yimer. et al., 2017 (PMID: 28536560)

### Data Protocol
Peptide characterization and quantitation were performed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer interfaced with an EASY1000-nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Biberach, Germany). The LC gradient was from 2% to 90% solvent B (0.1% FA in 97% CAN) in 50µm x 15cm analytical columns (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) for 75 min analysis at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans.  The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 × 106 ions between m/z = 300 to 1800 and were surveyed for a maximum injection time of 200 milliseconds (ms). Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for peptide fragmentation at normalized collision energy set to 28. The MS/MS scans were performed using a data-dependent top10 method at a resolution of 17.5K with an AGC of 5 × 104 ions at maximum injection time of 100 ms and isolation window of 2.0 m/z units. An underfill ratio of 10% and dynamic exclusion duration of 30 s was applied. Three biological and three technical replicates and were run for each sample. Maxquant software (version 1.5.7.4) was used for protein and glycosylation site identification from the raw MS data. The raw mass spectral data were searched against the Uniprot Mtb protein database containing 3993 protein sequences concatenated to reverse decoy database and protein sequences for common contaminants. Trypsin [KR].[^P] was specified as a cleavage enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification and acetylation on protein N-terminal, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid, and oxidation of methionine were set as the variable modifications.  For the PTM analysis, a number of glycosyl residues were configured in the MaxQuant search at three different amino acid residues, Asn, Ser and Thr (Supp. Table S3) and set as the variable modification. Both unique and razor peptides were used for the quantification of PTM abundance. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and detected in at least one or more of the replicates were considered for identification. For protein identification, a minimum of two peptides, of which at least one was unique, was required per protein group. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.  Statistical significance was determined with Multiple-sample test at a P < 0.05 level of significance using Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). All modified peptide spectra were validated by applying stringent site localization probability of > 0.70 and PEP of <0.05 prior to further analysis. PTM sites with a minimum of one valid value from the total samples were considered for PTM site identification. Modified peptides with quantifiable values in at least 50% of the samples were considered for label-free relative quantification. Sequence logo generators, WebLogo and motifx, were used to identify the enriched amino acid motifs flanking the glycosylated sites. The biological processes, cellular component, molecular function and KEGG pathways for the identified glycoproteins were analyzed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7. The proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three terms; molecular function (MF), biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was utilized to annotate the pathways.  Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were generated via STRING database version 10 with a high confidence threshold of 0.7, and imported into Cytoscape software (version 3.5.0) to produce the final interaction networks. Highly interconnected clusters were identified using MCODE and ClusterOne plug-in toolkits.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are secreted by human cells in response to infection by <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb). Although RNS can kill Mtb under some circumstances, Mtb can adapt and survive in the presence of RNS by a process that involves modulation of gene expression. Previous studies focused primarily on stress-related changes in the Mtb transcriptome. This study unveils changes in the Mtb proteome in response to a sub-lethal dose of nitric oxide (NO) over several hours of exposure. Proteins were identified using liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 2911 Mtb proteins were identified, of which 581 were differentially abundant (DA) after exposure to NO in at least one of the four time points (30 min, 2 h, 6 h, and 20 h). The proteomic response to NO was marked by two phases, with few DA proteins in the early phase and a multitude of DA proteins in the later phase. The efflux pump Rv1687 stood out as being the only protein more abundant at all the time points and might play a role in the early protection of Mtb against nitrosative stress. These changes appeared to be compensatory in nature, contributing to iron homeostasis, energy metabolism, and other stress responses. This study thereby provides new insights into the response of Mtb to NO at the level of proteomics.

### Keywords
Nitric oxide, Proteomics, Ptms, M. tuberculosis

### Affiliations
PhD candidate, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway
PhD candidate, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,  Norway

### Submitter
Alemayehu Godana Birhanu

### Lab Head
Dr Alemayehu Godana Birhanu
PhD candidate, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,  Norway


