### Accession
PXD005968

### Title
Prediction of protein complexes in Trypanosoma brucei by protein correlation profiling mass spectrometry and machine learning

### Description
A disproportionate number of predicted proteins from the genome sequence of the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei, an important human and animal pathogen, are hypothetical proteins of unknown function. This work describes a protein correlation profiling mass spectrometry approach, using two size exclusion and one ion exchange chromatography systems, to derive sets of predicted protein complexes in this organism by hierarchical clustering and machine learning methods. We provide examples of both potential new subunits of known protein complexes and of novel trypanosome complexes of suggested function, contributing to improving the functional annotation of the trypanosome proteome. These hypothesis-generating proteomic data are provided in an open access online data visualisation environment (http://134.36.66.166:8083/complex_explorer)

### Sample Protocol
For SEC separation, procyclic trypanosomes were lysed, using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) water bath sonicator, in PBS containing 0.1 μM 1-5-chloro-3-tosylamido-7-amino-2-heptone (TLCK), 1 mM phenyl-methyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 μg/mL leupeptin, 1 μg/mL pepstatin and 5 mM ethylenediametetraacetic acid (EDTA). Lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant filtered through a 0.45 μm filter unit, all at 4°C. Filtered lysates (200 μL) were injected onto either a BioBasic SEC 300, or a BioBasic SEC 1000 column, using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC system and collected into 48 fractions of 120 μL. Columns were equilibrated with PBS and eluted at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min at 4°C. Each fraction was made up to 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 M urea and 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 2 h at 37°C, followed by addition of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 25 mM at room temperature for 1 h. Trypsin and LysC were added, each at a ratio of 1:100 (enzyme to total average protein per fraction) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Each fraction was made up to 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak tC18 plates, with peptides eluted in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoracetic acid. Peptides were dried using a GeneVac evaporator and resuspended in 5% formic acid. Five biological replicates were performed in total for each SEC chromatography column used. Procyclic trypanosome cells were prepared in a similar manner as described for SEC analysis, with lysis in 1mL 20 mM ethanolamine (pH 9.0). Lysates were centrifuged and filtered as described previously. Filtered lysate was injected onto a Protein-Pak Hi Res Q, 5 μm, 4.6 x 100 mm, column (Waters), equilibrated in 20 mM ethanolamine (pH 9.0). Proteins were resolved over a gradient of 0-100 % 0.5 M NaCl in 20 mM ethanolamine (pH 9.0), over the course of 26 min, at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min at 5°C. Ninety-six 105 μL fractions were collected from 1.5 to 35 min. Collected fractions were made up to 4% SDS and 25 mM TCEP, then heated to 65°C for 30 min. Once samples had cooled to room temperature, N‑ethylmaleimide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubated for 1 h. The denatured, reduced and alkylated proteins in each fraction were prepared for digestion utilising a Kingfisher Flex Purification System (ThermoFisher Scientific) in combination with magnetic SP3 beads. Twenty μL of a 1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic, carboxylate modified, Sera-Mag SpeedBead magnetic particles (20 mg/mL in H2O, GE) was added to each fraction, followed by the addition of 500 μL of acetonitrile and 15 μL of 10% formic acid. In a 96‑well plate format, the Kingfisher Flex System was then utilised to wash the magnetic beads (protein bound) for each collected fraction, twice in 1 mL 70% ethanol, once in 1 mL 100% acetonitrile and then released into a pre-cooled plate, containing 50 μL 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1% SDS, 1 mM CaCl2 and trypsin and LysC at a 1:100 ratio of protease to estimated protein per fraction. The plate was incubated overnight at 37°C at 500 rpm in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf). Following overnight digestion, the 96-well plate was thoroughly vortexed to ensure resuspension of SeraMag beads and 950 μL of acetonitrile added. Peptides bound to the magnetic beads were washed in 1 mL of acetonitrile, eluted in 40 μL of 2% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and beads removed from the sample again on the Kingfisher System. Formic acid was added to each sample to a final concentration of 5%. For each biological replicate of either 48 SEC, or 96 SAX fractions, 1μg of peptide was injected from the most concentrated fraction and the equivalent volume injected for the remaining fractions. Peptides in 5% formic acid were injected onto a C18 nano-trap column using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were washed with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and resolved on a 150 mm x 75 μm C18 reverse phase analytical column over a gradient from 2-28% acetonitrile over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by nano-electrospray ionisation at 2.5 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), using HCD fragmentation of precursor peptides. A data-dependent method was utilised, acquiring MS/MS spectra for the top 15 most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
SEC RAW data files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.3, supplied with the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database from TriTrypsDB release 8.1, containing 11,567 entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The enzyme was set to trypsin and endopeptidase LysC, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, pyro-glutamate (with N-terminal glutamine), oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled, allowing transfer of peptide identifications of sequenced peptides from one LC-MS run to non-sequenced ions, with the same mass and retention time, in another run. A 20-min time window was set for alignment of separate LC-MS runs and a 30-second time window for matching of identifications. The false-discovery rate for protein and peptide level identifications was set at 1%, using a target-decoy based strategy. Each individual SEC fraction was set as an individual experiment in MaxQuant parameters, to output IBAQ data for protein groups in every fraction. Only unique peptides were utilised for quantitation. SAX RAW data files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30, supplied with the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database from TriTrypDB release 26.0, also containing 11,567 entries. All other settings were identical, apart from the fixed modification on cysteine, which was set to N-ethylmaleimide.

### Publication Abstract
A disproportionate number of predicted proteins from the genome sequence of the protozoan parasite <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>, an important human and animal pathogen, are hypothetical proteins of unknown function. This paper describes a protein correlation profiling mass spectrometry approach, using two size exclusion and one ion exchange chromatography systems, to derive sets of predicted protein complexes in this organism by hierarchical clustering and machine learning methods. These hypothesis-generating proteomic data are provided in an open access online data visualization environment (http://134.36.66.166:8083/complex_explorer). The data can be searched conveniently via a user friendly, custom graphical interface. We provide examples of both potential new subunits of known protein complexes and of novel trypanosome complexes of suggested function, contributing to improving the functional annotation of the trypanosome proteome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005968.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Procyclic, Protein correlation profiling mass spectrometry, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Dundee
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Thomas Crozier

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Univeristy of Dundee


