### Accession
PXD010999

### Title
A novel truncated form of Nephronectin is present in small extracellular vesicles isolated from 66cl4-cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are quickly emerging as biomarkers in breast cancer. Our recent report suggested that an intracellular granular staining pattern of the extracellular matrix protein Nephronectin (NPNT) in breast tumor sections correlated with poor prognosis. In this study we performed proteomic analysis which reveals that overexpression of NPNT in breast cancer cells alters the cargo of its NPNT-containing small extracellular vesicles, and includes several tumor promoting proteins. We identify three different forms of NPNT at 80, 60 and 20 kDa. We report that the native form of NPNT at 60 kDa gets further glycosylated and is detected as the 80 kDa NPNT, which maybe truncated then by matrix metalloproteinases to a shorter form of around 20 kDa. Although both 80 kDa and 20 kDa NPNT are detected in small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from breast cancer cells, the truncated form of NPNT is concentrated in sEVs, which is a novel finding.

### Sample Protocol
SimplyBlue stained protein bands corresponding to 80, 60 and 20 kDa respectively were manually cut out from the gel and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as previously described40. After desalting41, peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense). Peptides were injected into a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 50 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a multistep gradient with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid): From 0-6% B in 5 min, 6-12% B in 39 min, 12-20% B in 80 min, 20-28% B in 31 min, 28-40% B in 4min, 40-100% B in 1min, 100% B in 9 min, 100-0% B in 1min and 10min with 100% A. The flow rate was 250 nl/min. Peptides eluted were analyzed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer operating in positive ion- and data dependent acquisition mode using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy 35, automatic gain control target value of 1E6 for Orbitrap MS and 1E3 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (m/z 300–1600) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM, followed by 20 MS/MS scans triggered for intensities above 500, at a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms for MS and 120 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by processing MS data using in Max Quant v 1.5.8.342. Preview 2.3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.) was used to inspect the raw data to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; mass tolerance set to 20 ppm; oxidation of Methionine and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine as dynamic post-translational modification and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as a fixed modification. These were imported in MaxQuant which uses m/z and RT values to align each run against each other sample with one min window match-between-run function and 20 mins overall sliding window using a clustering based technique. These are further queried against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release April 2017 Mouse proteome with Isoforms; 59684 sequences and MaxQuant’s internal contaminants database) using Andromeda built into MaxQuant. Both protein and peptide identifications FDR was set to 1% thus only peptides with high confidence were used for final protein group identification. Peak abundances were extracted by integrating the area under the peak curve. Each protein group abundance was normalised by the total abundance of all identified peptides for each run and protein by calculated median summing all unique and razor peptide ion abundances for each protein using label free quantification algorithm43 with minimum peptides ≥ 1. Protein group abundances were imported and analyzed using R software. Given the structure of the data, the statistical analysis was performed using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in order to consider the levels of variance at batch as well as test groups. Data were log2-transformed before the analysis. Proteins were considered identified if they were quantified in at least 75% of the biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles are emerging as biomarkers in breast cancer. Our recent report suggested that an intracellular granular staining pattern of the extracellular matrix protein nephronectin (NPNT) in breast tumor sections correlated with a poor prognosis. Furthermore, the results showed that NPNT is localized in extracellular vesicles derived from mouse breast cancer cells. In this study, we performed proteomic analysis that revealed that several proteins, including tumor-promoting molecules, are differentially expressed in the cargo of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from NPNT-expressing mouse breast cancer cells. We also identified three different forms of NPNT at 80, 60, and 20 kDa. We report that the native form of NPNT at 60 kDa becomes further glycosylated and is detected as the 80 kDa NPNT, which may be processed by matrix metalloproteinases to a shorter form of around 20 kDa, which has not previously been described. Although both 80 and 20 kDa NPNT are detected in sEVs derived from breast cancer cells, the 20 kDa form of NPNT is concentrated in sEVs. In summary, we show that a novel truncated form of NPNT is found in sEVs derived from breast cancer cells.

### Keywords
Small extracellular vesicles, Maxlfq, Proteome, Breast cancer, Nephronectin

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Modomics Experimental Core Facility (PROMEC) Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Medisinsk teknisk forskningssenter Olav Kyrres gt. 9 N-7489 Trondheim Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Hagen
Proteomics and Modomics Experimental Core Facility (PROMEC) Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine Medisinsk teknisk forskningssenter Olav Kyrres gt. 9 N-7489 Trondheim Norway


