### Accession
PXD013700

### Title
Proteomic analysis of urinary microvesicles - logitudinal Study

### Description
This is a small pilot study for two voluteers with average diets that gave morning urine specimens across six samplings over 10-11 days to determine the day to day stability of extracellular vesical proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Extracellular vesicle (EV) isolation.  ~90 mL of urine samples previously biobanked in two 50 mL polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Corning orange-caps) were quick-thawed from -80C storage with a shaking 42C water bath and placed on ice immediately after thawing. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000x g for 30 mins at 4C and supernatant was transferred and then centrifuged at 100,000x g for 1 hour at 4C. Resultant EV pellets were washed in 1 mL PBS and centrifuge a final time at 100,000x g for 1 hour at 4C.  Urinary ECV pellets resultant from ~90 mL of urine were reconstituted in 400 L of M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Buffer (Thermo) supplemented with 1x Halt Protease Inhibitors (Thermo) and sonicated in an ultrasonic water bath for 15 min. Lysates were exchanged into ~40 L of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate using Amicon Ultra-0.5, 3k columns (Millipore). Resultant lysates were quantified using EZQ (Invitrogen) and ~10 g of protein per sample were diluted in 35 L of LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Proteins were reduced with addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and denatured at 70°C for 10 min prior to loading into NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen), with electrophoresis of samples to maximum ~1cm from the wells. Gels were stained overnight with Colloidal Blue dye (Invitrogen) and following de-staining each lane was excised and equilibrated into 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc) with digestion overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega). Peptides were finally reconstituted into 0.1% formic acid to a concentration of 1 g L-1.

### Data Protocol
XCalibur RAW files were centroided and converted to MzXML and the MGF files were created using both ReAdW and MzXML2Search respectively (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi/). Data were analyzed with SEQUEST (v.27 rev12, .dta files), set for two missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 0.45 da for LTQ-XL data, and 20 ppm for Orbitrap Velos Pro data, tryptic enzyme, variable modification M @ 15.9949, and static modifications C at 57.0293. Searches were performed with UniRef100 database  which includes common contaminants like digestion enzymes and human keratins.  BioInquire was used for peptide grouping and both peptide and protein filtering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Logitudinal, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicals

### Affiliations
Director UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry Shared Facility
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A. Mobley
Director UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry Shared Facility


