### Accession
PXD022543

### Title
lMoniliella spathulata an oil-degrading yeast, which promotes growth of barley in oil polluted soil

### Description
The yeast strain Moniliella spathulata SBUG-Y 2180 was isolated from oil-contaminated soil at the Tengiz oil field in the Atyrau region of Kazakhstan on the basis of its unique ability to use crude oil and its components as the sole carbon and energy source. This yeast used a large number of hydrocarbons as substrates (more than 150), including n-alkanes with chain lengths ranging from C10 to C32, monomethyl- and monoethyl-substituted alkanes (C9 – C23), n-alkylcyclo alkanes with alkyl chain lengths from 3 to 24 carbon atoms as well as substituted monoaromatic and diaromatic hydrocarbons. Metabolism of this huge range of hydrocarbon substrates produced a very large number of aliphatic, alicyclic and aromatic acids. 51 of these were identified by GC/MS analyses. This is the first report of the degradation and of the formation of such a large number of compounds by a yeast. Inoculation of barley seeds with M. spathulata SBUG-Y 2180 had a positive effect on shoot and root development of plants grown in oil-contaminated sand, pointing towards potential applications of the yeast in bioremediation of polluted soils.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in triplicates for 14 days in 100 mL of MSMF medium with glucose or oil as carbon source. 30 ml culture were harvested by centrifugation (10 min, 4°C, 8,500 rpm), washed three times with 2 ml TE buffer and finally resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer. Cell suspensions were transferred into screw cap tubes filled with 500 µl of lysis matrix A (MP Biomedicals) and mechanically disrupted using a FastPrep (MP Biomedicals) for 3 x 30 sec at 6.5 m/s with on ice incubation for 5 min between cycles. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (5 min, 4°C, 13,000 rpm), followed by a second centrifugation step (30 min, 4°C, 13,000).  Protein concentration was determined with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 30 µg protein extract were separated on a 1D SDS PAGE and gel lanes cut into 5 (glucose samples) or 1 (oil samples) fractions. Tryptic in-gel digestion was described earlier (Eymann et al. 2017). Resulting peptide mixes were desalted using C18 Zip Tips (Thermo Scientific). LC-MS/MS analyses were done on an EASY-nLC1200 coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a self-packed analytical column (100 µm x 20 cm) containing reverse-phase C18 material with integrated emitter using an 85 min non-linear gradient from 5 to 50 % buffer B (0.1 % acetic acid in acetonitrile) and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 in the m/z range of 333 – 1650. The 15 most-intense peaks per scan cycle were selected for fragmentation. Precursor ions were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 30 sec; singly charged ions as well as ions with unknown charge state were rejected. Internal calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
Since the genome sequence of Moniliella spathulata is not available yet, the sequence of Moniliella sp. ‘wahieum’ (NCBI; assembly ASM397190v1) was used to identify proteins. The genome sequence of Moniliella sp. ‘wahieum’ was uploaded to the Galaxy web platform, and the public server at usegalaxy.org was used to analyze the sequence (Afgan et al. 2018). Gene prediction and translation into protein sequences was done using Augustus (Galaxy version 3.3.3) (Stanke et al. 2008). Functional annotation of predicted proteins was done using eggNOG-mapper (v2.0.0) (Huerta-Cepas et al. 2017; Huerta-Cepas et al. 2019). Database searching and quantification was performed using MaxQuant software (v6.1.10.43) (Cox and Mann 2008). MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against the Moniliella sp. ‘wahieum’ database (29,737 entries) using following parameters: protease trypsin, two missed cleavages allowed, variable modification methionine oxidation, precursor ion mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichosporonoides spathulata, Dibenzofuran, Biphenyl, Cruide oil, Moniliella spathulata

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology


