### Accession
PXD007671

### Title
PKM2 methylation by CARM1 activates aerobic glycolysis to promote tumorigenesis

### Description
Global proteome comparison between breast cancer MCF7 parental cell and PKM2 KO cell

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended in cold 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 30 mM NaCl containing protease inhibitor tablet (lysis buffer), and homogenized for three cycles of 30s each. All lysates were processed by centrifugation at 16,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The concentrations of protein were determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo). Protein extract was reduced by 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Excess IAA was quenched with 5 mM DTT. Proteins were diluted with 50 mM Tris-HCl to a urea concentration of 0.9 M and subjected to digestion with trypsin at 50:1 protein: enzyme ratio. The reaction was incubated at 37°C for 16 h and quenched with 10% TFA. The tryptic peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (SPE, Waters). One milligram of each DiLeu label was dissolved in 25 μL of anhydrous DMF, and combined with DMTMM and NMM at 0.7X molar ratio to DiLeu labels. The activation reaction occurred at room temperature by vortexing the mixture for one hour. The supernatant was used immediately to label the peptides. 5X w/w activated DiLeu reagents were used to label the protein extract. Additional anhydrous DMF was added to ensure organic composition reaches 70% (v/v). The labeling reaction was performed at room temperature by vortexing for two hours and quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a concentration of 0.25%. The labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all the samples and dried in vacuo. Strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation was performed on a Waters Alliance e2695 HPLC (Milford, MA) with a flow rate of 0.2 mL/ min. Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 10 mM NH4HCO3, 25% ACN (v/v), pH 3, and loaded onto a 200 mm × 2.1 mm polySULFOETHYL A (PolyLC, Columbia, MD) column with 5 μm packing materials. Buffer A was composed of 10 mM NH4HCO3, 25% ACN (v/v), pH 3, and buffer B was composed of 500 mM NH4HCO3, 25% ACN (v/v), pH 6.8. Gradient elution program starts with 100% A for 20 min, followed by a gradient of 0-50% B for 70 min. B increased from 50-100% over 10 min and stayed at 100% B for 10 min. The fractions were collected every 1.5 min and concatenated into 10 fractions determined by UV-VIS at 215 nm. All samples were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, 3% ACN and loaded on the fabricated column. The column was filled with 1.7 µm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid packing materials (130 Å, Waters). Peptides were separated with Dionex UltiMate 3000 LC system before entering the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (San Jose, CA). MS scans were aquired in a profile mode in the range of 300-1500 m/z at resolution of 60K, followed by selection of fifteen most intense ions for HCD fragmentation with an isolation width of 1 m/z. 2×105 and 5×105 were selected as the automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS scans. Tandem mass spectra were acquired with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30 and a fixed first mass of 110 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The OMSSA proteomic Analysis Software Suite (COMPASS) was used for peptide identification. Raw files were converted to text files and searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot reference proteome database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 25 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. DiLeu labeling on peptide N-termini and lysine residue (+145.1267748 Da), and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were chosen as static modifications. Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) and DiLeu labeling on tyrosine residue (+145.1267748) were selected as variable modifications. Search results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels. Quantification was performed using an in-house software called DiLeu tool. Reporter ion abundances are corrected for isotope impurities with python script.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer. Herein we discover that the key glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 isoform (PKM2), but not the related isoform PKM1, is methylated by co-activator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1). PKM2 methylation reversibly shifts the balance of metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis in breast cancer cells. Oxidative phosphorylation depends on mitochondrial calcium concentration, which becomes critical for cancer cell survival when PKM2 methylation is blocked. By interacting with and suppressing the expression of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (InsP<sub>3</sub>Rs), methylated PKM2 inhibits the influx of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum to mitochondria. Inhibiting PKM2 methylation with a competitive peptide delivered by nanoparticles perturbs the metabolic energy balance in cancer cells, leading to a decrease in cell proliferation, migration and metastasis. Collectively, the CARM1-PKM2 axis serves as a metabolic reprogramming mechanism in tumorigenesis, and inhibiting PKM2 methylation generates metabolic vulnerability to InsP<sub>3</sub>R-dependent mitochondrial functions.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
UW Madison

### Submitter
Fengfei  Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
UW Madison


