### Accession
PXD010690

### Title
Characterization of cerebrospinal fluid via data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine diseases of the central nervous system through analyzing its components. These include the analysis of metabolites, cells as well as proteins. For identifying new suitable diagnostic protein biomarkers bottom-up data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry-based approaches are most popular. Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. It overcomes several limitations of DDA, since it combines the benefits of DDA and targeted methods like selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We established a DIA method for in-depth proteome analysis of CSF. For this, four spectral libraries were generated with samples from native CSF (n=5) CSF fractionation (15 in total) and substantia nigra fractionation (54 in total) applying to CSF DIA of three replicates. The DDA and DIA methods for CSF were conducted with the same nanoLC parameters using a 180 minute gradient. Compared to a conventional DDA method, our DIA approach both increased the number of identified protein groups with 1574 compared to DDA with 648 over 50 % with a comprehensive spectral library (generated with DDA measurements from five native CSF and 54 substantia nigra fractions) and decreased the coefficient of variation to 6 %, compared to 11 % with a DDA method. We also could show that a sample specific spectral library generated only from native CSF increased the identification reproducibility from three DIA replicates to 90 % (77 % with a DDA method). Moreover, by utilizing a substantia nigra specific spectral library for CSF DIA over 60 brain-originated proteins could be identified compared to only eleven with DDA. In conclusion, the here presented optimized DIA method substantially outperforms DDA and could develop into a powerful tool for biomarker discovery in CSF.

### Sample Protocol
Substantia nigra samples – Substantia nigra tissue was fractionated by gel electrophoresis and in-gel digested. For this, 100 mg substantia nigra tissue was homogenized in 400 µL RIPA buffer (cell signalling). Following, glass beads were added to the lysate and a sonication of the sample was performed with an ultrasound probe (Potter S. Homogenizer, B. Braun; amplitude 90, power 50%, 4 times 1 min). After this, the sample was washed off the glass beads (Ø 1.25 – 1.65 nm; Ø 0.25 – 0.5 nm; Carl Roth) with 50 µL ultrapure water and sonicated in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath six times for 10 sec. After this, the protein concentration of the cell lysate was determined via Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufactures protocol. An acetone precipitation was performed overnight. For this, three times cell lysate (40 µg) was mixed with acetone at the ratio of 1:4 (v/v) in (J.T. Baker) and stored at -20 °C overnight. After this, gel electrophoresis was performed. 40 µg precipitated proteins were loaded on a NuPAGETM 4-12% BisTris gel as well as on a NuPAGETM 3-8% Tris-Acetate gel (both from Fisher Scientific. Gel electrophoresis was performed at 200 mA and 200 W per gel, the voltage profile was as following: 50 V for 15 min and 180 V for 50 min. After this, gels were stained with Coomassie Blue Staining (SimpleBlueTM SafeStain, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufactures protocol. Protein lanes from each sample were cut into single fractions (in total three times 18 fractions) and destained and pH adjusted by incubating the gel pieces for 10 min with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) as well as 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% (v/v) 100% acetonitrile (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) three times alternately. After the second incubation with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, samples were treated with 50 µL 10 mM DTT (AppliChem GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) for 1 h at 56 °C and with 50 µL 50 mM IAA (Merck KGaA) for 45 min at room temperature before the destaining protocol was continued. Finally, gel pieces were dried in a vacuum concentrator (RVC2-25CD plus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen, Osterode am Harz, Germany) and resuspended in 6 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was initiated by adding 6 µL of trypsin solution (0.012 µg/µL, Promega Corp.) and was performed overnight. The digestion was stopped and peptides eluted by incubating the gel pieces two times for 15 min with 30 µL of a 1:1 solution containing 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA (Merck KGaA) in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath. Samples were transferred in MS vials, dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 15 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Finally, samples were spiked with spiked with 1 µl of iRT peptides (Biognosys) before they were analyzed via HPLC-MS.    Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as previous described 37, 38. In brief, a Dionex nanoHPLC system Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a PepMap C18 (75 µm x 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was used as analytical column. Peptide separation was performed by applying a stepwise three-hour gradient of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (84% ACN, 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 400 nL·min-1. The HPLC gradient was a 141 min segmented gradient from 5%-60% (v/v) buffer B. The mass range of the mass spectrometric analysis was set to 350-1,100 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. The maximum injection time was 20 ms and the isolation window was set as 1.6 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at 24%, 27% and 30% NCE. The fragment analysis was performed in an orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 5e5, 25 ms maximum injection time).

### Data Protocol
The generated .RAW files were directly analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The recorded spectra were matched to peptides by the search algorithm Mascot (40, Matrix Science, London, UK) using a database containing the human Swiss-Prot part of UniProt-KB 41 (version 2.5) and additionally the HRM calibration peptide sequences (all together 20,205 protein entries). Trypsin was selected as digestion enzyme with two maximum missed cleavage sites. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 mmu. Oxidation at methionine was set as dynamic modification, carbamidomethylation as static modification at cysteine. Using the target decoy PSM validator decoy database search was performed with target FDR of 1%).

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine diseases of the central nervous system through analyzing its components. These include the analysis of metabolites, cells as well as proteins. For identifying new suitable diagnostic protein biomarkers bottom-up data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry-based approaches are most popular. Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. It overcomes several limitations of DDA, since it combines the benefits of DDA and targeted methods like selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We established a DIA method for in-depth proteome analysis of CSF. For this, four spectral libraries were generated with samples from native CSF ( n = 5), CSF fractionation (15 in total) and substantia nigra fractionation (54 in total) and applied to three CSF DIA replicates. The DDA and DIA methods for CSF were conducted with the same nanoLC parameters using a 180 min gradient. Compared to a conventional DDA method, our DIA approach increased the number of identified protein groups from 648 identifications in DDA to 1574 in DIA using a comprehensive spectral library generated with DDA measurements from five native CSF and 54 substantia nigra fractions. We also could show that a sample specific spectral library generated from native CSF only increased the identification reproducibility from three DIA replicates to 90% (77% with a DDA method). Moreover, by utilizing a substantia nigra specific spectral library for CSF DIA, over 60 brain-originated proteins could be identified compared to only 11 with DDA. In conclusion, the here presented optimized DIA method substantially outperforms DDA and could develop into a powerful tool for biomarker discovery in CSF. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifiers PXD010698, PXD010708, PXD010690, PXD010705, and PXD009624.

### Keywords
Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, Spectral library, Proteomics, Csf, Cerebrospinal fluid, Dia

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany


