### Accession
PXD011459

### Title
Sequential digestion with Trypsin and Elastase in cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Description
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry has become an important approach for studying protein structures and protein-protein interactions. The amino acid composition of some protein regions impedes the detection of cross-linked residues, although it would yield invaluable information for protein modelling. Here, we report on a sequential digestion strategy with trypsin and elastase to penetrate regions with a low density of trypsin cleavage sites. We exploited intrinsic substrate recognition proper-ties of elastase to specifically target larger tryptic peptides. Our application of this protocol to the TAF4-12 complex allowed us to identify cross-links in previously inaccessible regions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Human TAF4-TAF12 complex was co-expressed in Sf21 insect cells using the MultiBac system23. DNA encoding for a N-terminal hexa-histidine tag and a protease cleavage site for tobacco etch virus (TEV) NIa protease was added to the 5’ end of the TAF4 open reading frame and cloned into pFL plasmid along with TAF12. Baculoviurus generation, cell culture infection and protein production was carried out following published protocols24. Cell pellets were resuspended in Talon Buffer A (25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole with complete protease inhibitor (Roche Molecular Biochemi-cals)). Cells were lysed by freeze-thawing (twice), followed by centrifugation at 40,000 g in Ti70 rotor for 60 min to clear the lysate. The TAF4-TAF12 complex was first bound to talon resin, pre-equilibrated with Talon Buffer A, fol-lowed by washes with Talon Buffer A, then Talon Buffer HS (25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 M NaCl, 5 mM imidazole and complete protease inhibitor) and then again with Talon Buffer A. The TAF4-TAF12 complex was eluted using Talon Buffer B (25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 200 mM imidazole and complete protease inhibitor). Fractions containing the TAF4-TAF12 complex were dialyzed over-night against MonoQ Buffer A (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT and complete protease inhibi-tor). The complex was further purified using ion exchange chromatography (IEX) with a MonoQ column pre-equilibrated with MonoQ Buffer A. After binding, the col-umn was washed with MonoQ Buffer A and TAF4-TAF12 was eluted using a continuous gradient of MonoQ Buffer B (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1000 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT and complete protease inhibitor) from 0-100% linear gradient. The complex was further purified by size exclusion chro-matography (SEC) with a SuperoseS6 10/300 column in SEC buffer (25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT and complete protease inhibitor).  TAF4-TAF12 (1.5 µg per condition) complexes were cross-linked with bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) at weight-to-weight ratio of 1:1 and incubated on ice for 2 hours. The mixture was incubated on ice for 1 hour after saturated bicarbonate (50 molar excess) was added to quench the reaction. Frozen S. pombe cells were ground and 1g of yeast powder was resuspended in 2 ml RIPA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with cOmplete™ (Roche, Basel). Cell debris was moved via centrifugation at 1200 g for 15 minutes. All samples were separated by SDS–PAGE on a 4-12% Bis Tris gel (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and stained using Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Appropriate bands were cut and proteins were first reduced with DTT and then alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated with trypsin (13 ng µl-1) (Pierce™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) or elastase (15 ng µl-1) (Promega) respectively at 37°C for 16 hours. For the sequential tryp-sin-elastase digestion, elastase (15 ng µl-1) was added to the trypsin digest and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. In the case of elastase-trypsin digestion, trypsin (13 ng µl-1) was added to the overnight elastase digest and incubated for 4 hours at room temperature. Following the digestion, peptides were purified on C18 StageTips using standardized protocols25. LC-MS/MS. TAF4-TAF12 complexes were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) and yeast lysates were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Both were coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-nano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were loaded onto an EASY-Spray™ LC Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) at a flow rate of 0.300 μL min−1 using 98% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). To elute the peptides, the percentage of mo-bile phase B was first increased to 40% over a time course of 110 minutes followed by a linear increase to 95% in 11 minutes.  Full MS scans for yeast lysates were recorded in the or-bitrap at 120,000 resolution for MS1 with a scan range of 300-1700 m/z. The 20 most intense ions (precursor charge ≥2) were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced disassociation and MS2 spectra were recorded in the ion trap (2.0E04 ions as a minimal required signal, 35 normal-ized collision energy, dynamic exclusion for 40 s). Both MS1 and MS2 were recorded in the orbitrap for TAF4-TAF12 complexes (mass resolution for MS1 120,000 and for MS2 15,000 scan range 300-1700 m/z, dynamic exclu-sion for 60 s, precursor charge ≥3). Higher-energy collision dissociation was used to fragment peptides (30% collision energy, 5.0E04 AGC target, 60 ms maximum injection time).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. MaxQuant software26 (version 1.5.2.8) employing the Andromeda search engine27 was used to analyze the whole cell lysates of S. Pombe. We used the PombeBase database28 with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methio-nine as a variable modification. MS accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 20 ppm. For trypsin, we allowed up to 2 miscleavages. Specificity of elastase was defined as cleavage after Ala, Val, Leu, Ile, Ser and Thr but not before Pro. Specificity for the trypsin and elastase di-gest was set to cleavage after Ala, Val, Leu, Ile, Ser, Thr, Arg and Lys, except if it was followed by Pro. For all digests containing elastase, up to 10 miscleavages were allowed. The peaklist for identification of cross-linked peptides was generated using MS convert (ProteoWizard) for tryptic digests with the following settings: peakPicking 2-; msLevel 2-; MS2Denoise 20,100, false or Maxquant version 1.6.2.3 with default setting except increasing the “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” to 100 for elastase containing digests. Resulting mgf or apl files were searched using Xi software15,29 version: 1.6.731 with MS accuracy set to 4 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 20 ppm. The only fixed modification was the carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, ami-dated and hydrolyzed BS3. The cross-linker was BS3 with Lys, Ser, Thr and Tyr as the only cross-linkable residues. Enzyme specificities were the same as described for Mas-cot. Four miscleavages were allowed for the trypsin digest and 11 miscleavages were allowed for the other digests. An additional 2 missing isotopes was allowed in the custom settings. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using xiFDR30 version 1.1.26.58 with 5 % FDR at peptide-pair level for the TAF4-12 complex and 5 % FDR at peptide-pair and link-level. Linear peptides of the cross-linked TAF4-12 complex were identified using Mascot software31 with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modifi-cation and the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, hydrolyzed BS3 (mass: 156.0786 Da) and amidated BS3 (mass: 155.0946 Da). Chromatograms of MS1 were extracted and peak areas quantified using Sky-line 32.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Human taf4-12 complex, Lc-msms, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edin-burgh EH9 3BF, U.K.  Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Therese Dau

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edin-burgh EH9 3BF, U.K.  Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany


