### Accession
PXD008961

### Title
chicken liver cells under mycotoxin treatment with iTRAQ sequencing

### Description
We used iTRAQ technology to sequence the proteome for chicken liver cells under mycotoxin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The samples with SDT buffer were transferred to 2 ml tubes with quartz sand,and 1/4-inch ceramic bead MP 6540-424, and then homogenized by MP homogenizer twice (24×2,6.0M/S, 60s). The samples were sonicated and boiled for 15 min, and centrifuged at 14000 x g for 40 min. The supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters, and quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). For each sample, 20 µg of proteins were mixed with 5X loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min), and visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. The peptide mixture of each sample (100 μg) was labeled by iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). The labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography (GE Healthcare), and the dried peptide mixture was acidified by buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 μm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%–8% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0). The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density) and injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded to a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems). MS data was collected based on the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2). The MASCOT parameter settings is listed below. The type of search was MS/MS Ion search. The proteases used to generate peptide was Trypsin. The missed cleavages permitted was 2. The mass values were monoisotopic. The list of all fixed modifications considered included Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4PLEX (N-terminal), iTRAQ4plex (K). The list of all variable modifications included Oxidation (M) and iTRAQ4plex (Y). Peptide mass tolerance for precursor ions was ±20 ppm. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.1Da. The database pattern was decoy and peptide FDR was set to < 0.01. The retrieved sequences were locally searched against UniProt GOA database (chicken) (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/chicken_release, Uniprot_Chicken_24083_20150713.fasta) by NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) 46 for annotation. The protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. To exclude the experimental bias, we normalized all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be one after the normalization. Protein quantification was calculated by the normalized spectral index 47, and the FDR of differentially expressed genes was calculated by the mixture model method. The peptide sequences assigned were listed in Table S13 and all protein identified were listed in Table S14. To category genes into the specific KEGG pathway, we blasted the annotated proteins against the online KEGG database 44. The mapping and ID conversion was facilitated by the R package ‘org.Gg.eg.db’ in the Bioconductor repository site. The downstream analysis and graphic plotting for transcriptomic and proteomic data was mainly on the Rstudio platform based on the programming language R 48.

### Publication Abstract
Transcript levels are the primary factor determining protein levels, but for the majority of genes, fold changes in transcript levels are larger than the corresponding changes in protein levels, a phenomenon that is termed "protein homeostasis". However, this phenomenon is not well characterized in the context of environmental changes. In this study, we sequenced the entire transcriptome and proteome of chicken primary hepatocytes administered three mycotoxin treatments Aflatoxin B<sub>1</sub> (AFB<sub>1</sub>), Ochoratoxin A (OTA) and Zearalenone (ZEN). Each mycotoxin induced unique set of differential expressed transcripts and proteins, suggesting variable cytotoxicity and biochemical action in cell. We found a weak positive correlation between transcript and protein changes, and the transcript changes were higher than the protein changes. Furthermore, we observed pathway-specific protein homeostasis pattern under mycotoxin stress. Specifically, the "Metabolism", "Transcription" and "Translation" pathways (housekeeping pathways) showed lower fold changes in protein/mRNA levels than non-housekeeping pathways such as "Cell growth and death" and "Immune system". Protein molecular weight had a weak negative effect on protein production, and this effect was stronger for non-housekeeping pathways. Overall, we hypothesize housekeeping pathways maintain stable protein production for baseline cellular function, whereas non-housekeeping pathways is associated with the fitness response to environmental stress.

### Keywords
Chicken liver mycotoxin itraq

### Affiliations
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Function and Regulation in Agricultural Organisms, College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR China
South China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yu Sun

### Lab Head
Dr yu sun
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Function and Regulation in Agricultural Organisms, College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR China


