### Accession
PXD013016

### Title
Interactions between Transport Protein Particle (TRAPP) complexes and Rab GTPases in Arabidopsis

### Description
The Transport Protein Particle II (TRAPPII) is essential for exocytosis, endocytosis, protein sorting and cytokinesis. In spite of a considerable understanding of its biological role, little is known about Arabidopsis TRAPPII complex topology and molecular function. In this study, independent proteomic approaches initiated with TRAPP components or Rab-A GTPase variants converge on the TRAPPII complex. We show that the Arabidopsis genome encodes the full complement of 13 TRAPPC subunits, including four previously unidentified components. A dimerization model is proposed to account for binary interactions between TRAPPII subunits. Preferential binding to dominant negative (GDP-bound) versus wild-type or constitutively active (GTP-bound) RAB-A2a variants discriminates between TRAPPII and TRAPPIII subunits and shows that Arabidopsis complexes differ from yeast but resemble metazoan TRAPP complexes. While the TRAPPII complex has been implicated in biosynthetic pathways, TRAPPIII appears to be implicated in degradative pathways. Analyses of Rab-A variants in trappii backgrounds provide genetic evidence for the conclusion that the TRAPPII complex behaves as a Guanine-nucleotide Exchange Factor (GEF) for the RAB-A2a GTPase. GEFs catalyze exchange of GDP for GTP; the GTP-bound, activated, Rab then recruits a diverse local network of Rab effectors to specify membrane identity in subsequent vesicle fusion events. Understanding the control of GEF-Rab interactions will be crucial to unraveling the co-ordination of membrane traffic.

### Sample Protocol
For TRAPPII baits, co-immunoprecipitation experiments were carried out on three grams of inflorescences using GFP-trap beads (Chromotek), as described (Rybak et al., 2014).  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an EksigentnanoLC-Ultra 1D+ (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) to a Velos-LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first delivered to a trap column (100 µm inner diameter (i.d.) x 2 cm, packed with 5 µm C18 resin, Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 40 cm C18 column Reprosil GOLD, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated using a 210 min gradient from 4% to 32% solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min flowrate. Data acquisition occurred in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-1300 m/z at a resolution of 30,000. Up to 10 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window 2 m/z) and fragmented by HCD using 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions that were singly-charged or unassigned were excluded. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was 20 s. For RAB-A2a baits, co-IP experiments were carried out by isolating total microsomes from Arabidopsis roots expressing YFP:RAB-A2a, YFP: RAB-A2a[Q71L] and YFP: RAB-A2a[S26N] (Chow et al., 2008), YFP: RAB-G3f (Geldner et al., 2009) and no transgene. Plants were grown in 20mL 0.3x Murashige and Skoog medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Poole, UK) with 1% sucrose and 0.05% MES, pH5.7 shaking at 60rpm (16h day: 8h night cycle, 21°C) for 14 days. 5µM NAA (naphthyl acetic acid) was then added and plants allowed to continue growth for 3 days. Root tissue was then harvested (4-5g) and ground in an extraction buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 50mM MgCl22, 10% glycerol, 0.5mM PMSF, 100µM GTP-ƴ-S and Complete EDTA-Free Protease Inhibitor (Roche)), centrifuged and 1mM DTSSP added to the supernatant. This was incubated on ice for 30 min and subsequently quenched with 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5 for 10 min on ice. Microsomes were isolated onto 2M sucrose through centrifugation at 541,000xg  for 30 min at 4°C and re-suspended and re-suspended in 1.8mL extraction buffer (above) with 2% CHAPs and centrifuged again at 100,000xg for 30 min at 4°C. 200µl anti-GFP µMACS magnetic microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Woking, UK) were added to the supernatant and kept on ice for 60 min with gentle agitation. Bound proteins were eluted in 50µl Laemmi protein loading buffer and subsequently run on a NuPAGE Novex 4-12 Bis Tris polyacrylamide gel (Thermofisher Scientific Ltd, Runcorn, UK). In-gel trypsin digest and mass spectrometry were performed by the Central Proteomic Facility, University of Oxford (www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk). Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were quantified from 3 independent experiments (with three biological replicates for the Rab baits and six biological replicates for the negative controls).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were loaded into the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4; Cox and Mann, 2008) and searched against an Arabidopsis thaliana RefSeq database (Araport11_genes.201606.pep.fasta) using carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Protein identifications were filtered to 0.01% false-discovery rate on PSM and protein-level. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were used in the downstream analysis (Schwanhaeusser et al. 2011). Before statistical analysis, iBAQ intensities were normalized according the iBAQ of the bait protein used in the co-immunoprecipitation (coIP). We calculated a correction factor per sample as  "a/bi", where "a" is the average of all baits’ iBAQ intensities and "bi" is the iBAQ intensity of bait in sample i. Then all the iBAQ values in sample i were multiplied by this correlation factor. Next, the normalized iBAQ intensities were log transformed and missing values were replaced by a constant (1000). Normalized iBAQ intensities were used to calculate protein ratios between samples as well as to relatively compare the concentration of different proteins within one sample. The two-sided Student t-test was used to evaluate the significance of mean differences in all comparisons. A p-value cutoff of 0.02 was used to determine significance.

### Publication Abstract
Transport Protein Particle II (TRAPPII) is essential for exocytosis, endocytosis, protein sorting and cytokinesis. In spite of a considerable understanding of its biological role, little information is known about Arabidopsis TRAPPII complex topology and molecular function. In this study, independent proteomic approaches initiated with TRAPP components or Rab-A GTPase variants converge on the TRAPPII complex. We show that the Arabidopsis genome encodes the full complement of 13 TRAPPC subunits, including four previously unidentified components. A dimerization model is proposed to account for binary interactions between TRAPPII subunits. Preferential binding to dominant negative (GDP-bound) versus wild-type or constitutively active (GTP-bound) RAB-A2a variants discriminates between TRAPPII and TRAPPIII subunits and shows that Arabidopsis complexes differ from yeast but resemble metazoan TRAPP complexes. Analyzes of Rab-A mutant variants in trappii backgrounds provide genetic evidence that TRAPPII functions upstream of RAB-A2a, allowing us to propose that TRAPPII is likely to behave as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for the RAB-A2a GTPase. GEFs catalyze exchange of GDP for GTP; the GTP-bound, activated, Rab then recruits a diverse local network of Rab effectors to specify membrane identity in subsequent vesicle fusion events. Understanding GEF-Rab interactions will be crucial to unravel the co-ordination of plant membrane traffic.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Arabidopsis, Co-ip, Trappii, Transport protein particle, Rab gtpases

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising DEUTSCHLAND / GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising DEUTSCHLAND / GERMANY


