### Accession
PXD022673

### Title
Chemotherapy-polarized macrophages from human breast cancer

### Description
Chemotherapies have been shown to enhance anti-tumor immunity, but whether chemotherapies affect tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) is still unclear. We found TAMs is different before and after chemotherapy by comparing proteomic profiles of TAMs before and after chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
TAMs isolated from fresh tumor samples collected before chemotherapy or after chemotherapy by magnetic-activated cell sorting using direct CD14 Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-050-201) for CD14+ cells. Macrophages were sonicated on ice in lysis buffer, then supernatant was collected for protein extraction by centrifugation. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column and then dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 25% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Macrophages

### Affiliations
SunYat-Sen University
Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University

### Submitter
Jiang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jiang Liu
Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University


