### Accession
PXD027668

### Title
iTRAQ proteomics of sentinel lymph nodes for the identification of extra cellular matrix protein signatures that can flag metastasis in early breast cancer

### Description
Background Breast cancer patients who present in the early stage of disease are affected by metastasis to the axillary group of lymph nodes. The first among this group that is affected is called as sentinel lymph node, and metastasis to this lymph node is crucial for the staging of cancer and the quality of surgical intervention. Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy (SLNB) that is currently used to assess lymph node metastasis is neither sensitive, nor specific, is time-consuming, thereby necessitating the identification of novel biomarkers that can flag sentinel lymph node metastasis.  Methods Breast cancer patients were screened, and those with early stage were recruited in the study. Surgical resection of the breast was followed by identification of sentinel lymph nodes by methylene fluorescent technique. Histo-pathology of fresh frozen section biopsy was used as the gold standard to assign the clinical phenotypes of metastatic (SLNM+) and non-metastatic sentinel lymph nodes (SLNM-). Discovery phase of the experiment included isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) technique comprising of six comparative experiments coupled with mass spectrometric analysis on Orbitrap Fusion to identify differentially expressed proteins on Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Functional enrichment and pathway analyses of differentially regulated genes was carried out in DAVID functional annotation tool. Validation was done by ELISA and protein concentrations were used to estimate the ROC for computing diagnostic parameters. Results Based on MS/MS spectra there were 2396 unique protein groups and 81 differentially expressed proteins comparing SLNB + and SLNB -. Nineteen proteins up-regulated, and eight proteins that were down regulated in SLNB+ as compared to SLNB-. Bioinformatic analysis showed the implication of extra cellular matrix proteins and ECM-receptor interaction pathways to be implicated in lymph node metastasis. ELISA confirmed the up-regulation of caveolin 1, collagen α-1, desmin, fibrillin-1, and microfibrillar associated glycoprotein 4 in metastatic, as compared to non-metastatic lymph nodes. These proteins are known to be integral in tumorogenesis, cell proliferation, invasion, cell survival and anti-apoptosis. These proteins have 80%-100%, of sensitivity and specificity to differentiate the two clinical phenotypes.  Conclusion Identified extra cellular matrix protein biomarkers have requisite diagnostic parameters to be developed as a translational tool to assess the status of sentinel lymph nodes during mastectomy procedure to guide surgical therapy of axillary lymph nodes in early breast oncology.

### Sample Protocol
Sample phenotyping and protein isolation  The sentinel lymph node tissue sections which were stored at -80°C were labelled as either SLNM+ or SLNM- based on histopathology finding. The tissue samples were minced and the proteins were solubilized in 120μl of lysis buffer that contained 8M urea, 2M thiourea and 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS). The tissue was homogenized by sonication at an interval of 3 seconds and vortexed for 2 minutes. The samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C, debris was discarded and the supernatant was transferred onto a fresh eppendorf tube. Protein extracted with lysis solution was buffer exchanged with 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) using a 3 kDa cut off membrane filters to bring down the concentration of urea well below 0.1M. Protein amount was quantified using the Bradford assay using 1μg/μl of Bovine serum albumin as a standard.  Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) labelling  Five sets of SLNM+ tissue samples, five sets of SLNM- tissue samples and two cancer control benign breast tumor tisssues were taken for iTRAQ experiment. The design of iTRAQ experiment is illustrated in Figure 1. Each experiment composed of at least one SLNM+, one SLNM- and, one of either of these two phenotypes or a cancer control benign breast tumor tissue. The equimolar culmination of the three phenotypes was made into an internal standard for the sake of normalization for each of the four experiments. 80 μg of protein from each phenotype sample was reduced with 25mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature. Each of these proteins samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin in 1:10 ratio at 37°C. Digested peptides were then labelled with iTRAQ 4-plex reagents, 114 (sentinel lymph node metastasis), 115 (sentinel lymph node without metastasis, 116 (one of either of these two phenotypes or cancer control benign breast tumor tissues), and 117 (internal standard) following the protocol provided by manufacturer (AB Sciex, Foster city, CA, USA). In brief, all vials of iTRAQ labelling tags were reconstituted in 70μl of absolute ethanol. This was then added to each sample and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature, and the reaction was quenched using 50μl mili-Q water. iTRAQ labelled samples in each experiment were then pooled into a single vial and dried using speedvac. These samples were reconstituted in 8mM ammonium formate buffer (pH: 3) and were fractionated by cation exchange using isotope coded affinity tag cartridge. Peptides were then eluted with 500μl of gradient elution with 5mM to 500mM concentrations range of ammonium formate (pH: 3) to obtain a total of eleven fractions from each experiment. These 44 fractions were vacuum dried and taken for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides from the 44 fractions were desalted and concentrated using reversed phase ZipTip, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. The peptide fractions were loaded onto analytical column associated with trap column. The peptide separation were performed using EASY-nLC™ 1200 which was coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) for Mass spectrometry analysis. The gradient elution were initiated using 5% elution buffer and were held for 1 minute, with linear increase rate of 10% for 10 minutes, 35% for 70 minutes and 50% for 80 minutes. The gradient elutions were held at 80% B for 8 minutes before being re-equilibrated to 5% B for 18 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full MS spectra was acquired in positive ion mode in m/z ratio of 350-2000 Da, with a 100 milli second MS accumulation time, whereas the MS/MS product ion scans were performed in the mass range of 100-2000 Da with a 7 milli second accumulation time in Orbitrap mass analyzer. The mass spectrometric setting included Ion spray voltage floating of 1900 V. For 3 seconds former target was excluded and 25 ions were monitored per MS cycle. DDA advanced ‘rolling collision energy’ were applied for subsequent MS/MS scans with normalized High energy Collision induced Dissociation (HCD) collision energy set to 35%.  Raw files from the Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer were processed using Proteome Discoverer protein analysis software (ver. 2.4.1.15). Both MS and MS/MS spectra were searched using Sequest HT algorithm against a combined UniProt Human proteome database appended to a list of common contaminants provided by Thermo Scientific. Sequest HT parameters were specified as trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Daltons. The static modification was set to carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine at peptide C-terminus. The dynamic modifications on peptide terminus were set to methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and iTRAQ 4-plex (+144.102 Da) modification, on N-terminus and Lysine (K) residues. Since iTRAQ modification was used as dynamic modification, the unmodified or unlabelled peptides and associated proteins were removed from the analysis. Also, dynamic modification was assigned for acetylation (+42.011 Da) of protein’s N-terminus. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator PSM validation node to trigger the  positive and false matches. In Percolator node, the false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on the qvalues of Decoy database search. Data were filtered at the peptide spectral match-level using a strict FDR cut off of 0.01 and relaxed FDR cut off of 0.05 as determined by Percolator. Contaminant and decoy proteins were removed from all data sets prior to downstream analysis. Reporter ion values were calculated on “Reporter Ions Quantifier” node using FTMS mass analyzer setting and HCD activation process. Reporter ions were quantified from MS/MS scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. The following settings were used to obtain the quantification results: the protein ratio type was the ‘weighted’ geometric mean, normalization with summed intensities and outlier removal was ‘automatic’. The peptide threshold was ‘at least homology’ where peptide score does not exceed absolute threshold but is an outlier from the quasi-normal distribution of random scores. Minimum of two unique peptides were required to be the top ranking matches. In Consensus workflow in “Reporter Ion Quantifier”node, the following settings were applied to increase the quantification accuracy of the analyzed proteins: (i) only unique peptides were used for protein quantification, (ii) precursor co-isolation threshold was considered 25%, (iii) average reporter signal to noise ratio threshold was considered 10 and, (iv) peptide normalization was done with respect to the total peptide amount. At the level of protein analysis,  further normalization was done where the protein abundance of individual sample was scaled by the abundance of the internal standard which was labelled with channel 117 of iTRAQ 4-plex reagent. On obtaining the results, multiple filter criteria were applied and only those proteins were considered for differential expression analysis which had: (i) FDR confidence threshold as medium during identification by Sequest-HT, (ii) atleast two unique peptides and, (iii) peak  found at found in sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq proteomics, Extracellular matrix proteins, Sentinel lymph node metastasis, Early breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Biophysics
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
New Delhi
India
Department of Biophysics All India Institute of Medical Sciences New Delhi 110029 India

### Submitter
GURURAO HARIPRASAD

### Lab Head
Dr Gururao Hariprasad
Department of Biophysics All India Institute of Medical Sciences New Delhi 110029 India


