### Accession
PXD022723

### Title
Fasting reverses drug-resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma through p53-dependent metabolic synergism

### Description
Cancer cells voraciously consume nutrients to support their growth, exposing a metabolic vulnerability that can be therapeutically exploited. Here we show in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, xenografts, and in patient-derived HCC organoids that fasting can synergistically sensitise resistant HCC to sorafenib. Mechanistically, sorafenib acts non-canonically as inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, causing resistant cells to depend on glycolysis for survival. Fasting, through reduction in glucose and impeded AKT/mTOR-signalling, prevents this Warburg shift. p53 is necessary and sufficient for the sorafenib-sensitizing effect of nutrient restriction and crucial for improvement of sorafenib efficacy through intermittent fasting (IF) in an orthotopic HCC mouse model. Together, our data indicate IF and sorafenib as clinically actionable, rational combination therapy for HCC with intact p53 signalling. As HCC therapy is currently severely limited by resistance, these results should instigate clinical studies with the goal of improving therapy response in advanced-stage, and possibly even early-stage, HCC.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse-derived xenograft HCC tumors were homogenized in RIPA buffer using metal beads and the LT TissueLyser (Qiagen). Samples were sonicated (Branson Sonifier 3310s ultrasound probe, 10% output), centrifuged at 14000rpm for 5min and quantified with BCA (Thermo). Cell culture (HepG2WT, HepG2KO) samples were scraped from the cell culture wells in RIPA buffer and directly sonicated, centrifuged, and quantified. 250µg of each sample was precipitated with Methanol/Chloroform protocol (10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6). The protein pellet was reconstituted in 100mM Tris pH8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and reduced/alkylated with 5mM TCEP/30mM chloroacetamide at 56°C for 10min. The proteins were subjected to proteolysis with 1:100 Lys-C and 1:50 trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation at 14000rpm for 10min and supernatant containing digested peptides was desalted on Oasis HLB plate (Waters). Peptides were dried and dissolved in 2% formic acid before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. 3000 ng of the mixture tryptic peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HF-x mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A consisted of water acidified with 0.1% Formic Acid, while Buffer B was 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) and 20% water with 0.1% FA. The peptides were first trapped for 1 minute at 30 µL/min with 100% buffer A on a trap (0.3 x 5mm with PepMap C18, 5μm - 100Å Thermo Fisher Scientific); after the trapping peptides were separated by a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm, Agilent Technologies). The gradient was 9-40%B in 155 minutes at 400 nL/min. Buffer B was then raised to 55% in 10 minutes and increased to 99% for the cleaning step. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a capillary heated at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (350–1400 m/z) for a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106. Up to 25 of the most intense precursor ions were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). HCD fragmentation was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 15,000 (isolation window of 1.4 Th) and an AGC target value of 1×105 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.17 software using the integrated Andromeda Search engine and searched against the Human UniProt Reference Proteome (October 2020 release with 75,088 protein sequences) alone for cells, while for xenograft we added the Mouse UniProt Reference Proteome (October 2020 release with 55,489 protein sequences) (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 ). MaxQuant was used with the standard parameters (the “Label-Free Quantification” and “Match between runs” were selected with automatic values) with only the addition of Deamidation (N) as variable modification. Data analysis was then carried out with Perseus v1.6.14: proteins reported in the file “proteinGroups.txt” were filtered for reverse, potential contaminants and identified by site. For the quantitation we used the LFQ calculated by MaxQuant and we kept only proteins found in at least 2 biological replicates in each group; in xenografts we eliminated proteins which were only identified in the Mouse Ffasta. At this point missing values were imputed by Perseus with the automatic settings (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8, mode: separately for each column) leaving with us more than 5,500064 genes left for statistical analysis with . ANOVA testing (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR 0.05), z-score (mean per row) and hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells voraciously consume nutrients to support their growth, exposing metabolic vulnerabilities that can be therapeutically exploited. Here, we show in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, xenografts, and patient-derived organoids that fasting improves sorafenib efficacy and acts synergistically to sensitize sorafenib-resistant HCC. Mechanistically, sorafenib acts noncanonically as an inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, causing resistant cells to depend on glycolysis for survival. Fasting, through reduction in glucose and impeded AKT/mTOR signaling, prevents this Warburg shift. Regulating glucose transporter and proapoptotic protein expression, p53 is necessary and sufficient for the sorafenib-sensitizing effect of fasting. p53 is also crucial for fasting-mediated improvement of sorafenib efficacy in an orthotopic HCC mouse model. Together, our data suggest fasting and sorafenib as rational combination therapy for HCC with intact p53 signaling. As HCC therapy is currently severely limited by resistance, these results should instigate clinical studies aimed at improving therapy response in advanced-stage HCC.

### Keywords
Starvation, Sorafenib, Xenografts, Hepg2, Hcc, Tp53

### Affiliations
Gottfried Schatz Research Center for Cell Signaling, Metabolism & Aging, Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria
Medical University of Graz

### Submitter
Markus Galhuber

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Prokesch
Gottfried Schatz Research Center for Cell Signaling, Metabolism & Aging, Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria


