### Accession
PXD002271

### Title
PTSD mouse anterior cingulate cortex proteome

### Description
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent psychiatric disorder. Several studies have attempted to characterize molecular alterations associated with PTSD, but most findings were limited to the investigation of specific cellular markers in the periphery or defined brain regions. In the current study, we aimed to unravel affected molecular pathways/mechanisms in the fear circuitry associated with PTSD. We interrogated a foot shock induced PTSD mouse model by integrating proteomics and metabolomics profiling data. Alterations at the proteome level were analyzed using in vivo 15N metabolic labeling combined with mass spectrometry in prelimbic cortex (PrL), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), basolateral amygdala (BLA), central nucleus of amygdala (CeA) and CA1 of hippocampus between shocked and non-shocked (control) mice, with and without fluoxetine treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based quantitative proteomics analysis Tissue pools (n=5 for non-shock-vehicle group, n=5 for shock-vehicle group, n=3 for shock-fluoxetine group) separately for  each bilaterally punched brain region (PrL, ACC, NAc, BLA, CeA, CA1) were subjected to extraction of cytosolic and membrane-associated proteins (19). To all samples, equal protein amounts of 15N-labeled internal reference standard were added (14). 14N/15N protein mixtures representing 50-60 μg were separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, fixed and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). The gel was destained and each gel lane was cut into 2.5 mm slices (20-22 slices per sample) for tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide extraction as described previously (14).  Tryptic peptide extracts were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and subjected to a nanoflow HPLC-2D system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Prior to peptide separation, samples were on-line desalted for 10 min with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 3 μl/min (Zorbax-C18 (5μm) guard column, 300 μm  5 mm, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). RP-C18 (3μm). Desalted peptides were then separated by chromatography (in-house packed Pico-frit column, 75 μm  15 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). A gradient of 95% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid from 10% to 45% over 93 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min was applied for peptide elution. Column effluents were directly injected into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode applying a data-dependent scan switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scans were recorded in the orbitrap mass analyzer (profile mode, m/z 380-1600, resolution R=60000 at m/z 400). The top 5 most intense peaks in each scan were fragmented and recorded in the LTQ with a target value of 10000 ions in centroid mode. Other MS parameters were set as described previously (14, 20).  Protein identification and quantitation Peptides were identified by 14N and 15N database searches using Sequest (v28, implemented in Bioworks v3.3.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a decoy Uniprot mouse protein database (release 2010_02) containing 110,128 entries (including forward and reverse sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Mass accuracy settings were 10 ppm and 1 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and cysteine carboxyamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Filtering parameters for peptide identifications were minimum Delta Cn: 0.08 and Xcorr: 1.90 (z=1+), 2.7 (z=2+), 3.50 (z=3+) and 3.00 (z≥4+). 15N peptide identification was assessed by a variable modification of -0.99970 Da for lysine and arginine for the frequent shift from 15N monoisotopic to the most intense 15N isotopomer as described previously (21). False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.1% was set as filtering criteria for peptide hits using PeptideProphet, 14N and 15N database searches were combined via iProphet and protein groups were identified by ProteinProphet (22). Keratin and proteins with one peptide identified were excluded. Relative protein quantification was performed with the ProRata software (v1.0) with default parameter settings (23). The identified peptides for every 14N/15N were filtered and quantified with a minimum signal-to-noise ratio cutoff of 2 and ambiguous peptides were excluded for further analysis. To correct potential mixing errors during sample preparation, quantification results were normalized by subtracting the median from all log2 ratios of the quantified proteins.

### Data Protocol
Identification of differentially expressed (DE) proteins To compare protein expression levels between two experimental groups, profile likelihoods of both groups were combined via cross-correlation to get a probabilistic estimate of the indirect abundance ratio between two groups. For each protein, a p-value for the null hypothesis was derived from the profile likelihood by means of a likelihood ratio test to identify whether the estimated log2 ratio is significantly different from 0. All p-values are adjusted using the "Benjamini-Hochberg" method.  In silico pathway analysis To identify altered biological pathways and processes between different mouse groups in distinct brain regions, DE proteins (p < 0.05) were uploaded to DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) with all quantified proteins as background. Functional enrichment of KEGG pathway and Gene ontology was acquired and pathways were considered enriched with p-value < 0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction.  One-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test based Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Metabolite Set Enrichment Analysis (MSEA) GSEA and MSEA are commonly used statistical methods to identify enriched gene sets or metabolite sets by considering the genome-wide expression profiles of samples from two different groups (24). The one-sided KS test based GSEA and MSEA are varieties of the typical GSEA/MSEA which uses random walk with permutation to estimate significance of enrichment. Instead, the one-sided KS test based GSEA/MSEA uses one-sided KS test to estimate whether genes or metabolites involved in the set distribute unevenly in the ranked list (Supplemental Fig. S2). Genes or metabolites are first ranked based on the Pearson’s correlation coefficients between their expression profiles and the group distinction pattern, i.e. the pattern using 0 and 1 to distinguish samples from the two different groups. Given a priori defined sets of genes or metabolites, e.g. the genes or metabolites involved in a given metabolic pathway, the distribution of ranks of these genes or metabolites is compared with the uniform distribution across the list using one-sided KS test, by trying two different null hypothesises: 1) the rank distribution of the defined gene set is not less than the uniform distribution; 2) the rank distribution of the defined gene set is not greater than the uniform distribution. The significance and the direction of the changes are determined based on the p-values for the two null hypotheses. In this study, the metabolic pathway information, including genes and metabolites that are part of the pathways was obtained from the Small Molecule Pathway Database (SMPDB) (http://smpdb.ca/) and Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) (http://www.hmdb.ca/).

### Publication Abstract
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent psychiatric disorder. Several studies have attempted to characterize molecular alterations associated with PTSD, but most findings were limited to the investigation of specific cellular markers in the periphery or defined brain regions. In the current study, we aimed to unravel affected molecular pathways/mechanisms in the fear circuitry associated with PTSD. We interrogated a foot shock-induced PTSD mouse model by integrating proteomics and metabolomics profiling data. Alterations at the proteome level were analyzed using in vivo (15)N metabolic labeling combined with mass spectrometry in the prelimbic cortex (PrL), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), basolateral amygdala, central nucleus of the amygdala and CA1 of the hippocampus between shocked and nonshocked (control) mice, with and without fluoxetine treatment. In silico pathway analyses revealed an upregulation of the citric acid cycle pathway in PrL, and downregulation in ACC and nucleus accumbens (NAc). Chronic fluoxetine treatment prevented decreased citric acid cycle activity in NAc and ACC and ameliorated conditioned fear response in shocked mice. Our results shed light on the role of energy metabolism in PTSD pathogenesis and suggest potential therapy through mitochondrial targeting.

### Keywords
Brain, Ptsd, Lc-msms, Mouse

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Chi-Ya Kao

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph W. Turck
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry


