### Accession
PXD022880

### Title
Multi-omics revealed molecular mechanisms underlying guard cell systemic acquired resistance

### Description
Systemic Acquired Resistance (SAR) as a plant immune response improves immunity of distal tissue after local exposure to a pathogen. Stomata pores on leaf surfaces are formed by guard cells that recognize bacterial pathogens via pattern recognition receptors. We found that Arabidopsis thaliana plants that have been previously exposed to the pathogenic bacteria Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pst) exhibit an altered stomatal response compared to control plants when systemic leaves are later exposed to the bacteria. Reduced stomatal apertures of SAR primed plants lead to decreases in the number of bacteria that enter the apoplastic space of the leaves. To examine how SAR affects molecular processes in guard cells of distal leaves, we collected Arabidopsis guard cell samples and extracted lipids, metabolites and proteins using a 3-in-1 method. Multi-omic results have revealed molecular components of SAR response specific to the functions of guard cells and roles of ROS and fatty acid signaling in guard cell SAR response. Additionally, our results show an increase in palmitic acid and its derivative 9-PAHSA in primed guard cells. Palmitic acid may play a role as an agonist to Flagellin Sensitive 2 (FLS2), which initiates stomatal closure upon perception of bacterial flagella. The improved understanding of how SAR immune signals affect stomatal movement and immunity can aid biotechnology and marker-based breeding of crops for enhanced disease resistance.

### Sample Protocol
For guard cell samples, three biological replicates of mock and SAR primed samples were prepared for proteomic experiments. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 80% acetone in glass centrifuge tubes in -20°C overnight. The majority of the acetone was removed using glass pipettes, and the glass tubes with the protein samples were dried in a speedvac. Protein samples were then resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 22°C for 1 h, alkylated with 55 mM indol-3-acetic acid (IAA) in darkness for 1 h, then digested with trypsin for 16 h.  MS data acquisition was performed using an Easy-nLC coupled to a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap MS/MS system (Thermo Scientific, Breme, Germany) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Sample peptides (10 µL volume) were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap™ 100 pre-column (75 um X 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 µm, 100A) and separated in an Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC (75 um X 25 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 µm, 100A) analytical column with a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 99,9% Acetonitrile) from 1% to 30% for 90 minutes at 250 nL/min. The MS was operated between MS scan and MS/MS scan automatically with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Eluted peptides were detected in the Orbitrap MS at a resolution of 120 K with a scan range of 350-1800 m/z, and the most abundant ions bearing 2-7 charges were selected for MS/MS analysis. Automatic gain control (AGC) for the full MS scan was set as 200,000 with maximum injection time (MIT) as 50 ms, and AGC Target of 10,000 and MIT of 35 ms were set for the MS/MS scan. The MS/MS scan used quadrupole isolation mode, collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation energy, and 35% collision energy, and an IonTrap detector. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was applied to prevent repeated sequencing of the most abundant peptides.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS proteomic data analysis, we used Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) with the SEQUEST algorithm to process raw MS files. Spectra were searched using the TAIR10 protein database with the following parameters: 10 ppm  mass tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 da as mass tolerance for MS2, two maximum missed tryptic cleavage sites, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.021) on cysteine residues, dynamic modifications of (oxidation of methionine (+15.996) and phosphorylation (+79.966) on tyrosine, serine, and threonine. Search results were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and peptide confidence level was set for at least two unique peptides per protein for protein identification.  Relative protein abundance in primed and control guard cell samples was measured using label-free quantification in Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Breme, Germany). Proteins identified and quantified in all 3 out of 3 sample replicates were used, and no imputation was performed. Peptides in mock and primed samples were quantified as area under the chromatogram peak. Peak areas were normalized by the bovine serum albumin (BSA) internal standard added during sample preparation and extraction.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic Acquired Resistance (SAR) improves immunity of plant systemic tissue after local exposure to a pathogen. Guard cells that form stomatal pores on leaf surfaces recognize bacterial pathogens via pattern recognition receptors, such as Flagellin Sensitive 2 (FLS2). However, how SAR affects stomatal immunity is not known. In this study, we aim to reveal molecular mechanisms underlying the guard cell response to SAR using multi-omics of proteins, metabolites and lipids. <i>Arabidopsis</i> plants previously exposed to pathogenic bacteria <i>Pseudomonas syringae pv</i>. tomato DC3000 (<i>Pst</i>) exhibit an altered stomatal response compared to control plants when they are later exposed to the bacteria. Reduced stomatal apertures of SAR primed plants lead to decreased number of bacteria in leaves. Multi-omics has revealed molecular components of SAR response specific to guard cells functions, including potential roles of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and fatty acid signaling. Our results show an increase in palmitic acid and its derivative in the primed guard cells. Palmitic acid may play a role as an activator of FLS2, which initiates stomatal immune response. Improved understanding of how SAR signals affect stomatal immunity can aid biotechnology and marker-based breeding of crops for enhanced disease resistance.

### Keywords
Systemic acquired resistance, Fatty acid, Redox, Immunity, Guard cell, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Florida
University of Florida Biology Department

### Submitter
Lisa David

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
University of Florida Biology Department


