### Accession
PXD003712

### Title
ATM INDUCES MACROD2 NUCLEAR EXPORT UPON DNA DAMAGE

### Description
ADP-ribosylation is a dynamic post-translation modification that regulates the early phase of various DNA repair pathways by recruiting repair factors to chromatin. ADP-ribosylation levels are defined by the activities of transferases and hydrolases. Little is known about regulation of these enzymes except for that of the transferase ARTD1/PARP1. Among the hydrolases, MacroD2 contains a unique C-terminal region, which may regulate the enzymatic activity carried out by the N-terminal macrodomain. Our study shows that MacroD2 is exported from the nucleus upon DNA damage, and that this nuclear export is induced by ATM activity. In the MacroD2 C-terminal unstructured region we find two SQ/TQ motifs that are necessary for this regulation, arguing for a direct interaction with ATM. This study also shows that MacroD2 nuclear export restricts MacroD2 recruitment to the DNA damage site on the temporal scale, suggesting that the regulation of location determines a regulation of enzymatic activity.

### Sample Protocol
MacroD2 was expressed as YFP-tagged construct in human U2OS cells. After initiation of DNA-damage by stimulation with etoposide, MacroD2 was immunoprecipitated using the GFP-trap (Chromotek). Purified proteins bound to beads were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide and subsequently digested with AspN. Peptide mixtures were desalted on C18-stage tips before enrichment of phosphopeptides using TiO2.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-chromatography system. Peptides were separated on a nano-RP/C18 column which was directly coupled to the mass spectrometer inlet. For tryptic peptide mixtures, a data-dependent analysis program with 1 survey scan and up to 6 fragment ion scans was employed. Phosphopeptides were analyzed with a multi-stage-activation CID-MS/MS program allowing for activation of dephosphorylated precursors data-dependently.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by database search using the Andromeda algorithm in MaxQuant against a human database. All phosphorylation sites were manually curated, especially, when more thant one peptide signal was observed for different phosphor-isoforms. For protein and peptide quantitation, RT/intensity peak areas of unmodified, oxidized and phosphorylated peptides were extracted from raw data of tryptic peptide mixtures. Peak areas were log2-normalized and the protein amount of individual control and etoposide sample pairs were calculated to normalize the abundance of phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation is a dynamic post-translation modification that regulates the early phase of various DNA repair pathways by recruiting repair factors to chromatin. ADP-ribosylation levels are defined by the activities of specific transferases and hydrolases. However, except for the transferase PARP1/ARDT1 little is known about regulation of these enzymes. We found that MacroD2, a mono-ADP-ribosylhydrolase, is exported from the nucleus upon DNA damage, and that this nuclear export is induced by ATM activity. We show that the export is dependent on the phosphorylation of two SQ/TQ motifs, suggesting a novel direct interaction between ATM and ADP-ribosylation. Lastly, we show that MacroD2 nuclear export temporally restricts its recruitment to DNA lesions, which may decrease the net ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity at the site of DNA damage. Together, our results identify a novel feedback regulation between two crucial DNA damage-induced signaling pathways: ADP-ribosylation and ATM activation.

### Keywords
Atm phosphorylation, Dna damage, Regulation of adp-ribosylation, Nuclear export

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik (Protein Analysis Unit), Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Grosshadernerstr. 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik (Protein Analysis Unit), Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Grosshadernerstr. 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


