### Accession
PXD034629

### Title
Mass spectrometry-driven discovery of neuropeptides mediating nictation behavior of nematodes

### Description
Very little is known about the genetic modulation of nictation, a host-finding strategy used by infective juveniles of many pathogenic nematodes, as well as a phoretic strategy of Caenorhabditis elegans dauers. We here use a mass spectrometry-driven approach to find neuropeptides involved in the modulation of this behavior. We identified 126 neuropeptides in infective juveniles of the commercially relevant entomopathogenic nematode Steinernema carpocapsae, 75 of which have orthologs in the model organism C. elegans. To prioritize candidates for causality testing in light of the stage-restricted nictation behavior, we developed quantitative peptidomic assays and carried out targeted proteomic measurements that allows comparing neuropeptide levels at different C. elegans life stages. Our results show that virtually all 164 quantified neuropeptides are more abundant in dauers compared to L3 juveniles. Even so, not all are relevant to nictation, and we identify the neuropeptide genes flp-7 and flp-11 as novel regulators of nictation.

### Sample Protocol
For our discovery samples (S. carpocapsae IJs), we pooled multiple frozen pellets to 0.6 mL, 0.9 mL, 1.8 mL, 3x 2.9 mL and 3.9 mL to cover a possibly wide concentration range of detectable neuropeptides. Frozen pellets were pulverized in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle. Then, acidified methanol (precooled on dry ice) was added to a final concentration of 90:9:1 methanol/worm pellet/acetic acid. Samples were sonicated four times for 15 s with intermittent 30 s cooling on dry ice (Branson Ultrasonic SLPe, 80% amplitude). After centrifugation (2100 g, 12 min), samples were transferred and distributed over 2 mL tubes, and methanol was evaporated using a Thermo Savant SpeedVac vacuum concentrator samples were diluted to 4 mL using 0.1 % formic acid in water). Samples were delipidated three times using 2 mL n-hexane. The peptide fraction was then purified using an Amicon Ultra-4 10 kDa filter (Merck Millipore) as described by the manufacturer. Finally, samples were concentrated using Pierce C18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s instructions and using formic acid for acidification. Samples were dried (Thermo Savant SpeedVac), redissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and stored for 1-3 weeks at 4 °C prior to analysis.  For peptide discovery, samples were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled online to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The UHPLC was equipped with a guard pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 75 μm x 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) followed by an analytical column integrated in the nano-electrospray ion source (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 50 μm x 150 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). The solvent flow was set to 300 nL/min with a 75 min linear gradient from 4% to 36% acetonitrile, always containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were injected in the mass spectrometer using its nano-electrospray ion source. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent manner (Top10 method, dynamic exclusion: 10 s), always selecting the most abundant precursor ions with charges [+2 , +5] from a full MS survey scan for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Full MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6, a maximum injection time of 256 ms and scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z. The resolution for the MS/MS scans was set at 17,500 at m/z 200, with an AGC of 1e6, maximum injection time of 64 ms, and normalized collision energy of 25.

### Data Protocol
For the peptide discovery samples, raw data files were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X+ (v.10.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). For de novo searches, parent mass error was set at 10 ppm, with a fragment mass error of 0.04 Da. Enzyme was set to “none” and the following variable posttranslational modifications were taken into account: oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da), pyroglutamation of N-terminal glutamic acid (-18.01 Da) or glutamine (-17.03 Da), C-terminal amidation (-0.98 Da) and half of a disulfide bridge on cysteine (-1.01 Da). For PEAKS DB searches, the same error tolerances and posttranslational modifications were applied. Here, the enzyme parameter was again set to “none” and digest mode to “unspecific”. Since two versions of the S. carpocapsae proteome exist [45, 46], a union of both databases was used as a search space for PEAKS DB. A false discovery rate of < 1% was applied to MS/MS peptide identifications, and .csv files containing the detected peptide sequences and database IDs were exported for further analysis using R [31].  Potential neuropeptide precursors were identified based on (1) peptides that have flanking dibasic peptide cleavage sites (arginine and/or lysine, as predicted by NeuroPred [47]), and (2) the presence of a signal sequence at the N-terminus of the precursor protein, as predicted with SignalP 5.0 [48].

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptides regulate animal physiology and behavior, making them widely studied targets of functional genetics research. While the field often relies on differential -omics approaches to build hypotheses, no such method exists for neuropeptidomics. It would nonetheless be valuable for studying behaviors suspected to be regulated by neuropeptides, especially when little information is otherwise available. This includes nictation, a phoretic strategy of Caenorhabditis elegans dauers that parallels host-finding strategies of infective juveniles of many pathogenic nematodes. We here developed a targeted peptidomics method for the model organism C.&#xa0;elegans and show that 161 quantified neuropeptides are more abundant in its dauer stage compared with L3 juveniles. Many of these have orthologs in the commercially relevant pathogenic nematode Steinernema carpocapsae, in whose infective juveniles, we identified 126 neuropeptides in total. Through further behavioral genetics experiments, we identify flp-7 and flp-11 as novel regulators of nictation. Our work advances knowledge on the genetics of nictation behavior and adds comparative neuropeptidomics as a tool to functional genetics workflows.

### Keywords
Steinernema carpocapsae, Caenorhabditis elegans, Data-dependent acquisition, Nictation, Parallel reaction monitoring, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Neurobiology (Temmerman Lab), Department of Biology, KU Leuven, Belgium
KU Leuven

### Submitter
Sven Van Bael

### Lab Head
Dr Liesbet Temmerman
Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Neurobiology (Temmerman Lab), Department of Biology, KU Leuven, Belgium


