### Accession
PXD014505

### Title
Proteomics of an artificial mixture of three microorganisms to evaluate sample preparation methods for tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping

### Description
This project provides tandem mass spectrometry datasets of an artificial mixture used to optimize the lysis and evaluate digestion protocols for a fast preparation of peptides for tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping. The microorganism mixture is composed of Bacillus subtilis subsp. spizizenii ATCC 6633, Escherichia coli BL21-Gold(DE3)pLysS AG and Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were obtained by bead beating. Protein samples were digested with trypsin either i) from polyacrylamide gel slices, or ii) suspension-trapping filters or iii) solid-phase-enhanced SP3 fractions. The resulting peptide pools were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer with a 60-min gradient time.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry-based proteotyping allows characterizing microorganisms in terms of taxonomy and is becoming an important tool for investigating microbial diversity from several ecosystems. Fast and automatable sample preparation for obtaining peptide pools amenable to tandem mass spectrometry is necessary for enabling proteotyping as a high-throughput method. First, the protocol to increase the yield of lysis of several representative bacterial and eukaryotic microorganisms was optimized by using a long and drastic bead-beating setting with 0.1 mm silica beads, 0.1 and 0.5 mm glass beads, in presence of detergents. Then, three different methods to obtain greater digestion yield from these extracts were tested and optimized for improve efficiency and reduce application time: denaturing electrophoresis of proteins and in-gel proteolysis, suspension-trapping filter-based approach (S-Trap) and, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation named SP3. The latter method outperforms the other two in terms of speed and delivers also more peptides and proteins than with the in-gel proteolysis (2.2 fold for both) and S-trap approaches (1.3 and 1.2 fold, respectively). Thus, SP3 directly improves tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping.

### Keywords
Sample preparation; shotgun proteomics; microorganisms; proteotyping

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA, DRF/JOLIOT/DMTS/SPI/Li2D, Laboratory “Innovative Technologies for Detection and Diagnostics

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA, DRF/JOLIOT/DMTS/SPI/Li2D, Laboratory “Innovative Technologies for Detection and Diagnostics


