### Accession
PXD026910

### Title
Proteomic analysis of adipose tissue from a pig model of mutant INS gene induced diabetes of youth (MIDY)

### Description
To evaluate functional consequences of insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus for adipose tissue, we used a genetically engineered pig model of mutant INS gene induced diabetes of youth (MIDY). Adipose tissue samples of MIDY pigs and wild-type (WT) littermate controls were analyzed by label-free proteomics to reveal pathways and key drivers significantly affected by chronic insulin deficiency and hyperglycemia.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue samples were homogenized in 1 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) using an ART-Miccra D-8 homogenizer (ART Prozess- & Labortechnik) at a speed of 23,500 rpm for two cycles of 1 min. Samples were kept on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 min. The aqueous phase beneath the top lipid layer was carefully taken and transferred to a new test tube. Protein concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Marshall Scientific) at 280 nm. 50 μg of protein was reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to quench residual IAA during 15 min incubation in the dark. Proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako) for 4 hours followed by digestion with 1 μg modified porcine trypsin (Promega) for 16 hours at 37 °C. SDC was removed by acid precipitation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant (v. 1.6.7.0), using the integrated Andromeda search engine and the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (v. 2020-11-12). Identifications were filtered to 1% FDR at peptide and protein level. Statistics and data visualization were performed in R (R Core Team, 2018). MS-EmpiRe was used to detect differentially abundant proteins. Reverse peptides, contaminants and identifications only by site were excluded for quantification. Proteins were quantified with at least two peptides with a minimum of two replicate measurements in each condition. For peptides with measurements in all replicates of one condition and insufficient measurements in the other condition, missing values were imputed from normal distribution (shift = 1.8, scale = 0.3) using the DEP package. Proteins were regarded as significantly changed in abundance with a Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted P-value < 0.05 and a fold change above 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
Adipose tissue (AT) is no longer considered to be responsible for energy storage only but is now recognized as a major endocrine organ that is distributed across different parts of the body and is actively involved in regulatory processes controlling energy homeostasis. Moreover, AT plays a crucial role in the development of metabolic disease such as diabetes. Recent evidence has shown that adipokines have the ability to regulate blood glucose levels and improve metabolic homeostasis. While AT has been studied extensively in the context of type 2 diabetes, less is known about how different AT types are affected by absolute insulin deficiency in type 1 or permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus. Here, we analyzed visceral and subcutaneous AT in a diabetic, insulin-deficient pig model (MIDY) and wild-type (WT) littermate controls by RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics. Multi-omics analysis indicates a depot-specific dysregulation of crucial metabolic pathways in MIDY AT samples. We identified key proteins involved in glucose uptake and downstream signaling, lipogenesis, lipolysis and &#x3b2;-oxidation to be differentially regulated between visceral and subcutaneous AT in response to insulin deficiency. Proteins related to glycogenolysis, pyruvate metabolism, TCA cycle and lipogenesis were increased in subcutaneous AT, whereas &#x3b2;-oxidation-related proteins were increased in visceral AT from MIDY pigs, pointing at a regionally different metabolic adaptation to master energy stress arising from diminished glucose utilization in MIDY AT. Chronic, absolute insulin deficiency and hyperglycemia revealed fat depot-specific signatures using multi-omics analysis. The generated datasets are a valuable resource for further comparative and translational studies in clinical diabetes research.

### Keywords
Animal model, Adipose tissue, Midy, Biobank, Lc-ms/ms, Pig model, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Flenkenthaler

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


