### Accession
PXD033394

### Title
Angel2 phosphatase activity is required for non-canonical mitochondrial RNA processing

### Description
Canonical RNA processing in mammalian mitochondria is defined by tRNAs acting as recognition sites for nucleases to release flanking transcripts. The relevant factors, their structures, and mechanism are well described, but not all mitochondrial transcripts are punctuated by tRNAs, and their mode of processing has remained unsolved. Using Drosophila and mouse models, we demonstrate that non-canonical processing results in the formation of 3′ phosphates, and that phosphatase activity by the carbon catabolite repressor 4 domain-containing family member ANGEL2 is required for their hydrolysis. Furthermore, our data suggest that members of the FAST kinase domain-containing protein family are responsible for these 3′ phosphates. Our results therefore resolve the mechanism of non-canonical RNA processing in metazoan mitochondria, by defining the role of ANGEL2.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Mouse heart tissue was homogenized in prefilled tube with 400 µm LoBind silica beads and supplemented with 300 µL of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by sonication. Twenty-five µg of protein was digested with 0.5 µg trypsin for 16 h at 37°C.  The digestion was stopped with 2.5 µL formic acid. The sample was cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate, and labeled with TMT-10plex reagents in random order adding 100 µg TMT-reagent in 30 µL dry acetonitrile (ACN) to each digested sample resolubilized in 70 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and incubating at room temperature (RT) for 2 h. The labeling reaction was stopped by adding 11 µL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated at RT for 15 min before combining them in one vial. Twenty-two µg was stage tipped and dried before resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN.  For proteomes of isolated fly mitochondria, samples were lysed with 25 µL of 8M urea and 40 µL of 0.2% ProteaseMAX™ surfactant in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Then, samples were digested with 1.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C, and peptides were desalted and labelled as described above. The TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were fractionated on an XBridge C18 UPLC column (2.1 mm inner diameter × 250 mm, 2.5 μm particle size, Waters), and profiled with a linear gradient of 5–60% 20 mM ammonium hydroxide in ACN (pH 10.0) over 48 min, at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. Fractions were collected at 30 s intervals into a 96-well plate and combined in 12 samples concatenating 8-8 fractions representing peak peptide elution.  For SILAF-IPs, agarose beads were supplemented with 30 µL of 4M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 1 µL of 0.5 µg/µL Lys-C. The beads were washed with 1M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT twice and with 100 mM Tris-HCl. Digestion in the eluent was continued over night at RT adding 1 µL of 0.5 µg/µL Lys-C with shaking at 400 rpm, while the agarose beads were supplemented with 50 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCl and further digested with 1 µL of 0.5 µg/µL Lys-C overnight at RT with shaking at 400 rpm. The peptide solutions were alkylated with 0.6M iodoacetamide in 50 mM of AmBic, pH 8 incubating at RT for 30 min in dark. The digestion was stopped with 10 µL of formic, cleaned on a C-18 HyperSep plate (Thermo Scientific) and dried in a Speedvac.  Label-free IPs were processed as SILAF-IPs, with the exception of additional 0.5 µg trypsin overnight.  Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition TMT-labelled peptides were reconstituted in solvent A and approximately, two µg samples (3/12 µL) injected on a 50 cm long EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 90 min long gradient: 4-26% of solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 90 min, 26-95% in 5 min, and 95% of solvent B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ranging from m/z 375 to 1500 at a resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 5x106 ions for maximum injection time of 80 ms, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 8+, using 45 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass spectra of the top 18 precursor ions were acquired with a resolution of R=60,000, targeting 2x105 ions for maximum injection time of 54 ms, setting quadrupole isolation width to 1.4 Th and normalized collision energy to 33%.  SILAF IP peptides were reconstituted in 15 µL solvent A and 5 µL injected on a 50 cm long EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 60 min long gradient: 4-25% of solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 50 min, 25-40% in 10 min, 40-95% in 3 min, and 95% of solvent B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ranging from m/z 375 to 1500 at a resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 4x105 ions for maximum injection time of 50 ms, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+, using 30 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of R=30,000 in 2 s cycle time, targeting 5x104 ions for maximum injection time of 100 ms, setting quadrupole isolation width to 1.6 Th and normalized collision energy to 30%.  Label-free IP peptides were measured as TMT-labelled peptides, with the exception of 30 s dynamic exclusion and a normalized collision energy of 28%.

### Data Protocol
TMT proteomics data was mapped with Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) version 2.5 against a UniProt D. melanogaster (downloaded October 2019 with 13,788 entries) and Mus musculus canonical database at default settings. SILAF proteomics data was mapped in MaxQuant v.1.6.3.4 at default settings with Lys0 or Lys6 as labels and LysC/P as protease against the canonical and isoform sequences of the fruit fly proteome (UP000000803_7227 from UniProt, downloaded in September 2018 with 21,939 entries). Normalised expression values, or normalised heavy/light ratios were further analysed in R v4.1.1. DmAngel knock-out fly proteomic data on fractionated mitochondria was normalised to median intensities of mitochondrial proteins to account for differences in organellar enrichment. A limma moderated t test was applied for statistical testing. MitoXplorer v2 (PMID: 31799603) protein sets were used as an annotated mitochondrial protein library. OXPHOS complex annotations were manually curated in-house.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Rna, Drosophila, Angel2, Processing

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Solna/Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Solna/Sweden


