### Accession
PXD010667

### Title
Metabolic determination of cell fate through selective inheritance of mitochondria

### Description
Metabolic characteristics of adult stem cells are distinct from their differentiated progeny, and cellular metabolism is emerging as a potential driver of cell fate conversions. However, how metabolism influences fate determination remains unclear. Here, we identified inherited metabolism imposed by functionally distinct mitochondrial age-classes as a fate determinant in asymmetric division of epithelial stem-like cells. While chronologically old mitochondria support oxidative respiration, new organelles are immature and metabolically less active. Upon cell division, selectively segregated mitochondrial age-classes elicit a metabolic bias in progeny cells, with old mitochondria imposing oxidative energy metabolism inducing differentiation. High pentose phosphate pathway flux, promoting redox maintenance, is favoured in cells receiving newly synthesised mitochondria, and is required to maintain stemness during early fate determination after division. Our results demonstrate that fate decisions are susceptible to intrinsic metabolic bias imposed by selectively inherited mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
The mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in 0.4 % (w/v) RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, 186001861) in 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Carl Roth) and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. After a short cool-down, 10 M Urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to a final concentration of 4 M Urea and mitochondria lysates were solubilized by sonication in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, 10 cycles with 1 min on and 30 s off with high intensity at 20 °C). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 5 min at 14,000 g, reduced by incubating at 37 °C for 30 min with 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol; Carl Roth), and cysteines alkylated with 15 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested for 4 h at 37 °C using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals, 125-05061), samples were diluted to 1.5 M Urea with HPLC grade water (Sigma-Aldrich, 270733), and digested with 1:100 (w/w) trypsin (Promega Biotech, V5111) for additional 16 h at 37 °C.Digested peptide solutions were then acidified with 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (Biosolve, 20234131) and then desalted with Oasis HLB μElution Plate 30 μm (Waters, 186001828BA) in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 μL solvent B (80 % acetonitrile; 0.05 % formic acid; Sigma Aldrich, 34998; Biosolve, 6914143) and equilibrated with 3x 100 μL solvent A (0.05 % formic acid in HPLC grade water). Samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 μL solvent A, and eluted into PCR tubes with 50 μL solvent B. Eluates were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf) and dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile, 95 % HPLC grade water, with 0.1 % formic acid to a peptide concentration of 1 μg/μl before analysis by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (500 ng) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min. After isocratic flow for 5 minutes with 5 % B, the elution step proceeded, with the percentage of solvent B increasing in a linear fashion from 5 % to 22 % in 105 minutes, then to 32 % in 10 more minutes and finally to 50 % in a further 1 minute. Column clean-up to 85 % B followed before re-equilibration to 5 % B. Total runtime was 155 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30 %. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z (using quadrupole isolation) were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions.The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30 %) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed. MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode in the Orbitrap, with a resolution of 15,000 and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. The filling time was set at maximum of 22 ms with limitation of 1 x 105 ions. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Tune version 2.0 were used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using the Andromeda search engine49 included in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). The data were searched against a human database (Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB database release 2016_01, 20198 entries) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide and protein level 1 % FDR were applied using a target-decoy strategy. Only proteins identified by at least two unique peptides were retained for further analysis. LFQ (label free quantification) intensity values were exported from the MaxQuant output table and used to perform quantitative analysis using in house written R (version 3.4.0) procedures. Data were processed using the R package MSnbase and data imputation was performed using imputeLCMD.  A mixed strategy based on the definition of Missing At Random (MAR) and Missing Not At Random (MNAR) values was used for data imputation. MNAR were defined as values that were (i) missing in 3 out of 3, or 2 out of 3 biological replicates in one sample group, and (ii) present in all the 3 biological replicates in the second sample group. Because of their non-random distribution across samples, these values were considered as underlying biological difference between sample groups. MNAR values were computed using the method “MinDet” by replacing values with minimal values observed in the sample. MAR were consequently defined as values that were missing in 1 out of 3 biological replicates per sample group. MAR values were imputed based on the method “knn” (k-nearest neighbors). All the other cases (e.g., protein groups that had less than 2 values in both sample groups) were filtered out. Following data imputation, data were quantile normalized and differential protein abundance was evaluated using the limma package. False discovery rate was estimated using fdrtool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Self-renewal, Mitochondria, Energy metabolism, Stem cells, Differentiation, Organelles

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute FLI

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute FLI


