### Accession
PXD013486

### Title
SCX, 18O-labeling and charge reversal for C-terminomics

### Description
The proteome wide, mass spectrometry based identification of protein C-termini is hampered by factors such as poor ionization efficiencies, low yields in labeling strategies or the need for enrichment procedures. We present a bottom-up proteomics workflow to identify protein C-termini utilizing a combination of strong cation exchange chromatography, on-solid phase charge-reversal derivatization and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were cultivated in biological replicates, lysed and cell debris was separated by centrifugation. Proteins were reduced via 40 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated with 80 mM IAA for 1 h at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated with ethanol, dried and resolubilized in H218O (18O water). Protein digestion was performed with 4 mg sample per replicate utilizing trypsin at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were purified using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, eluted with acetonitrile and lyophilized. SCX chromatography was performed and fractions collected as SCX+1, SCX+2 and SCX+3, according to peptide in-solution charge states. Fractions were dried, redissolved and loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. Non-derivatized samples were desalted and eluted. The samples to be derivatized were dimethylated and DMEDA derivatized when bound to solid phase, desalted and eluted.  Peptides were used for downstream reverse phase low pH nanoHPLC online coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer. For measurements, a data dependent acquisition method with top 15 precursors for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 29 % normalized collision energy in positive ion mode was utilized. For pools of the SCX +1 fractions, peptide fragmentation of charge states +1 to +8 was enabled, while SCX +2 and +3 was set to +2 to +8 ion charge. Resolution on MS1 was set to 70,000 with a scan range from 300 to 1,800 m/z and on MS2 to 17,500. AGC target was set to +3 e6 on MS1 level and +1 e5 on MS2, respectively. Dynamic exclusion list was used with 40 s cycles and the isolation window was selected with 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) with SequestHT search nodes. For non-derivatized samples 18O labeling (18O(0) [+0 Da], 18O(1) [+2.0042 Da] and 18O(2) [+4.0085 Da]) on peptide C-termini were set as variable modifications. Further variable modifications were oxidation on methionine [+15.9949 Da], acetylation on N-termini [+42.0106 Da] and as a fix modification carbamidomethylation on cysteine [+57.0215 Da]. For derivatized samples, DMEDA 18O labeling (DMEDA C-terminus [+70.0895 Da] and DMEDA 18O C-terminus [+72.0937 Da]) were used as fixed modifications. Further fixed modifications were set for dimethylation on lysine [+28.0313 Da] and carbamidomethylation on cysteine [+57.0215 Da], while variable modifications were set for acetylation on N-termini [+42.0106 Da], dimethylation on N-termini [+28.0313 Da], oxidation on methionine [+15.9949 Da] and DMEDA on aspartate and glutamate [+70.0895 Da]. Enzyme specificity was set to semi-tryptic with maximum two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Data were searched against a database consisting of 6721 yeast proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome wide, mass spectrometry based identification of protein C-termini is hampered by factors such as poor ionization efficiencies, low yielding labeling strategies, or the need for enrichment procedures. We present a bottom-up proteomics workflow to identify protein C-termini utilizing a combination of strong cation exchange chromatography, on-solid phase charge-reversal derivatization and LC-MS/MS analysis. Charge-reversal improved both MS and MS/MS spectra quality of peptides carrying nonbasic C-terminal residues, allowing the identification of a high number of noncanonical C-termini not identified in nonderivatized samples. Further, we could show that C-terminal <sup>18</sup>O labeling introduced during proteolytic processing of the samples is not suitable to distinguish internal from C-terminal peptides. The presented workflow enables the simultaneous identification of proteins by internal peptides and additionally provides data for the C- and N-terminome. Applying the developed workflow for the analysis of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome allowed the identification of 734 protein C-termini in three independent biological replicates, and additional 789 candidate C-termini identified in two or one of three biological replicates, respectively. The developed analytical workflow allowed us to chart the nature of the yeast C-terminome in unprecedented depth and provides an alternative methodology to assess C-terminal proteolytic protein processing.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, C-terminomics, Charge-reversal derivatization

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik, Institut für Experimentelle Medizin, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Niemannsweg 11, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik, Institut für Experimentelle Medizin, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Niemannsweg 11, 24105 Kiel, Germany


