### Accession
PXD012979

### Title
Diabetes causes marked inhibition of mitochondrial metabolism in pancreatic β-cells

### Description
Diabetes is a global health problem caused primarily by the inability of pancreatic β-cells to secrete adequate levels of insulin. The molecular mechanisms underlying the progressive failure of β-cells to respond to glucose in type-2 diabetes remain unresolved. Using a combination of transcriptomics and proteomics, we find significant dysregulation of major metabolic pathways in islets of diabetic βV59M mice, a non-obese, eulipidaemic diabetes model. Multiple genes/proteins involved in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis are upregulated, whereas those involved in oxidative phosphorylation are downregulated. In isolated islets, glucose-induced increases in NADH and ATP are impaired and both oxidative and glycolytic glucose metabolism are reduced. INS-1 β-cells cultured chronically at high glucose show similar changes in protein expression and reduced glucose-stimulated oxygen consumption: targeted metabolomics reveals impaired metabolism. These data indicate hyperglycaemia induces metabolic changes in β-cells that markedly reduce mitochondrial metabolism and ATP synthesis. We propose this underlies the progressive failure of β-cells in diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Islets were isolated from control or 2 weeks diabetic βV59M mice, centrifuged briefly at 2000g, and frozen at -80°C until use. INS-1 cells were cultured at 5 or 25mM glucose for 48hr, harvested in ice-cold PBS, centrifuged briefly at 2000g, and frozen at -80°C until use. Samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as described. Briefly, proteins were precipitated with chloroform and methanol after cell lysis in Ripa buffer (Sigma, R0278) and reduction/alkylation with DTT/iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptides were purified on reverse phase material (SOLA SPE, Thermo Fischer). Samples were injected into a nano LC-MS/MS workflow consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (both Thermo Fisher) instrument.   Peptides were separated on an easyspray column (500mmx75µm) with a flow rate of 250nl/min and a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid within 60 minutes.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analysed using label-free precursor quantitation in Progenesis QI (Waters, version 3.0.6039.34628) and peptides identified with Mascot v2.7 (Matrixscience) against the UniProt/Swissprot database (2015/11/26). Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to 1% and additionally all spectra identified with a score <20 were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is a global health problem caused primarily by the inability of pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells to secrete adequate levels of insulin. The molecular mechanisms underlying the progressive failure of &#x3b2;-cells to respond to glucose in type-2 diabetes remain unresolved. Using a combination of transcriptomics and proteomics, we find significant dysregulation of major metabolic pathways in islets of diabetic &#x3b2;V59M mice, a non-obese, eulipidaemic diabetes model. Multiple genes/proteins involved in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis are upregulated, whereas those involved in oxidative phosphorylation are downregulated. In isolated islets, glucose-induced increases in NADH and ATP are impaired and both oxidative and glycolytic glucose metabolism are reduced. INS-1 &#x3b2;-cells cultured chronically at high glucose show similar changes in protein expression and reduced glucose-stimulated oxygen consumption: targeted metabolomics reveals impaired metabolism. These data indicate hyperglycaemia induces metabolic changes in &#x3b2;-cells that markedly reduce mitochondrial metabolism and ATP synthesis. We propose this underlies the progressive failure of &#x3b2;-cells in diabetes.

### Keywords
Islets, Β-cells, Diabetes, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


