### Accession
PXD033057

### Title
Two aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complexes anchored to the Plasmodium surface tRNA import protein

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) attach amino acids to their cognate transfer RNAs. In eukaryotes, a subset of cytosolic aaRSs is organized into a multi-synthetase complex (MSC), along with specialized scaffolding proteins referred to as aaRS-interacting multifunctional proteins (AIMPs). In Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, the tRNA import protein (tRip), is a membrane protein which participates in tRNA trafficking. Here, we show that tRip is also an AIMP. We identified three aaRSs, namely the glutamyl- (ERS), glutaminyl- (QRS), and methionyl- (MRS) tRNA synthetases, which were specifically co-immunoprecipitated with tRip in Plasmodium berghei blood stage parasites. All four proteins contain an N-terminal GST-like domain involved in MSC assembly. Surprisingly, further dissection of GST-like interactions identified two exclusive heterotrimeric complexes: Q-complex (tRip:ERS:QRS) and M-complex (tRip:ERS:MRS). Gel filtration and light scattering suggest a 2:2:2 stoichiometry for both complexes but with distinct biophysical properties and mutational analysis revealed that the GST-like domains of QRS and MRS use different strategies to bind ERS. Furthermore, the modular organization of the assembled aaRSs and the properties of the specific additional modules supported the proposed localization of these complexes at the parasite membrane.

### Sample Protocol
For the Co-IP samples, parasite extracts (500 µg) were incubated with protein A-coated magnetic beads (50 µL/mL, Miltenyi Biotec) for 30 min at 4 °C under gentle agitation. The cleared sample (1 mL) was then incubated with 6 µg of purified anti-tRip214-402 antibody and 50 µL of beads for 1 h under gentle agitation at 4 °C and loaded on a micro-column applying a magnetic field. Successive washes (200 µL) were performed: twice with salt-free buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% NP-40), once with intermediate salt buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40), once with high salt buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40) and twice with salt-free buffer. Proteins bound to anti-tRip214-402 antibodies were eluted in 150 µL denaturing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM DTT, 1% SDS, 0.025% bromophenol blue and 10% glycerol) at 95 °C. Eluted proteins were precipitated, reduced and alkylated and were digested overnight with sequence-grade porcine trypsin (1:25, w/w, Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Generated peptides were analyzed on a NanoLC-2DPlus system (nanoFlexChiP module, Eksigent, ABSciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) operating in positive mode. For the mass spectrometry analysis of ERS-N, QRS-N, MRS-N and tRip, proteins were digestedsimilarly with trypsin before LC-MS/MS analysis. Generated peptides were separated either with a 250 min gradient on the NanoLC-2DPlus-TripleTOF 5600 system using the same column setup as for Co-IP or with a 60 min gradient on the Easy-nanoLC-1000 system equipped with a C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher) using a “Top10” strategy.

### Data Protocol
Co-IP MS data were searched simultaneously against the Mus musculus Swissprot database (release 2018_01, 33744 entries) and Plasmodium berghei Uniprot database (release 2016_07, 32170 entries) with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK), using the software’s decoy strategy. The resulting .dat files were imported into Proline 2.0 software where they were validated with Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein. The rest of the data was searched with Mascot algorithm (version 2.6, Matrix Science, London, UK) on a combination of Escherichia coli sequences (Swissprot, Ecoli K12, release 2022_01, 6507 entries) with contaminant proteins (release 2021_03, 111 entries) and the 4 sequences of interest. The resulting .dat files were imported into Proline 2.0 software where they were validated.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) attach amino acids to their cognate transfer RNAs. In eukaryotes, a subset of cytosolic aaRSs is organized into a multisynthetase complex (MSC), along with specialized scaffolding proteins referred to as aaRS-interacting multifunctional proteins (AIMPs). In Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, the tRNA import protein (tRip), is a membrane protein that participates in tRNA trafficking; we show that tRip also functions as an AIMP. We identified three aaRSs, the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase (ERS), glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase (QRS), and methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MRS), which were specifically coimmunoprecipitated with tRip in Plasmodium berghei blood stage parasites. All four proteins contain an N-terminal glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-like domain that was demonstrated to be involved in MSC assembly. In contrast to previous studies, further dissection of GST-like interactions identified two exclusive heterotrimeric complexes: the Q-complex (tRip-ERS-QRS) and the M-complex (tRip-ERS-MRS). Gel filtration and light scattering suggest a 2:2:2 stoichiometry for both complexes but with distinct biophysical properties and mutational analysis further revealed that the GST-like domains of QRS and MRS use different strategies to bind ERS. Taken together, our results demonstrate that neither the singular homodimerization of tRip nor its localization in the parasite plasma membrane prevents the formation of MSCs in Plasmodium. Besides, the extracellular localization of the tRNA-binding module of tRip is compensated by the presence of additional tRNA-binding modules fused to MRS and QRS, providing each MSC with two spatially distinct functions: aminoacylation of intraparasitic tRNAs and binding of extracellular tRNAs. This unique host-pathogen interaction is discussed.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Gst-like domain, Cell surface protein  multi-aminoacyl-trna synthetase complex (mars/msc), Trna, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase-interacting multifunctional proteins (aimp), Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR 9002, F-67084 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Magali Frugier
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR 9002, F-67084 Strasbourg, France


