### Accession
PXD028733

### Title
A whole genome CRISPR screen identifies AHR loss as a  mechanism of resistance to a PARP7 inhibitor

### Description
Inhibitors directed towards PARP1 and PARP2 are approved agents for the treatment of BRCA-related cancers. Other members of the PARP family have also been implicated in cancer and are being assessed as therapeutic targets in cancer and other diseases. In fact, an inhibitor of PARP7 (RBN-2397) has now reached early-stage human clinical trials. Here, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen for genes that modify the response of cells to RBN-2397. We identify the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon receptor AHR and multiple components of the cohesin complex as determinants of resistance to this agent. Activators and inhibitors of AHR modulate the cellular response to PARP7 inhibition, suggesting potential combination therapy approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Cells stably expressing TurboID constructs were incubated in media containing 500 μM biotin to induce biotin labeling of PARP7-interacting proteins. After 10 minutes, plates were placed on ice and washed 5 times with ice-cold PBS to stop labeling reaction. Cells were detached from the flask by gently pipetting a stream of PBS directly onto the cells, harvested and pelleted by centrifuging at 300g for 3 min. Cell pellets were lysed in 1.5 mL of RIPA lysis buffer for 5 min at 4 °C and lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. To enrich biotinylated proteins, 250 μL of Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, PI88817) were washed twice with RIPA buffer, incubated with clarified lysates containing ~1 mg protein for each sample with rotation for 1 h at room temperature, and further incubated overnight with rotation at 4°C. The beads were subsequently washed twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1 mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer. The beads were then resuspended in 1 mL of fresh RIPA lysis buffer and transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. Proteins bound to streptavidin beads (~300 μL of slurry) were washed twice with 400 μL of 50 mM Tris HCl buffer (pH 7.5) followed by two washes with 2 M urea/50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer. Beads were incubated with 80 μL of 2 M urea/50 mM Tris containing 1 mM DTT and 0.4 μg trypsin (Promega, PRV5280) for 1 h at 25 °C with shaking. After on-bead trypsin digestion, the supernatant was removed and transferred to a fresh lobind tube (Axygen, MCT-175-L-C). The streptavidin beads were washed twice with 60 μL of 2 M urea/50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) and the washes were combined with the on-bead digested supernatant. The eluate was alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at 25 °C with shaking and subsequently reduced with 4 mM DTT for 30 min at 25 °C with shaking. . An additional 0.5 μg of trypsin was added to the sample for further digestion overnight at 25 °C with shaking. After overnight digestion, samples were acidified (to pH<3) by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were desalted with 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, WAT-WAT054955) and dried by speedvac, as previously described.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition and analysis was performed as previously described. Briefly, samples were resuspended in 20 μL of 1% formic acid (FA) and separated by a reverse-phase gradient on a Nanoflow C18 column. Each sample was directly injected into the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and collected and analyzed for 75 minutes. Raw MS data were searched against the uniprot canonical isoforms of the human proteome (downloaded March 21, 2018), and using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10), with a match-between-runs enabled8 Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant. Protein MS1 intensity as determined by MaxQuant were analyzed by SAINTexpress (version 3.6.1)9. Parental HAP1 cells treated with doxycycline and biotin were used as background controls for TruboID-PARP7. Proteins with BFDR ≤ 0.01 were regarded as hits.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibitors directed toward PARP1 and PARP2 are approved agents for the treatment of BRCA1 and BRCA2-related cancers. Other members of the PARP family have also been implicated in cancer and are being assessed as therapeutic targets in cancer and other diseases. Recently, an inhibitor of PARP7 (RBN-2397) has reached early-stage human clinical trials. Here, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen for genes that modify the response of cells to RBN-2397. We identify the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon receptor AHR and multiple components of the cohesin complex as determinants of resistance to this agent. Activators and inhibitors of AHR modulate the cellular response to PARP7 inhibition, suggesting potential combination therapy approaches.

### Keywords
Human, Parp7, Turboid

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Minkyu Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
University of California San Francisco


