### Accession
PXD024955

### Title
Data in support of Identification of potential autoantigens in anti-CCP-positive and anti-CCP-negative rheumatoid arthritis

### Description
The presence or absence of autoantibodies against citrullinated proteins (ACPAs) distinguishes two main groups of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients with different etiology, prognosis, disease severity, and, presumably, disease pathogenesis. The heterogeneous responses of RA patients to various biologics, even among ACPA-positive patients, emphasize the need for further stratification of the patients. We use high-density protein array technology to evaluate ACPA reactivity. Identification of the proteome recognized by ACPAs may be a step to stratify RA patients according to immune reactivity. Methods: Pooled plasma samples from 10 anti-CCP negative and 15 anti-CCP positive RA patients were assessed for ACPA-content using a modified protein microarray containing 1,631 different natively folded proteins citrullinated in situ by protein arginine deiminases (PAD) 2 and PAD4.   Results: IgG antibodies from anti-CCP positive RA plasma showed high-intensity binding to 87 proteins citrullinated by PAD2 and 99 proteins citrullinated by PAD4 without binding significantly to the corresponding native proteins. Curiously, the binding of IgG antibodies in anti-CCP-negative plasma was also enhanced by PAD2- and PAD4-mediated citrullination for 29 and 26 proteins, respectively. For only 4 proteins, significantly more ACPA-binding occurred after citrullination with PAD2 compared to citrullination with PAD4, while the opposite was true for 1 protein.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation Fibrinogen (Cayman Chemical) was incubated for 3 hours at 37°C in a citrulline reaction buffer containing 1.2 µg/mL PAD2 or PAD4 (Cayman Chemicals), 1 mM DTT, 10 mM CaCl, and 100 mM Tris-HCL to citrullinate fibrinogen. Digestion of fibrinogen (Cayman Chemical) was performed using filter-aided sample preparation (Bennike et al. 2015). Briefly, samples were transferred to Amicon Ultra 0.5 Centrifugal Filters 10 kDa (Merck Millipore, MA, USA) containing 0.5 % SDC in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. Next, samples were reduced and alkylated by incubating in 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 50 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Samples were washed in 0.5 % sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM TEAB and each wash was followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min at 20°C. Next, samples were digested using 1µg trypsin/100 µg sample protein in 0.5 % SDC in TEAB incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min followed by the addition of 200 µl TEAB buffer and another centrifugation step. Next, the peptides were isolated by phase separation using ethyl acetate and acidified by trifluoroacetic acid. Phase separation was repeated two times and the aqueous phase containing the peptides was recovered. All samples were dried down and stored at -20°C until the time of analysis.  Ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry Fibrinogen samples were rehydrated in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Protein concentration was measured using DeNovix spectrophotometer DS-11 FX+ (DeNovix, Wilmington, Del, USA) and 0.4 µg was loaded per sample. Peptides were separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography on a UPLC system (Dionex RSLX, Thermo Scientific), ionized by a nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics), and analyzed using a timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Samples were injected directly onto a C18 reversed-phase column (IonOpticks, 25cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18) kept at 40°C. The peptides were eluted with a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) with a total runtime of 60 min. The gradient was as follows: 0-16 min at 2% B, 16-45 min at 5% B, 45-48 at 35% B, 48-52min at 95% B, 52-60 min at 2% B.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solution Inc, v. 10.5) and followed the standard analysis pipeline with the addition of citrulline as a variable modification. All search data have been provided as zip compressed files.

### Publication Abstract
The presence or absence of autoantibodies against citrullinated proteins (ACPAs) distinguishes two main groups of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients with different etiologies, prognoses, disease severities, and, presumably, disease pathogenesis. The heterogeneous responses of RA patients to various biologics, even among ACPA-positive patients, emphasize the need for further stratification of the patients. We used high-density protein array technology for fingerprinting of ACPA reactivity. Identification of the proteome recognized by ACPAs may be a step to stratify RA patients according to immune reactivity. Pooled plasma samples from 10 anti-CCP-negative and 15 anti-CCP-positive RA patients were assessed for ACPA content using a modified protein microarray containing 1631 different natively folded proteins citrullinated in situ by protein arginine deiminases (PADs) 2 and PAD4. IgG antibodies from anti-CCP-positive RA plasma showed high-intensity binding to 87 proteins citrullinated by PAD2 and 99 proteins citrullinated by PAD4 without binding significantly to the corresponding native proteins. Curiously, the binding of IgG antibodies in anti-CCP-negative plasma was also enhanced by PAD2- and PAD4-mediated citrullination of 29 and 26 proteins, respectively. For only four proteins, significantly more ACPA binding occurred after citrullination with PAD2 compared to citrullination with PAD4, while the opposite was true for one protein. We demonstrate that PAD2 and PAD4 are equally efficient in generating citrullinated autoantigens recognized by ACPAs. Patterns of proteins recognized by ACPAs may serve as a future diagnostic tool for further subtyping of RA patients.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Autoantibodies, Rheumatoid arthritis, Proteomics, Autoimmune

### Affiliations
Aalborg University, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University, Denmark


