### Accession
PXD021587

### Title
Proteome for Usp11 knockout E17.5 cortex

### Description
Since Usp11 encodes a DUB, we reasoned that Usp11 deficiency may lead to increased ubiquitination and destabilization of a protein that functions in neuronal differentiation and migration.To define the molecular mechanism of Usp11 deficiency on cortical development, we performed a label-free quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to detect the protein expression profiles in E17.5 WT and Usp11 KO cortices in four biological repeats.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC−nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 240K resolution with a 2×105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1×104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles; the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was processed using the Progenesis QI for proteomics 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle, UK) with the default peak-picking settings. 'Relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides’ setting was used, which calculates protein abundance in a run as the sum of all the unique peptide ion abundances corresponding to that protein. Peptide identification was performed using Mascot search engine (v.2.7.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the Swiss-Prot Mus. database (17,046 entries total) Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Fixed modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (cysteine) and variable modifications set as oxidation (methionine) and Acetylation (Protein N-term). A decoy database search was performed and identified peptides were filtered with 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Usp11, Cortex

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica.
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Shang Yin Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Shang Yin, Chiang
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica.


