### Accession
PXD032894

### Title
Sweat proteomic of cystic fibrosis patients

### Description
Sweat plays a crucial role in thermo-regulation and skin health and potentially antimicrobial defense. Its composition is highly dynamic and its homeostasis involves a fine tuning of metabolic pathways. In-depth profiling of sweat protein composition will increase our understanding of skin disorders. Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is associated with high NaCl sweat concentration due to the absence of the CFTR protein. Patients with CF (pwCF) often display aquagenic palmoplantar keratodermia, a rare skin disorder characterized by skin wrinkling with oedema and whitish papules on the palms and/or soles, the pathophysiology of which is unknown.  We report an in-depth analysis of the human sweat proteome of pwCF patients in comparison with that of healthy subjects (S).

### Sample Protocol
We enrolled 25 pwCF  homozygous for the most frequent mutation p.Phe508del (F508del) mutation (mean(SD) age)) and 12 healthy controls (WT) (mean(SD) age)). (CNT  RCB2016-A01923-48, 2018). Sweat was collected thanks wescor macroduct (Elitech) and 20 µl were processed in the S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) for  digestion according to manufacturer’s instructions.  After elution, 400ng was injected on a nanoelute - timsTOF Pro MS (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and separated over a 30 minutes gradient ( 250nL/ min) on C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm column (Ion Optics, Australia). MS data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) method. (m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th). Ion mobilities ranges were 0.65 to 1.4 V s/cm2(1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.1s and the number of PASEF MS/MS scans was set to 10.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (release 02-2021, 20396 entries). Mass deviation was set to 3 ppm (MS1) and 20 ppm (MS2), two missed cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 1 peptides per protein. Match between runs was allowed. Data filtering and imputation was performed with the Prostar Software, using slsa for partially observed values and det quantile for data missing in entire condition. Proteins were retained if they were detected in at least 70 % of any group in the analysis. Analyses were conducted in R. Data in CF and WT conditions were compared by Student t-test. Benjamini-Hochberg corrections were applied to account for multiple testing. A q-value <0.01 combined with a fold change of 0.5 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cftr, Sweat proteomic, Cystic fibrosis

### Affiliations
Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24-CNRS UAR3633, Paris, France
Necker proteomics, INSERM

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24-CNRS UAR3633, Paris, France


