### Accession
PXD025596

### Title
Soybean leaf proteomic profile influenced by rhizobacteria under optimal and salt stress conditions

### Description
Soil salinity is a major abiotic stressor inhibiting plant growth and development by affecting a range of physiological processes. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are considered a sustainable option for alleviation of stress and enhancement of plant growth, yet their mode of action is complex and largely unexplored. In this study, an untargeted proteomic approach provided insights into growth and stress response mechanisms elicited in soybean plants by Rhizobium sp. SL42 and Hydrogenophaga sp. SL48. The plants were grown under optimal and salt-stressed conditions up to their mid-vegetative stage; shoot growth variables were increased in the bacteria-treated plants. Shotgun proteomics of soybean leaf tissue revealed that a number of proteins related to plant growth and stress tolerance were modulated in the bacterial inoculation treatments. Several key proteins involved in major metabolic pathways of photosynthesis, respiration and photorespiration were upregulated. These include photosystem I psaK, Rubisco subunits, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase and glycine decarboxylase. Similarly, stress response proteins such as catalase and glutathione S-transferase (antioxidants), proline-rich precursor protein (osmolyte), and NADP-dependent malic enzyme (linked to ABA signaling) were increased under salt stress. The functions of proteins related to plant growth and stress adaptation led to an expanded understanding of plant-microbe interactions. These findings suggest that the PGPR strains regulated proteome expression in soybean leaves through multiple signaling pathways, thereby inducing salinity tolerance and improving plant growth in the presence of this abiotic stress challenge. They play a crucial role in the development of soybean plants under stressful conditions and therefore could potentially be utilized as biostimulants to mitigate stress effects and boost crop productivity.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, soybean leaves were harvested, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 C. The samples collected were pooled to form a single biological replicate; each treatment comprised 3 independent biological replications. The protein was extracted using a plant total protein extraction kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Briefly, samples were finely ground in liquid nitrogen and ~100 mg of sample was transferred to a sterile Eppendorf tube. It was incubated with 1 mL of 80% ice-cold methanol-protease inhibitor cocktail for 20 min in -20 C and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 C. The supernatant was discarded, and the procedure was repeated thrice. The sample was then incubated in acetone and washed twice following a similar procedure to remove pigments and other secondary metabolites. The RW4 (Protein extraction Reagent Type 4) solution was added to the pellet, vortexed for 30s and incubated for 10 min at room temperature (22 C). After centrifugation at room temperature, the supernatant was collected in a new tube. The protein content was quantified using the Lowry method and samples of 20 ug of protein in 20 ul of 1M urea. The samples were subjected to shotgun proteomic analysis at the Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM).

### Data Protocol
Proteome profiling Total protein was tryptic digested prior to being subjected to LC-MS/MS using a Velos Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). Tandem mass spectra were extracted; charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; Mascot in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305). Mascot was set up to search the Refseq database Glycine_max (86,460 entries), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57 on C) was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (+16 on M) was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Criteria for protein identification Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide sequence similarity were grouped into clusters. Proteomics data were analyzed using Scaffold v.4 (Proteome software, Inc.) for Fisher’s exact test and fold change of identified/known proteins between two sample categories after normalization (embedded) of the quantitative spectral count.

### Publication Abstract
Soil salinity is a major abiotic stressor inhibiting plant growth and development by affecting a range of physiological processes. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are considered a sustainable option for alleviation of stress and enhancement of plant growth, yet their mode of action is complex and largely unexplored. In this study, an untargeted proteomic approach provided insights into growth and stress response mechanisms elicited in soybean plants by <i>Rhizobium</i> sp. SL42 and <i>Hydrogenophaga</i> sp. SL48 and co-inoculated with <i>Bradyrhizobium japonicum</i> 532C. The plants were grown under optimal and salt-stressed conditions up to their mid-vegetative stage; shoot growth variables were increased in the bacteria-treated plants. Shotgun proteomics of soybean leaf tissue revealed that a number of proteins related to plant growth and stress tolerance were modulated in the bacterial inoculation treatments. Several key proteins involved in major metabolic pathways of photosynthesis, respiration, and photorespiration were upregulated. These include photosystem I psaK, Rubisco subunits, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, and glycine decarboxylase. Similarly, stress response proteins such as catalase and glutathione S-transferase (antioxidants), proline-rich precursor protein (osmolyte), and NADP-dependent malic enzyme (linked to ABA signaling) were increased under salt stress. The functions of proteins related to plant growth and stress adaptation led to an expanded understanding of plant-microbe interactions. These findings suggest that the PGPR strains regulated proteome expression in soybean leaves through multiple signaling pathways, thereby inducing salinity tolerance, and improving plant growth in the presence of this abiotic stress challenge. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025596.

### Keywords
Rhizobacteria, Leaf, Soybean, Salinity

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Science, McGill University, Montreal
McGill University

### Submitter
Gayathri Ilangumaran

### Lab Head
Dr Donald Lawrence Smith
Department of Plant Science, McGill University, Montreal


