### Accession
PXD001219

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Pseudomonas putida F1: From Early-Exponential to Late-Stationary

### Description
The genus Pseudomonas is a very versatile and heterogeneous group whose members regularly serve as model system of various applications. These include pathogens and rhizospheric strains as well as organisms with exceptional broad substrate ranges. Nevertheless, when it comes to physiological adaptation due to cell density and growth, on transcript- or proteome level, our knowledge is rather limited. The few existing studies so far focused mainly on B. subtilis and E. coli. In this study Pseudomonas putida F1, a model for the degradation of aromatic compounds, and its adaptation to stationary growth was investigated by label-free proteome quantification. The data unveiled that entrance to the stationary phase does not involve an abrupt switch within the P. putida F1 proteome, but is rather an ongoing adaptation which starts during exponential growth which is illustrated by principle component and functional enrichment analysis. These changes were especially metabolic adaptations, which involved a clear increase in amino acid degradation capabilities and a loss of transcription as well as translation capacity. The final entrance to the stationary phase was accompanied by increased oxidative stress protection, although the stress and stationary sigma factor RpoS increased in abundance already during mid-exponential growth. Finally, the data supports previous observations that phenylacetic acid concentrations might play an important role in growth and pathogenicity regulation within Pseudomonades.

### Sample Protocol
Pseudomonas putida F1 was cultivated in a complex CFA medium and harvested twice during exponential growth and once during early and late stationary growth. Cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in TEAB/Deoxycholate buffer before lysis by bead beating. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, proteins were reduced, alkylated and tryptic-digested in solution. Peptides were desalted using C18 microcolumns. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by LC-MS (Dionex Ultimate3000-QExactive) and a ~2 h gradient. For an unbiased analysis continuous scanning of eluted peptide ions was carried out between 400-1200 m/z, automatically switching to MS/MS higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode and twelve MS/MS events per survey scan. For MS/MS HCD measurements a dynamic precursor exclusion of 30 s, peptide match and an apex trigger of 2 to 10 s, were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done with the open-source software MaxQuant (v. 1.5). The sequence database, complete proteome of P. putida F1 (organism:351746 keyword:181) was obtained from UniprotKB. Besides the standard settings, label free quantification (LFQ) was activated in MaxQuant. This includes a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%. Protein quantitation needed at least two peptides overlapping between samples for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The physiological adaptation to stationary growth by Pseudomonas putida F1, a model organism for the degradation of aromatic compounds, was investigated by proteome-wide label-free quantification.The data unveiled that entrance to the stationary phase did not involve an abrupt switch within the P. putida F1 proteome, but rather an ongoing adaptation that started already during the mid-exponential growth phase. The proteomic adaptations involved a clear increase in amino acid degradation capabilities and a loss of transcriptional as well as translational capacity. The final entrance to the stationary phase was accompanied by increased oxidative stress protection, although the stress and stationary sigma factor RpoS increased in abundance already during mid-exponential growth. The results show that it is important to consider significant sample variations when exponentially growing cultures are studied alone or compared across proteomic or transcriptomic literature. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001219 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001219).

### Keywords
Rpos, Growth, Stationary, Exponential, Microbial proteomics, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
Head of Center for Microbial Communities | Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering Aalborg University | Sohngaardsholmsvej 49 | 9000 Aalborg | Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per Halkjær Nielsen
Head of Center for Microbial Communities | Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering Aalborg University | Sohngaardsholmsvej 49 | 9000 Aalborg | Denmark


