### Accession
PXD035106

### Title
Proteomic analysis of BioID experiments performed with Toxoplasma gondii MyoJ protein tagged with TurboID in tachyzoites

### Description
The aim of the project was to identify proteins of the basal complex of Toxoplasma gondii using MyoJ as bait

### Sample Protocol
TurboID proximity labeling is performed and beads are finally boiled in Laemmli buffer. The supernatants were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunk in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803A rev.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 48 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Toxoplasma gondii GT1 strain protein database (8 459 entries, release 48, https://toxodb.org/ website). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and biotinylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [Käll L. et al. Nature methods 2007] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The quantification parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) No normalization was applied (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> tachyzoite is a singled-cell obligate intracellular parasite responsible for the acute phase of toxoplasmosis. This polarized cell exhibits an apical complex, a hallmark of the phylum Apicomplexa, essential for motility, invasion, and egress from the host cell. Located on the opposite end of the cell is the basal complex, an elaborated cytoskeletal structure that also plays critical roles in the lytic cycle of the parasite, being involved in motility, cell division, constriction and cytokinesis, as well as intravacuolar cell-cell communication. Nevertheless, only a few proteins of this structure have been described and functionally assessed. In this study, we used spatial proteomics to identify new basal complex components (BCC), and <i>in situ</i> imaging, including ultrastructure expansion microscopy, to position them. We thus confirmed the localization of nine BCCs out of the 12 selected candidates and assigned them to different sub-compartments of the basal complex, including two new domains located above the basal ring and below the posterior cup. Their functional investigation revealed that none of these BCCs are essential for parasite growth <i>in vitro</i>. However, one BCC is critical for constricting of the basal complex, likely through direct interaction with the class VI myosin heavy chain J (MyoJ), and for gliding motility. Four other BCCs, including a phosphatase and a guanylate-binding protein, are involved in the formation and/or maintenance of the intravacuolar parasite connection, which is required for the rosette organization and synchronicity of cell division.

### Keywords
Myoj, Toxoplasma gondii, Proximity labelling

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, UMR 5234, F-33000 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Karine Frenal
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, UMR 5234, F-33000 Bordeaux, France


