### Accession
PXD039536

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation of Raptor transduces glucose signals to mTORC1

### Description
Complex molecular mechanisms ensure cellular homeostasis between nutrient sensing and energy metabolism. Strong evidence from many laboratories supports a role for the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) and its end product, UDP-GlcNAc, as important nutrient sensors. Isotopic photocleavable tagging for O-GlcNAc profiling (isoPTOP) was performed for quantitative and site specific identification of O-GlcNAcylation upon glucose mediated nutrient fluctuation. Mammalian target of Rapamycin complex 1（mTORC1）is a metabolic hub, which can sense the availability of various nutrients. We found that Raptor, the scaffold of the mTORC1 complex, is O-GlcNAcylated at T700. Our finding provides a novel mechanism that UDP-GlcNAc mediates glucose signal to mTORC1 by O-GlcNAcylating Raptor at T700 to regulate mTORC1 activity and cell growth.

### Sample Protocol
For glucose starvation, HEK293T cells were washed with PBS and cultured in glucose-free DMEM medium for 2 h. The indicated cells were lysed by Triton X-100 lysis buffer and 4mg protein were precipitated by methanol-chloroform and dissolved in 20 mM HEPES containing 1% SDS. O-GlcNAc residues were tagged with azides via chemoenzymatic labelling by Y289L GalT1, followed by click reaction with a pair of isotope-tagged alkyne-biotin containing a photocleavage linker “heavy” alkyne-PC-biotin (alkyne-H-PC-biotin) and “light” alkyne-PC-biotin (alkyne-L-PC-biotin) for glucose-sufficient and glucose-deprived samples, respectively. The “heavy” and “light” samples were mixed and digested with trypsin, followed by capture of the O-GlcNAcylated peptides with streptavidin beads. UV irradiation was then performed to release the O-GlcNAcylated peptides, which were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. HCD product-dependent EThcD (HCD pd EThcD) were performed for MS/MS fragmentation. In the HCD pd EThcD dissociation method, HCD normalized collision energy was set to 30, and HCD scans containing one of the following glycan oxonium ions (m/z 168.0655, 186.0761, 204.0865, 274.0921, 292.1027, 300.1302, 329.1455, 366.1395, 388.1463, 399.1992, and 405.213) triggered a separated EThcD scan on the captured precursor.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software (version 1.6.1.0) using the Homo sapiens proteome database (downloaded from UniProt on 12th November, 2021) was used for data analysis. O-GlcNAcylated peptides were quantified by an in-house software CIMAGE2. Briefly, the peptides with score > 40 and delta score > 8, located intracellularly, and quantified by CIMAGE2 were defined as quantified O-GlcNAcylated peptides. The quantified O-GlcNAcylated peptides were further categorized based on whether they possessed at least one unambiguous O-GlcNAcylation site with localization probability > 0.75. The median value of each peptide was considered as the final fold change.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) regulates metabolism and cell growth in response to nutrient levels. Dysregulation of mTORC1 results in a broad spectrum of diseases. Glucose is the primary energy supply of cells, and therefore, glucose levels must be accurately conveyed to mTORC1 through highly responsive signaling mechanisms to control mTORC1 activity. Here, we report that glucose-induced mTORC1 activation is regulated by O-GlcNAcylation of Raptor, a core component of mTORC1, in HEK293T cells. Mechanistically, O-GlcNAcylation of Raptor at threonine 700 facilitates the interactions between Raptor and Rag GTPases and promotes the translocation of mTOR to the lysosomal surface, consequently activating mTORC1. In addition, we show that AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of Raptor suppresses Raptor O-GlcNAcylation and inhibits Raptor-Rags interactions. Our findings reveal an exquisitely controlled mechanism, which suggests how glucose coordinately regulates cellular anabolism and catabolism.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, O-glcnac, Glucose, Raptor, Isoptop

### Affiliations
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
18856933419

### Submitter
Xiaoqing Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Chen
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China


