### Accession
PXD008860

### Title
Deep proteogenomics of Bacillus subtilis provides insights into function and evolution of bacterial organism

### Description
"Bacillus subtilis is an aerobic, endospore forming, rod-shaped Gram-positive bacterium. It has a relatively small genome of 4,215,606 bp with 4,197 protein coding genes. It is considered a model organism to study natural phenomena, such as chromosome replication, sporulation or swarming motility. Furthermore, many bacterial pathogens are closely related to B. subtilis, making it a highly significant system for research on potential targets for drug therapeutics. Although B. subtilis is among the best characterised bacterial systems, many of its gene products are still non-annotated, completely uncharacterised and/or their post-translational landscape is unknown. In the current study we aim at broadening the available information on Bacillus subtilis by providing a comprehensive resource for the microbial community encompassing a wide array of information at the genome, proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome level."

### Sample Protocol
"This manuscript partly includes some published datasets (PeptideAtlas ID: PASS00350; ProteomeXchange identifier PXD003764; ProteomeXchange identifier PXD002559). Described below are experimental conditions for data not previously published. Growth Conditions Bacterial cells were grown in either of the following growth mediums - (1) chemically defined minimal medium containing 15 mM ammonium sulphate, 2 mM calcium chloride, 1 μM ferrous sulphate, 8 mM magnesium sulphate, 10 μM manganese sulphate, 27 mM potassium chloride, 0.6 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 7 mM sodium citrate , 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with 0.5% glucose, 0.67 mM glutamic acid and 490 μM tryptophan; (2) Luria/Miller medium (Roth); (3) synthetic M9 minimal medium supplemented with 0.5% glucose, 1 mM magnesium sulphate, 0.1 mM calcium chloride and 1% thiamine. Stable isotope labeling, of certain samples, was done with isotopically labeled L-lysine (12C6 14N2 or 4,4,5,6-D4 or 13C6 15N2). Cells were grown at 37 °C at 200 rpm and harvested by centrifugation at different stages of growth (lag phase, transition phase, logarithmic phase or stationary phase). Protein Extraction Cell lysis was performed either by : (1) resuspension in Y-PER reagent supplemented with 50 μg/mL of lysozyme, 5 mM of phosphatase inhibitors - sodium fluoride (SF) and glycerol-2-phosphate (GP) and protease inhibitor cocktail, or (2) resuspension in a SDS lysis buffer containing 4% SDS in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.6, 5 mM GP, 5 mM SF, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate (SOV), 10 mM EDTA and protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation. Protein extract was cleaned up by chloroform/methanol precipitation and dissolved in 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford protein assay. Protein Digestion For in-solution digestion, the protein extract was reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated with 5.5 mM IAA. Proteins were digested with an endoprotease (Lys-C and/or Trypsin or ArgC for acetylome). Peptides obtained from in-solution digestion were separated into 12 fractions based on differences in their isoelectric point (pI) using the 3100 Offgel Fractionator. Fractionated peptides were acidified using 30% ACN, 5% acetic acid and 10% TFA. Samples for in-gel digestion were separated on a NuPAGE® Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient gel followed by coomassie staining. Cut gel slices were destained and dehydrated with 100% ACN followed by reduction with 10 mM DTT in 20 mM ABC and alkylation with 55 mM IAA in 20 mM ABC. Protein digestion was carried out overnight. Peptides were eluted from the gel using 3% TFA in 30% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid in 80% ACN and 100% ACN. Phosphopeptide Enrichment Phosphorylated peptides were enriched for by (1) titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatography with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) or 6% TFA; (2) phospho-tyrosine antibodies; (3) HAMMOC; (4) Prime-XS. Briefly, TiO2 spheres of 10 μm were pre-incubated with an appropriate competitive binder on an end-over-end rotation wheel followed by incubation with the sample. Incubated beads were then washed and the phosphorylated peptides were eluted from the beads under basic pH conditions. Additionally, enrichment specifically for phosphorylated tyrosines was carried out using the PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine antibody. Acetylated Peptide Enrichment Digested samples were first subjected to solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak Classic C18 cartridges. Enrichment of acetylated lysine peptides was performed using Acetyl Lysine Agarose Antibody. Pre-equilibrated agarose beads were incubated with the diluted sample overnight at 4 °C. Incubated beads were loaded onto a spin column and washed multiple times and peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA. C18 discs were activated with methanol and equilibrated with 2% ACN, 1% TFA. The sample was loaded onto the membrane and washed with 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted in 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and acidified. Mass Spectrometric Analysis Samples were measured on an Easy-LC nano-HPLC coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Chromatographic separation was done on a 15 cm PicoTip fused silica emitter with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin. The peptides were injected onto the column with 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min or 500 nL/min and 280 bars. Peptides were then eluted using a 90 (Elite) or 130 (XL) min segmented gradient. Separated peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization in the positive mode. The mass spectrometer was operated on a data-dependent mode. Survey full-scans for the MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer between 300 – 2000 Thompson at a resolution of 120,000 or 60,000. Top 20 or top 5 most intense peaks were selected for fragmentation with HCD in the HCD cell or with CID in the linear ion trap analyser."

### Data Protocol
"Data Processing A total of 1,688 MS runs were processed. Acquired MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.1.0), integrated with the Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of B. subtilis 168 obtained from UniProt (4,197 protein entries) and commonly observed laboratory contaminants (245 entries). Lys-C, Trypsin or ArgC were chosen as the endoproteases, with a maximum missed cleavage of two specified. Three isotopic forms of lysine were stated in the search space. Oxidation of methionines, N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues and acetylation on lysine residues were specified as a variable modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 12 ppm for the precursor and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was defined as a fixed modification. Re-quantify was enabled. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide, protein, phosphorylated site level and acetylated site level individually. A minimum of two unmodified peptide counts was set as a requirement for the respective protein quantification. Proteogenomics MS data processing For proteogenomics data processing, we downloaded the genome of Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168 from the European Nucleotide Archive (reference: GCA_000009045.1). Open Reading Frames (ORFs) on all 6-frames were generated and translated. The same MS RAW data were then processed with the MaxQuant software via the Andromeda search engine against three databases containing all UniProtKB proteins for B. subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168 (4,197 entries), all putative ORFs (254,598 entries) and common lab contaminants (245 entries), respectively. MaxQuant parameters were set identically as detailed above."

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus subtilis is a sporulating Gram-positive bacterium widely used in basic research and biotechnology. Despite being one of the best-characterized bacterial model organism, recent proteomics studies identified only about 50% of its theoretical protein count. Here we combined several hundred MS measurements to obtain a comprehensive map of the proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome of B. subtilis grown at 37&#x2009;&#xb0;C in minimal medium. We covered 75% of the theoretical proteome (3,159 proteins), detected 1,085 phosphorylation and 4,893 lysine acetylation sites and performed a systematic bioinformatic characterization of the obtained data. A subset of analyzed MS files allowed us to reconstruct a network of Hanks-type protein kinases, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphatases and their substrates. We applied genomic phylostratigraphy to gauge the evolutionary age of B. subtilis protein classes and revealed that protein modifications were present on the oldest bacterial proteins. Finally, we performed a proteogenomic analysis by mapping all MS spectra onto a six-frame translation of B. subtilis genome and found evidence for 19 novel ORFs. We provide the most extensive overview of the proteome and post-translational modifications for B. subtilis to date, with insights into functional annotation and evolutionary aspects of the B. subtilis genome.

### Keywords
Phylostratigraphy", Phosphorylation, Proteogenomics, "bacillus subtilis, Acetylation, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Macek
Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


