### Accession
PXD043089

### Title
MRG15 interactome upon UV irradiation

### Description
The aim of this analysis is to identify the difference between interaction partners of MRG15 wild type and Chromodomain and MRG domain mutants upon UV irradiation. Therefore, MRG15 wild type and mutants (N-terminal FLAG tag) were overexpressed in U2OS cells. After UV irradiation, immunoprecipitation of the constructs was performed using FLAG M2 affinity gel. The constructs were eluted from the beads with 3xFLAG peptide.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample 2 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Inc.) connected to a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150 m, Waters Inc.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a gradient from 5 to 35% B in 60 min, 35 to 60% B in 5 min and 60 to 95% B in 10 min before equilibrating back to 5% B.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
To recognize DNA adducts, nucleotide excision repair (NER) deploys the XPC sensor, which detects damage-induced helical distortions, followed by engagement of TFIIH for lesion verification. Accessory players ensure that this factor handover takes place in chromatin where DNA is tightly wrapped around histones. Here, we describe how the histone methyltransferase ASH1L, once activated by MRG15, helps XPC and TFIIH to navigate through chromatin and induce global-genome NER hotspots. Upon UV irradiation, ASH1L adds H3K4me3 all over the genome (except in active gene promoters), thus priming chromatin for XPC relocations from native to damaged DNA. The ASH1L-MRG15 complex further recruits the histone chaperone FACT to DNA lesions. In the absence of ASH1L, MRG15 or FACT, XPC is misplaced and persists on damaged DNA without being able to deliver the lesions to TFIIH. We conclude that ASH1L-MRG15 makes damage verifiable by the NER machinery through the sequential deposition of H3K4me3 and FACT.

### Keywords
Human, Mrg15, Ner

### Affiliations
Institute for Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Reihaneh Khaleghi

### Lab Head
Dr Hanspeter Naegeli
Institute for Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Switzerland


