### Accession
PXD002333

### Title
Barley flag leaf LC-MS/MS, part 2

### Description
Senescence is the last developmental phase of plant tissues, plant organs and, in the case of monocarpic senescence, entire plants. In monocarpic crops such as barley, it leads to massive remobilization of nitrogen (primarily from degradation of photosynthetic proteins) and other nutrients to developing seeds. Senescence has therefore a major impact on both yield and seed/grain quality. To further investigate this process, a proteomic comparison of flag leaves of late-senescing barley variety ‘Karl’ and a near-isogenic early-senescing line, ‘10_11’, was performed at 14 and 21 days past anthesis, using both two-dimensional gel-based and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based (‘shotgun’) proteomic techniques. Overall, this approach identified >9,000 barley proteins, and one-third of them were quantified. Analysis focused on proteins that were significantly (P-value ≤0.05; difference ≥1.5-fold) upregulated in early-senescing line ‘10_11’ as compared to ‘Karl’, as these may be functionally important for the senescence process. Many proteins in this group, including several membrane and intracellular receptors, glucanases, enzymes with possible roles in cuticle modification, classical pathogenesis-related proteins, membrane transporters and proteins involved in DNA repair, have likely or putative functions in plant pathogen defense. Additionally, several proteases and elements of the ubiquitin-proteasome system were upregulated in line ‘10_11’; these proteins may be involved in nitrogen remobilization, and in the regulation of both senescence and plant defense reactions. Together, our data shed new light, at the protein level, on the importance of plant defense reactions during senescence, on senescence regulation, and possibly on crosstalk between senescence regulation and plant-pathogen interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Stock samples of 2 mg/ml (determined by Bradford analysis) were used to obtain 50 g of each treated protein sample that were then transferred into two separate Eppendorf tubes, one for tryptic digest and the second for 1D gel electrophoresis. Protein digest was performed by the initial addition of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and Trypsin Gold (Promega Corp., Madison WI, USA) in a 50:1 ratio (soluble protein / trypsin) followed by an overnight incubation at 37 °C. Residual undigested protein was removed by filtration using 3 K OMEGA Spin Columns (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) (24,700 g, 5 minutes) prior to mass spectroscopic analysis of peptides. Overall, three biological replicates from each of the two lines (‘Karl’ and ‘10_11’) and time point (14 and 21 dpa) were harvested and treated for MS experiments, totaling 12 samples.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis pipeline utilized a two-tiered search system. Initially, raw data were searched against a target-decoy library, assigned peptide identifications, filtered by false determination discovery rate, and exported by a minimum coverage. Separately, this output was matched to a dataset that was composed of normalized/aligned mass lists to obtain precursor ion intensities that correspond to abundance of each peptide/protein in a run. For quality management of experimental data, a theoretical peptide target library was generated by performing an in silico tryptic digest on the protein sequence entries available in the current Hordeum vulgare L. UniProt database (retrieved 2014; http://www.uniprot.org; 52,289 sequences) and used for comparison. The acquired experimental MS data files exported directly from the mass spectrometer were converted using OpenMS FileConverter scripts (Junker et al., 2012; Weisser et al., 2013) into two separate file formats: (1) molecular graphic file format, (2) MZxml for quantification in later analysis. Analysis was performed on two distinct sets of biological replicates depending on time point. Each set was composed of six samples; three from variety ‘Karl’, and three from line ‘10_11’. Database searching and peptide identification was performed as described for 2D-DIGE analysis. Final protein identifications that met software requirements were consolidated into three non-distinct groups depending on the number of unique peptide representatives contributing to their assignment. A protein was ‘identified’ when two or more peptides were assigned. Members of this group possessing three or more peptides were preliminarily designated ‘quantifiable’. Potentially ‘quantifiable’ group members and their precursor ion information (m/z and retention time; RT; in minutes) were exported to a new mass library from assigned experimental data values (experimental mass library). Quantifiable proteins with a fold-change of 1.5 or more and a P-value ≤0.05 were additionally categorized as having ‘significantly different abundance’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barley, Senescence, Flag leaf, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Montana State University
Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717

### Submitter
Katelyn Mason

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Bothner
Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717


