### Accession
PXD012003

### Title
An insight into the proteome of uveal melanoma-derived ectosomes reveals the presence of potentially useful biomarkers

### Description
Cancer cells are known to release extracellular vesicles that often promote disease development and progression. The present study investigated protein content and glycosylation pattern of ectosomes released in vitro by human primary uveal melanoma Mel202 cell line. Ectosomes released by Mel202 cells were isolated from conditioned media by sequential centrifugation and nanoLC-MS/MS approach was used to determine their protein content. Subsequently, proteins from ectosomes, the whole cell extracts and the membrane fractions were probed with a panel of lectins to reveal characteristic glycan structures. As many as 2529 unique proteins were identified, and many of them are known to be involved in cancer cell proliferation and altered metabolism, tumor invasion, metastasis or drug resistance. Lectin-based studies showed a distinct glycosylation pattern between Mel202 ectosomes and parental cell membranes. Selective enrichment of ectosomal proteins with bisected complex type N-glycans and α2,6-linked sialic acid may be significant for ectosome formation and sequestration. Our data supports recent findings that ectosomes derive from particular regions of the cell membrane and thus contain a unique protein and glycan composition. Exploring whether cancer-related proteins and glycans are enriched in ectosomes isolated from body fluids of cancer patients should became a subject of future in-depth studies.

### Sample Protocol
The ectosomes isolated from primary uveal melanoma Mel202 cell line were washed three times with PBS and suspended in 50 µl of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 1% w/v SDS). Lysates were sonicated with Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode) for 20 min at high intensity (320 W, 30 s/30 s on/off). Next, the samples were denaturated at 95°C under strong agitation for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 20°C. Supernatants were collected and proteins were precipitated (one volume of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to four volumes of the sample). After overnight incubation at -20°C, the samples were spun at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 10°C and washed two times with ice-cold acetone. The pellets were resuspended in 100 µl of 10 mM HEPES pH 8.5. The samples were prepared using paramagnetic bead technology based on the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) [Hughes et al. 2014]. Two types of SpeedBeads™ mixed at a 1:1 ratio were used: GE45152105050250 and GE65152105050250 (Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega).

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer platform (v.1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the SwissProt database with Homo sapiens taxonomy restriction using the locally installed MASCOT search engine (v.2.5.1, Matrix Science). The following parameters were applied: fixed modification - cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications - methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; peptide mass tolerance - 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance - 20 mmu. Only tryptic peptides with up to one missed cleavage were considered. Target Decoy PSM Validator was applied with the maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells are known to release extracellular vesicles that often promote disease development and progression. The present study investigated the protein content and glycosylation pattern of ectosomes released in vitro by a human primary uveal melanoma Mel202 cell line. Ectosomes released by Mel202 cells were isolated from conditioned media using sequential centrifugation, and a nano-LC-MS/MS approach was used to determine their protein content. Subsequently, proteins from ectosomes, the whole cell extracts, and the membrane fractions were probed with a panel of lectins using Western blotting and flow cytometry to reveal characteristic glycan structures. As many as 2527 unique proteins were identified, and many of them are known to be involved in cancer cell proliferation and altered metabolism, tumor invasion, metastasis, or drug resistance. Lectin-based studies revealed a distinct glycosylation pattern between Mel202-derived ectosomes and the parental cell membranes. Selective enrichment of ectosomal proteins with bisected complex type N-glycans and &#x3b1;2,6-linked sialic acids may be significant for ectosome formation and sequestration. Differences in the surface glycosylation of Mel202 cells and ectosomes supports recent findings that the budding of ectosomes occurs within strictly determined fragments of the plasma membrane, and thus ectosomes contain a unique protein and glycan composition.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Uveal melanoma, Extracellular vesicles, Lectins, Glycosylation, Ectosomes

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland Laboratory of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kedracka-Krok
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland Laboratory of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland


