### Accession
PXD004596

### Title
Dissecting the secretory pathway with electrophoresis reveals intra-Golgi trafficking pathways and enables compilation of sub-Golgi and sub-ER proteomes.

### Description
The Golgi is the hub of the eukaryotic secretory pathway, trafficking proteins and lipids, as well as synthesizing complex sugars.  Different biosynthetic reactions are associated with different compartments of its complex architecture.  Although pre- and post-Golgi trafficking has been much studied, comparatively little is known about intra-Golgi organization. In this study, secretory vesicles and organelles were separated along an electrophoretic gradient at sub-Golgi resolution, presenting snapshots of the changing relative abundance of hundreds of resident and cargo proteins and glycans in transit through the ER, Golgi compartments and post-Golgi compartments. Furthermore, grouped features in migration profiles reveal the dominant intra-Golgi protein trafficking pathways, showing separate routes for cargo and different groups of resident proteins. As few structural characteristics of proteins or sequence motifs have been associated with specific regions of the Golgi stack, we also carried out a comparative analysis of the transmembrane regions of resident proteins associated with the main migratory profiles identifying the presence of charge amino acids adjacent to the transmembrane helix, exoplasmic Ser and Thr content and helix composition as likely contributors to protein sorting mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Membranes were enriched from 7-day old Arabidopsis cell-suspension culture using a sucrose density gradient, then separated by free flow electrophoresis according to Parsons et al. 2012 “Isolation and Proteomic Characterization of the Arabidopsis Golgi Defines Functional and Novel Components Involved in Plant Cell Wall Biosynthesis”. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1:10 w/w) overnight in 50% ACN at pH 8.0.

### Data Protocol
For replicates 1 and 2 shotgun proteomics on 1ug of protein was performed on an EST-Q-TOF (TripleTOF 5600 System , AB SCIEX) using a Eksigent nano LC system (AB Sciex) incorporating a 75 μm × 15 cm PepMap C18 reverse-phase column (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For replicates 3 – 5, 1ug proteins was analyzed using a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters, USA), incorporating a C18 reversed phase column (Waters, 100 μm×100 mm, 1.7 μm particle, BEH130C18, column temperature 40 °C). Peptides were analyzed over a 150 min gradient using buffers A (2% ACN [v/v], 0.1% formic acid [v/v]) and B (98% ACN [v/v], 0.1% formic acid [v/v]). Buffer B was increased from 2% to 10% over 2 min, to 40% over 110 min, then to 85% over 1 min, maintained at 85% for 10 min and equilibrated for 14 min with 2% buffer B.

### Publication Abstract
The order of enzymatic activity across Golgi cisternae is essential for complex molecule biosynthesis. However, an inability to separate Golgi cisternae has meant that the cisternal distribution of most resident proteins, and their underlying localization mechanisms, are unknown. Here, we exploit differences in surface charge of intact cisternae to perform separation of early to late Golgi subcompartments. We determine protein and glycan abundance profiles across the Golgi; over 390 resident proteins are identified, including 136 new additions, with over 180 cisternal assignments. These assignments provide a means to better understand the functional roles of Golgi proteins and how they operate sequentially. Protein and glycan distributions are validated in vivo using high-resolution microscopy. Results reveal distinct functional compartmentalization among resident Golgi proteins. Analysis of transmembrane proteins shows several sequence-based characteristics relating to pI, hydrophobicity, Ser abundance, and Phe bilayer asymmetry that change across the Golgi. Overall, our results suggest that a continuum of transmembrane features, rather than discrete rules, guide proteins to earlier or later locations within the Golgi stack.

### Keywords
Immunogold, Arabidopsis, Trafficking, Proteomics, Cisternae, Golgi, Free flow electrophoresis, Trans-membrane span, Secretory pathway, Polysaccharide, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge Cambridge UK

### Submitter
Harriet Parsons

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn s. Lilley
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge Cambridge UK


