### Accession
PXD041132

### Title
Aberrant DNA repair reveals a vulnerability in histone H3.3-mutant brain tumors

### Description
Pediatric high-grade gliomas (pHGG) are devastating and incurable brain tumors with recurrent mutations in histone H3.3. These mutations promote oncogenesis by dysregulating gene expression through alterations of histone modifications. We identify aberrant DNA repair as an independent mechanism, which fosters genome instability in H3.3 mutant pHGG, and opens new therapeutic options. The two most frequent H3.3 mutations in pHGG, K27M and G34R, drive aberrant repair of replication-associated damage by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Aberrant NHEJ is mediated by the DNA repair enzyme Polynucleotide Kinase 3'-Phosphatase (PNKP), which shows increased association with mutant H3.3 at damaged replication forks. PNKP sustains the proliferation of cells bearing H3.3 mutations, thus conferring a molecular vulnerability, specific to mutant cells, with potential for therapeutic targeting.

### Sample Protocol
Total extracts from U2OS cells expressing SNAP-tagged H3.3, wild-type or K27M, G34R, G34V mutant, were loaded on 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels (Bio-Rad). Histone and SNAP-tagged histone pieces were excised from the gel after Coomassie staining. Gel pieces containing histones were washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, dehydrated with acetonitrile, chemically propionylated with propionic anhydride and digested overnight with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted sequentially with 70% acetonitrile/0.25% TFA and acetonitrile, filtered using C8-StageTips, vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 15µl of 0.1% FA.  For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition with the following parameters: survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the Skyline (version 21.2) by using doubly and triply charged peptide masses for extracted ion chromatograms. Automatic selection of peaks was manually curated based on the relative retention times and fragmentation spectra with results from Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Integrated peak values were exported for further calculations. The relative abundance of an observed modified peptide was calculated as percentage of the overall peptide. H3.1 and H3.3 27-40 peptides were used for the quantification of mutant H3.3 over total H3.

### Publication Abstract
Pediatric high-grade gliomas (pHGG) are devastating and incurable brain tumors with recurrent mutations in histone H3.3. These mutations promote oncogenesis by dysregulating gene expression through alterations of histone modifications. We identify aberrant DNA repair as an independent mechanism, which fosters genome instability in H3.3 mutant pHGG, and opens new therapeutic options. The two most frequent H3.3 mutations in pHGG, K27M and G34R, drive aberrant repair of replication-associated damage by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Aberrant NHEJ is mediated by the DNA repair enzyme polynucleotide kinase 3'-phosphatase (PNKP), which shows increased association with mutant H3.3 at damaged replication forks. PNKP sustains the proliferation of cells bearing H3.3 mutations, thus conferring a molecular vulnerability, specific to mutant cells, with potential for therapeutic targeting.

### Keywords
Replication fork, Oncohistone, Pnkp, Brain cancer, Non-homologous end joining, Dna repair, Dna damage, Pediatric high-grade glioma

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Epigenetics and Cell Fate Centre CNRS UMR7216 – Université Paris Cité Lamarck B building, 4th floor, room 413 35, rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13 +33157278981

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Polo
Epigenetics and Cell Fate Centre CNRS UMR7216 – Université Paris Cité Lamarck B building, 4th floor, room 413 35, rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13 +33157278981


