### Accession
PXD011455

### Title
Peptidomics profiling of the murine gut after vertical sleeve gastrectomy

### Description
Profiling of the murine peptidome along the gastrointestinal tract and pancreas in vertical sleeve gastrectomy and sham operated mice. The study compares the peptidome of various portions of the GI tract using intact mass spectrometry and database searching. These peptides included most gut hormones including proglucagon derived peptides, PYY, GIP, somatostatin, neurotensin amongst others.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue (ranging from 10 to 40 mg in total) was homogenised in the presence of 6M GuHCl and large proteins were precipitated using 80% ACN in water. The aqueous phase was transferred and extracted by solid phase extraction (HLB micro-elution) and disulphide bonds were reduced and alkylated prior to nano and normal flow LC-MS/MS analysis. LC separations were performed on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 LC system, and mass spectrometry was performed on a Q-Exactive plus system using IDA based detection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data was searched against the murine swissprot database using the PEAKS 8.5 software. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylated cysteines, and variable modifications were C-terminal amide, N-terminal pyroglutamate and N-terminal acetylation. Databases were searched using a "No digest" setting.

### Publication Abstract
Bariatric surgery is widely used to treat obesity and improves type 2 diabetes beyond expectations from the degree of weight loss. Elevated post-prandial concentrations of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), peptide YY (PYY), and insulin are widely reported, but the importance of GLP-1 in post-bariatric physiology remains debated. Here, we show that GLP-1 is a major driver of insulin secretion after bariatric surgery, as demonstrated by blocking GLP-1 receptors (GLP1Rs) post-gastrectomy in lean humans using Exendin-9 or in mice using an anti-GLP1R antibody. Transcriptomics and peptidomics analyses revealed that human and mouse enteroendocrine cells were unaltered post-surgery; instead, we found that elevated plasma GLP-1 and PYY correlated with increased nutrient delivery to the distal gut in mice. We conclude that increased GLP-1 secretion after bariatric surgery arises from rapid nutrient delivery to the distal gut and is a key driver of enhanced insulin secretion.

### Keywords
Stomach, Gut hormones, Intestine, Peptidomics, Vsg, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Medical Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Fiona Gribble
Medical Research Laboratories, University of Cambridge


