### Accession
PXD000908

### Title
Agron-omics Long Day Optimal Watering (LOW) experiment

### Description
Plants adapt to the prevailing photoperiod by optimally adjusting growth and flowering to the availability of energy. When Arabidopsis thaliana plants are grown in long days individual leaf growth is favoured, whereas whole plant leaf area is decreased because of the rapid shift to floral stages and, consequently, the low number of total leaves. To understand the molecular profiles of adaptation to long-day conditions we profiled Arabidopsis leaf number six of plants grown in 16 hours of light at four developmental stages both at the end of the day and the end of the night and compared the profiles to those acquired in short day conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in Arabidopsis leaf 6 at four developmental stages and at the end of the day and the end of the night in the LOW experiment and of the reference sample were quantified using the 8-plex iTRAQ isobaric tagging reagent. The labelled peptides were fractionated with strong cation-exchange (SCX) and purified before mass spectrometry measurements on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were matched to peptides with the database-dependent search algorithm Mascot searching the TAIR10 protein database with concatenated decoy database and supplemented with common contaminants (71,032 entries). The peptide spectrum assignments were filtered for peptide unambiguity in the pep2pro database. Accepting only unambiguous peptides with ion score greater than 24 and an expect value smaller than 0.05 resulted in 70 979 assigned spectra at a spectrum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.07%. Quantitative information for all reporter ions was available in 50 947 of these spectra leading to the quantification of 1788 proteins based on 6178 distinct peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq quantification, Arabidopsis, Leaf 6, Photoperiod

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of  Plant Science

### Submitter
Katja Baerenfaller

### Lab Head
Dr Wilhelm Gruissem
ETH Zurich


