### Accession
PXD004630

### Title
ON-TISSUE DIRECT MONITORING OF GLOBAL HYDROGEN/DEUTERIUM EXCHANGE BY MALDI MASS SPECTROMETRY: TDXMS

### Description
Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometric methods for protein structural analysis are conventionally performed in solution. We present Tissue Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (TDXMS), a method to directly monitor deuterium uptake on tissue, as a means to better approximate the deuterium exchange behavior of proteins in their native microenvironment. Using this method, a difference in the deuterium uptake behavior was observed when the same proteins were monitored in solution and on tissue. The higher maximum deuterium uptake at equilibrium for all proteins analyzed in solution suggests a more open conformation in the absence of interacting partners normally observed on tissue. We also demonstrate a difference in the deuterium uptake behavior of a few proteins across different morphological regions of the same tissue section. Modifications of the total number of hydrogens exchanged, as well as the kinetics of exchange, were both observed. These results provide information on the implication of protein interactions with partners as well as on the conformational changes related to these interactions, and illustrate the importance of examining protein deuterium exchange behavior in the presence of its specific microenvironment directly at the level of tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Samples include protein standards, rat brain tissue sections and protein extracts from these sections. For the protein standards and extracts, hydrogen/deuterium exchange was realized in solution by diluting concentrated samples in deuterium-enriched buffers. For tissue sections, deuterated buffers were spotted on specified regions. Deuterium uptake evolution was monitored by spotting liquid samples on a MALDI target or directly for tissue sections after the quench acid solution containing sinapinic acid matrix was deposited. Analysis was done in linear positive mode at a mass range of 3000-20000 m/z accumulating 5000 laser shots per spectrum. Protein extracts were also subjected to top-down LC MS to identify the intact proteins extracted. Extracts were separated in a ProSwift RP-4H column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile for 60 min. Spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode using an LTQ orbitrap XL. The full MS scans were acquired at 100,000 resolution (m/z 400) with a maximum injection time of 1000ms. The top 2 most intense peaks were subjected to MS/MSwith higher energy-collision dissociation and the spectra were acquired at 60,000 resolution (m/z 400) with a maximum injection time of 500 ms, activation time of 1s, isolation width of 15 ppm and default charge state of 10. The normalized collision energy was set at 30.0 V. Dynamic exclusion with a size of 500 was enabled for a duration of 180s. +1, +2 and +3 charge states were rejected.

### Data Protocol
 For top-down analysis, the data were analyzed with ProSightPC 3.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) utilizing the ProSightPD node. Spectra were then searched using a three-tiered search tree. The first search was an Absolute Mass search with MS1 tolerance of 100 Da, MS2 tolerance of 10 ppm, against a Rattus UniProt database containing 35,953 canonical and isoform sequences accessed on July 8, 2016. The second search was a ProSight Biomarker search with MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm, MS2 tolerance of 10ppm, against the same database. Lastly, a second Absolute Mass search was performed with MS1 tolerance of 1000 Da, MS2 tolerance of 10ppm, using Delta M mode, against the same database.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometric (H/DXMS) methods for protein structural analysis are conventionally performed in solution. We present Tissue Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (TDXMS), a method to directly monitor deuterium uptake on tissue, as a means to better approximate the deuterium exchange behavior of proteins in their native microenvironment. Using this method, a difference in deuterium uptake behavior was observed when the same proteins were monitored in solution and on tissue. The higher maximum deuterium uptake at equilibrium for all proteins analyzed in solution suggests a more open conformation in the absence of interacting partners normally observed on tissue. We also demonstrate a difference in the deuterium uptake behavior of a few proteins across different morphological regions of the same tissue section. Modifications of the total number of hydrogens exchanged, as well as the kinetics of exchange, were both observed. These results provide information on the implication of protein interactions with partners as well as on the conformational changes related to these interactions, and illustrate the importance of examining protein deuterium exchange behavior in the presence of its specific microenvironment directly at the level of tissues.

### Keywords
Tissue, In situ analysis, H/d exchange, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) INSERM U1192- Université Lille 1 Bât SN3, 1er étage, porte 107 F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex France
PRISM- University of Lille 1

### Submitter
Jusal Quanico

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) INSERM U1192- Université Lille 1 Bât SN3, 1er étage, porte 107 F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex France


