### Accession
PXD032209

### Title
Identification of different proteins binding to Na, K-ATPase α1 in LPS-induced ARDS cell model by proteomic analysis

### Description
Background: Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is characterized by refractory hypoxemia caused by accumulation of pulmonary fluid, which is related to inflammatory cell infiltration, impaired tight junction of pulmonary epithelium and impaired Na, K-ATPase function, especially Na, K-ATPase α1 subunit. Up until now, the pathogenic mechanism at the level of protein during lipopolysaccharide- (LPS-) induced ARDS remains unclear. Methods: Using an unbiased, discovery and quantitative proteomic approach, we discovered the differentially expressed proteins binding to Na, K-ATPase α1 between LPS-A549 cells and Control-A549 cells. These Na, K-ATPase α1 interacting proteins were screened by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) technology. Among them, some of the differentially expressed proteins with significant performance were identified and quantified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The protein interaction network was constructed by the related Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. Several differentially expressed proteins were validated by Western blot. Results: Of identified 1598 proteins, 89 were differentially expressed proteins between LPS-A549 cells and Control-A549 cells. Intriguingly, protein-protein interaction network showed that there were 244 significantly enriched co-expression among 60 proteins in the group control-A549. while the group LPS-A549 showed 43 significant enriched interactions among 29 proteins. The related GO and KEGG analysis found evident phenomena of ubiquitination and deubiquitination, as well as the pathways related to autophagy. Among proteins with rich abundance, there were several intriguing ones, including the deubiquitinase (OTUB1), the tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), the scaffold protein in CUL4B-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL4B) complexes (CUL4B) and the autophagy-related protein sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1). Conclusions: In conclusion, our proteomic approach revealed targets related to the occurrence and development of ARDS, being the first study to investigate significant differences in Na, K-ATPase α1 interacting proteins between LPS-induced ARDS cell model and control-A549 cell. These proteins may help the clinical diagnosis and facilitate the personalized treatment of ARDS.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Cell line and cell culture  A549 cell line was purchased from ATCC; A549 cells were seeded into plastic culture dishes at 1×10^6/cm2 and cultured in a humidified incubator (21 % O2, 5 % CO2, 37°C) in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100µg/ml streptomycin. For all experiments, cells were grown and maintained in six-well plates, and cells were serum deprived for 24 h prior to pretreatment with LPS at a concentration of 1 ug/ml for 12 h at 37°C. The final number of cells we used was 2 x 10^7 A549 cells. This was resuscitated starting from a cryogenic vial, when growing a full T25 culture flask, which was about 1×10^6 cells at that point. Whereas 2×10^7 A549 cells would take 10 flasks, roughly 2-3 weeks. 2.3 Sample preparation  There were two groups: A: A549 cells, B: A549 cells +LPS (1μg/ml, cultured for 12h). ARDS was induced by LPS according to previous reports[7]. Na, K-ATPase α1 antibody was used to pull down the Na, K-ATPase α1 proteins in two groups of cells. These proteins were pulled down for label-free mass spectrometry to understand the binding and interacting protein, and then the protein of interest was selected for verification.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS -based assays were performed as previously described with some minor alterations[8,9]. For each sample, ~ 1/2 peptide were separated and analyzed with a nano-UPLC (EASY-nLC1200) coupled to Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). Separation was performed using a reversed-phase column (100 µm, ID × 15 cm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9µm, Dr. Math). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1 % FA, 2 % ACN (phase A) and 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 120 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 8 to 30 % for 92 min, 30 to 40 % for 20 min, 40 to 100 % for 2 min, 100 % for 2 min, 100 to 2 % for 2 min and 2 % for 2 min. Data dependent acquisition was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000 (@200 m/z) and m/z range of 350-1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 17,500 with a dynamic first mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 1.0 E+6 with max IT 100ms, and 5.0 E+4 for MS2 with max IT 200ms. The top 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, and isolation window of 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 20s. 2.6 MaxQuant database search The MaxQuant computational platform was performed as described previously[10]. Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0). The protein sequence database (Uniprot_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UNIPROT.  2.7 Quantification and class specific grouping  We performed proteomic profiling from LPS-A549 cell group and control A549 cell group (Table S1) using the Co-IP and LC-MS/MS technology. In this study, the FDR of polypeptide and protein levels were all controlled at 0.01.  Statistical Analysis All results were expressed as themean ± standard deviation. The normalized spectral count of protein in purification was performed as previously described[13]. And the difference multiple selection, identification and quantitative results were as follows: FCA value＞1 or FCA value＜-1, and the protein with unique peptide number ≥2 was defined as significant difference. Statistical significance was set at a P<0.05 (*), P < 0.01 (**) and P < 0.001 (***)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Na, Proteomics, Lipopolysaccharide, A549 cell., K-atpase α1, Ards

### Affiliations
wxpwy1216@163.com
Transplantation Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,Changsha 410013, Hunan, China

### Submitter
xupeng Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Wan qiquan
Transplantation Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,Changsha 410013, Hunan, China


