### Accession
PXD035112

### Title
Identification of Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets Related to Sepsis-associated Encephalopathy in Rats by Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Background: Sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE) is a common and severe complication of sepsis. While several studies have reported the proteomic alteration in plasma, urine, heart, etc. of sepsis, few research focused on the brain tissue. This study aims at discovering the differentially abundant proteins in the brains of septic rats to identify biomarkers of SAE.  Methods: The Prague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into sepsis (n = 6) or sham (n = 6) groups, and then the whole brain tissue was dissected at 24 h after surgery for further protein identification by TMT-LC–MS/MS-based proteomics. Ingenuity pathway analysis, Gene ontology knowledgebase, and STRING database are used to explore the biological significance of proteins with altered concentration.  Results: Among the total of 3163 proteins identified in the brain tissue, 57 were increased while 38 were decreased in the sepsis group compared to the sham group. Bioinformatic analyses suggest that the differentially abundant proteins are highly related to cellular microtubule metabolism, energy production, nucleic acid metabolism, neurological disease, etc. Additionally, acute phase response signaling was possibly activated and PI3K/AKT signaling was suppressed during sepsis. An interaction network established by IPA revealed that Akt1, Gc-globulin, and ApoA1 were the core proteins. The increase of Gc-globulin and the decrease of Akt1 were confirmed by Western blot.  Conclusions: Based on the multifunction of these proteins in several brain diseases, we first propose that Gc-globulin, ApoA1, PI3K/AKT pathway, and acute phase response proteins (hemopexin and cluster of alpha-2-macroglobulin) can potentially be diagnosis biomarkers, therapeutic targets, and prognosis indicators of SAE. These results may provide new insights into the pathologic mechanism of SAE, yet further research is required to explore the functional implications and clinical applications of the differentially abundant proteins in the brains of sepsis group.

### Sample Protocol
5.1 Animals The experimental design and animal methodologies for this research were approved by the Animal Experimental Committee of Huashan Hospital Fudan University's Animal Care Guidelines. In this experiment, 250–300g Prague-Dawley rats were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal. The mice were kept in temperature and humidity-controlled conditions and had free access to water and food. The light in the room is limited to a 12-hour light/dark cycle. Mice were randomly assigned to each group, and random numbers and a unique code associated with a single animal were generated using SPSS version 18.0 software. 5.2 Experimental Design There are two separate experiments and the summary of experimental groups are shown as following. Proteomic analysis, western blot validation and clinical scores evaluation were assessed in a blinded manner. The investigators were blinded for the surgical procedures and treatment. S.X.D. performed surgeries, and M.X.Y. and Y.H. did all other measurements.  5.2.1 Experiment 1 To quantify the protein expression in the brain at 24 hours after septic encephalopathy. The rats were divided into CLP group and Sham group at random (6/group) for proteomic analysis after identify the CLP model stability. 5.2.2 Experiment 2 To validate the proteomic results, the rats were divided into CLP group and Sham group at random (6/group). After identify the CLP model stability, we used immunoblotting to test GC and AKT1 expression in both groups of mice. 5.3 CLP Models In this experiment, 250–300g Prague-Dawley rats were employed. Brains of 6 rats were harvested at 24 h after CLP. Similar surgical procedures were performed on 6 sham animals without generating CLP. Sodium pentobarbital (40 mg/kg intraperitoneal injection) was used to anesthetize the rats. Make a 3-4cm longitudinal skin midline incision to get access to the peritoneal cavity. At the middle of the ileocecal valve and distal cecum, 6.0 silk thread (6-0 PROLINE, 8680g; Ethicon) was firmly ligated. Perforate the cecum with a single through-and-through puncture in a mesenteric-to-antimesenteric orientation, halfway between the ligation and the tip of the cecum. Extrude a small amount (droplet) of feces from both the mesenteric and antimesenteric penetration holes after withdrawing the needle to confirm patency. Skip these steps from constricting the cecum for sham animals. Move the cecum into the abdominal cavity and suture the skin. The animal was placed in an incubator with free access to food and water after the incision was sutured. Subcutaneously administer prewarmed normal saline (37 °C; 5 ml per 100 g body weight) to resuscitate the animals. The rats were sedated by sodium pentobarbital at 24 hours after the operation. The brains were taken after anesthesia and sectioned coronally at the level of the optic chiasm (2 mm posterior to the chiasm), resulting in one section. Whole brains were dissected quickly, washed in ice-cold PBS, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and retained at -80 °C until used.

### Data Protocol
Three brains of mice in each group were mixed into one tube for quantitative analysis of protein, and finally the relative protein concentration of each tube was obtained. The material was resuspended in a lysis solution that was roughly eight times its original volume (4% SDS, 100 mM Hepes, pH = 7.6, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and PMSF). On the ice, the homogenate was sonicated for 10 minutes. The supernatant was stored at -80 °C after centrifugation at 25,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. A BCA kit was used to determine the total protein content.The proteins were reduced by 5 mmol/L DTT for 30 minutes at 56 °C and alkylated by 10-mmol/L IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then diluted with ammonium bicarbonate (50 mmol/L) until the urea content was less than 1 M. For 12 hours, trypsin was administered to the samples at a 1:50 mass ratio (enzyme: protein). The peptide samples were incubated at room temperature for 120 minutes with iTRAQ-8plex labeling reagents (AB Sciex). The peptides were fractionated using a C18 column (Waters BEHC18 2.1 50 mm, 1.7 m) in a water UPLC. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5–35 % solvent B (acetonitrile) over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 600 L/min; solvent A is 20 mM ammonium formate with pH adjusted to 10. At 214 nm, the absorbance was measured. 12 fractions were collected and lyophilized.Each fraction was separated using a reverse-phase analytical column (Eksigent, C18, 3 m, 150 mm, 75 m) and nano-HPLC (Eksigent Technologies). Peptides were then eluted using the gradient conditions below, using phase B (98% CAN with 0.1% formic acid) from 5 to 45% phase B (5–78 minutes) with a total flow rate of 300 nL/min. A 2.5 kV electrospray voltage was applied to the mass spectrometer's intake. The information-dependent data collection mode on the 5600 mass spectrometer was used to switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition automatically.Database Searching Mascot was used to evaluate all MS/MS samples (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.0). Mascot was programmed to search the UniProt Human database (20,204 items), assuming trypsin digestion. Mascot was searched with a 0.1 Da fragment ion mass tolerance and a 20.0 ppm parent ion tolerance. Mascot defined cysteine carbamidomethyl and lysine iTRAQ8plex, as well as the N-terminus, as permanent alterations. Methionine oxidation and the iTRAQ8plex of tyrosine were listed as changeable alterations in Mascot. Criteria For Protein Identification To validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications, Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.4.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was employed. The Scaffold Local FDR method approved peptide identifications with an FDR of less than 1.0 percent. Protein identification was allowed if the FDR was less than 1.0% and at least one peptide was found. The Protein Prophet program gave probability to proteins (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). To meet the concept, proteins with identical peptides that could not be distinguished by MS/MS analysis alone were grouped.Scaffold Q+ (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, version Scaffold 4.4.5) was used to quantify iTRAQ peptides and protein identifications. The experiment's acquired intensities were globally adjusted across all acquisition runs. Within each acquisition run, individual quantitative samples were standardized. Within the designated protein, the intensities for identification of each peptide were standardized. A 1:1-fold change was achieved by normalizing the reference channels. To multiplicatively normalize data, all normalization computations were conducted using medians.We utilized all of the rat proteins as the foundation for determining enrichment values for gene ontology (GO) analysis, which was done using a self-written R script. The significance of the enrichment values, which were then depicted as a heat map, was tested using a two-tailed Fisher's exact test and an FDR control. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway database was also used to undertake pathway analysis. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; Ingenuity R Systems, www.Ingenuity.com/) was used to examine canonical pathways and linkages within the uploaded data to better understand the biological implications of differentially expressed plasma proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Acute phase response, Sepsis-associated encephalopathy, Pi3k/akt signaling, Gc

### Affiliations
Department of Critical Care Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University
Huashan Hospital, Fudan University

### Submitter
miaoxian yang

### Lab Head
Dr yang miaoxian
Huashan Hospital, Fudan University


