### Accession
PXD016874

### Title
Embryo cryopreservation-transfer procedure entails long-term phenotypic consequences correlated with molecular signatures in the rabbit model. Spectral Library DATA

### Description
Since the first human conceived through in vitro fertilisation in 1978, over 8 million babies have been born by assisted reproductive technologies (ART). Although most ART babies and children seem healthy, in recent years, several human and animal model studies have evidenced a potential impact of ART on long-term development. However, the long-term follow-up data in this field is still limited. Till now, studies are mainly focused on techniques such as in vitro fertilisation or in vitro culture, being the information from gametes/embryos cryopreservation field practically missing. Herein, we have developed an animal model to determine whether vitrified-thawed embryo transfer procedure has long-term consequences over the offspring. The birth weight, growth performance and adult body weight of the rabbits derived from vitrified-thawed embryos was compared with that of the naturally-conceived animals. In adulthood, the liver, heart, kidneys, spleen, lungs, gonads and adrenal glands of the males were weighed and compared. Moreover, some haematological and biochemical parameters were assessed on peripheral blood. Besides, some liver samples were obtained to perform a comparative proteomic study.  The embryo vitrification-transfer process modified the birth weight and the growth pattern of the offspring, reducing the growth performance in a sex-specific manner. In adulthood, animals derived from vitrified embryos showed a significantly lower body, liver and heart weight. Molecular analyses revealed that vitrified-thawed embryo transfer procedure triggers concordant reprogramming of the liver proteome. The most relevant metabolic alteration denoted by the protein profile was that related to the oxidative phosphorylation, suggesting an impaired oxidative metabolism in the mitochondria. Furthermore, hints of dysregulation in the zinc and lipid metabolism were identified. These results evidence long-term consequences in the offspring derived from cryopreserved-transferred embryos and represented an evident example of the phenotypic plasticity exhibited by the mammalian embryo.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 8 individual samples (4 from VT and 4 from NC groups) were obtained from adult rabbit males, retrieving some liver biopsies randomly from the same individual (one individual, one sample). The samples were immediately washed with a phosphate-buffered saline solution to remove blood remnants and were directly flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ºC for the proteomic study. Proteins from liver biopsy were extracted in Lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris‐pH 8.5) using 2D Grinding Kit (GE Healthcare). Samples were quantified by RC_DC kit (BioRad) according manufactured instructions.  The complete proteome was analysed from a pool obtained mixing aliquots with an equivalent amount of all the samples (100 µg in total) for build the spectral library from a 1D SDS PAGE gel. The career corresponding to the library was cutted into 3 pieces and then were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Gel slides were digested using 500  ng of trypsin and digestion was set to 37 ºC. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the supernatant (SN) was removed, then the library gel slides were dehydrated with pure acetonitrile (ACN). The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and resuspended in 100 μL 2% ACN; 0.1% TFA.   Five µl of the digested fragments were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75umx15cm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ C18-CL, 75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 90 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) for at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX).  The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 250-ms TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 150-ms product ion scans from 350–1500 m/z on the 25 most intense 2-5 charged ions. The rolling collision energies equations were set for all ions as for 2+ ions.

### Data Protocol
The SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm (4.0.0.0, 4767) of ProteinPilot was used to search against the Uniprot mammalia protein database (1376814 proteins searched) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation,  and the search effort set to through and FDR correction for proteins [56]. To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Pro GroupTM Algorithm, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that could explain more spectral data with confidence was depicted as the primary protein of the group.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) are considered valuable contributors to our past, but a future without their use is inconceivable. However, in recent years, several studies have evidenced a potential impact of ART on long-term development in mammal species. To date, the long-term follow-up data are still limited. So far, studies have mainly focused on in vitro fertilization or in vitro culture, with information from gametes/embryos cryopreservation field being practically missing. Herein, we report an approach to determine whether a vitrified embryo transfer procedure would have long-term consequences on the offspring. Using the rabbit as a model, we compared animals derived from vitrified-transferred embryos versus those naturally conceived, studying the growth performance, plus the weight throughout life, and the internal organs/tissues phenotype. The healthy status was assessed over the hematological and biochemical parameters in peripheral blood. Additionally, a comparative proteomic analysis was conducted in the liver tissue to investigate molecular cues related to vitrified embryo transfer in an adult tissue. After vitrified embryo transfer, birth weight was increased, and the growth performance was diminished in a sex-specific manner. In addition, vitrified-transferred animals showed significantly lower body, liver and heart weights in adulthood. Molecular analyses revealed that vitrified embryo transfer triggers reprogramming of the liver proteome. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins showed changes in relation to oxidative phosphorylation and dysregulations in the zinc and lipid metabolism, which has been reported as possible causes of a disturbed growth pattern. Therefore, we conclude that vitrified embryo transfer is not a neutral procedure, and it incurs long-term effects in the offspring both at phenotypic and molecular levels. These results described a striking example of the developmental plasticity exhibited by the mammalian embryo.

### Keywords
Embryo cryopreservation, Spectral library, Swath, Differential proteomics

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Marco-Jiménez
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain


