### Accession
PXD009091

### Title
Histone lysine acetylation, butyrylation, and crotonylation dynamics and functional interplay in rice under starvation and submergence

### Description
Histone lysine acylations are regulated by primary metabolism in animal cells. However, histone non-acetyl acylation is not yet studied in plants that have distinct primary metabolic pathways. In this work, we detected rice histone lysine butyrylation (Kbu) and crotonylation (Kcr) sites by mass spectrometry, and found both similar and specific acylation patterns compared with that in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Rice seedlings were grinded by liquid nitrogen; core histones were extracted by H2SO4 and digested by trypsin. Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) and butyrylation (Kbu) peptides were enriched by pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou). The eluted peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by analysis with LC–MS/MS. s > 0.75.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Oryza sativa database (UniProt Oryza sativa subsp. Japonica) concatenated with reverse decoy database. False discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified as 1%; minimum peptide length was set at 7; the site localization probability was set as ＞0.75

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crotonylation, Butyrylation, Histone, Rice

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
Institute of Plant Science of Paris-Saclay (IPS2), CNRS, INRA, Université Paris-sud 11, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France

### Submitter
qiutao xu

### Lab Head
Dr Dao-Xiu Zhou
Institute of Plant Science of Paris-Saclay (IPS2), CNRS, INRA, Université Paris-sud 11, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France


