### Accession
PXD012941

### Title
Lysine-specific demethylase 2A enhances binding of various nuclear factors to CpG-rich genomic DNAs by action of its CXXC-PHD domain

### Description
The lysine-specific demethylase 2A gene (KDM2A) is ubiquitously expressed and its transcripts consist of several alternatively spliced forms, including KDM2A and the shorter form N782 that lacks the 3’ end encoding F-box and LRR. KDM2A binds to numerous CpG-rich genomic loci and regulates various cellular activities; however, the mechanism of the pleiotropic function is unknown. Here, we identify the mechanism of KDM2A played by its CXXC-PHD domain. KDM2A is necessary for a rapid proliferation of post-natal keratinocytes while its 3’ end eclipses the stimulatory effect. EGFP-N782 binds to chromatin together with the XRCC5/6 complex, and the CXXC-PHD domain regulates the CpG-rich IGFBPL1 promoter. In vitro, CXXC-PHD enhances binding of nuclear extract ORC3 to the CpG-rich promoter, but not to the AT-rich DIP2B promoter to which ORC3 binds constitutively. Furthermore, CXXC-PHD recruits 94 nuclear factors involved in replication, ribosome synthesis, and mitosis, including POLR1A to the IGFBPL1 promoter. This recruitment is unprecedented; however, the result suggests that these nuclear factors bind to their cognate loci, as substantiated by the result that CXXC-PHD recruits POLR1A to the rDNA promoter. We propose that CXXC-PHD promotes permissiveness for nuclear factors to interact, but involvement of the XRCC5/6 complex in the recruitment is undetermined.

### Sample Protocol
We prepared nuclear extracts, slightly modifying the reported procedure60. The nuclear fraction was suspended in nuclear extraction buffer consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM sodium orthovandate, 1x EDTA- free Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1mM PMSF, 5 μl/ml RNase (Roche), and 25 μM ZnSO4. The suspension was sonicated 3 times for 3 s each time. The lysates were centrifuged after addition of EDTA to 1 mM and the supernatants were used as nuclear extracts. Cell extracts containing XRCC5, XRCC6, and GST-fusion probes were prepared from E. coli BL21 (DE3) or a derivative in which each protein were overexpressed. Collected bacterial cell pellets were subjected to freezing-thawing 3 times, then suspended in the nuclear extraction buffer containing 1 mg/ml lysozyme. The lysates were sonicated and the supernatants were saved. When necessary, the pellets were suspended in the same buffer and homogenized by brief sonication.

### Data Protocol
GeLC-MS/MS (gel-based liquid chromatography-based tandem mass spectrometry) analysis for KDM2A-interacting proteins. The proteins on the gel stained with ProtoBlue Safe Coloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 (national diagnostics) were excised, and their protein content was digested in-gel with trypsin (). The extracted peptides were desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Mass spectrometry data were collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Famos Autosampler (LC Packings) and an Accela600 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by ∼20 cm of Accucore C18 resin (1.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) under the conditions of a 3 hr gradient of 5 to 29% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ∼300 nL/min. The scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with the following parameters: resolution 70,000, scan range 300−1500 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 105, maximum injection time 250 ms, and centroid spectrum data type. We selected the top twenty precursors for MS2 analysis which consisted of HCD high-energy collision dissociation with the following parameters: resolution 17,500, AGC 1 × 105, maximum injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Th, normalized collision energy (NCE) 25, and centroid spectrum data type. The underfill ratio was set at 9%, which corresponds to a 1.5 × 105 intensity threshold. In addition, unassigned and singly charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to automatic. Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe.  Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database, which was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.003 Th. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were altered to a 1% FDR (). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The lysine-specific demethylase 2A gene (KDM2A) is ubiquitously expressed and its transcripts consist of several alternatively spliced forms, including KDM2A and the shorter form N782 that lacks the 3' end encoding F-box and LRR. KDM2A binds to numerous CpG-rich genomic loci and regulates various cellular activities; however, the mechanism of the pleiotropic function is unknown. Here, we identify the mechanism of KDM2A played by its CXXC-PHD domain. KDM2A is necessary for a rapid proliferation of post-natal keratinocytes while its 3' end eclipses the stimulatory effect. EGFP-N782 binds to chromatin together with the XRCC5/6 complex, and the CXXC-PHD domain regulates the CpG-rich IGFBPL1 promoter. In vitro, CXXC-PHD enhances binding of nuclear extract ORC3 to the CpG-rich promoter, but not to the AT-rich DIP2B promoter to which ORC3 binds constitutively. Furthermore, CXXC-PHD recruits 94 nuclear factors involved in replication, ribosome synthesis, and mitosis, including POLR1A to the IGFBPL1 promoter. This recruitment is unprecedented; however, the result suggests that these nuclear factors bind to their cognate loci, as substantiated by the result that CXXC-PHD recruits POLR1A to the rDNA promoter. We propose that CXXC-PHD promotes permissiveness for nuclear factors to interact, but involvement of the XRCC5/6 complex in the recruitment is undetermined.

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Tandem mass tag

### Affiliations
Joao A. Paulo, Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School,  Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Joao A. Paulo, Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School,  Boston, MA, USA


