### Accession
PXD027141

### Title
Organ wise proteomic profiling of Indian major carp,  Labeo rohita

### Description
The aim of this study was to develop an organ wise proteome map for Labeo rohita. Using LC-MS/MS, we have performed in-depth proteomics analysis of 19 different sample types, including 17 tissue samples, plasma from female fish and embryo 4-day post fertilization. Whole analysis resulted in the identification of more than more than 8000 proteins with 1% FDR of which more than 76% were identified with two or more than two unique peptides. The dataset show organ wise pattern of protein expression along with extensive catalogue of orgsn wise Post translational modification. This proteomic information would complement the recently published genome to accelerate further research.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from 17 tissue samples was done using urea lysis buffer composed of 8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl and 1 mM MgCl2. Tissues were first homogenised, sonicated, bead-beated for 90 sec followed by centrifugation at 8,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4-degree C. For embryo sample, conventional trizol method was followed for extracting proteins. Plasma was directly taken as protein extract. Protein in all the samples was quantified using Bradford assay and fractionated on 1D-SDS-PAGE. Fractionated protein bands were performed in-gel digestion using trypsin as protease. Protein digest was extracted from gel pieces using gradient solution of Acetonitrile. Peptides were desalted using c-18 zip tips, vacuum dried and stored till further use for mass spectrometry. For LC-MS/MS, peptides were quantified and around 1 ug of peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was searched against the NCBI L. rohita database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo). Briefly, the parameters included maximum two missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications, Carbamido-methylation of Cys as static modification, FDR< 0.01, mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da and 10 ppm for fragment and precursor ions respectively. For post translation modification analysis, the raw files were converted to Mzml and analysed using Trans Proteomic pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics has enormous applications in human and animal research. However, proteomic studies in fisheries science are quite scanty particularly for economically important species. Few proteomic studies have been carried out in model fish species, but comprehensive proteomics of aquaculture species are still scarce. This study aimed to perform a comprehensive organ-based protein profiling of important tissue samples for one of the most important aquaculture species,<i>Labeo rohita</i>.Deep proteomic profiling of 17 histologically normal tissues, blood plasma, and embryo provided mass-spectrometric evidence for 8498 proteins at 1% false discovery rate that make up about 26% of the total annotated protein-coding sequences in Rohu. Tissue-wise expression analysis was performed, and the presence of several biologically important proteins was also verified using a targeted proteomic approach. We identified the global post-translational modifications (PTMs) in terms of acetylation (N-terminus and lysine), methylation (N-terminus, lysine, and arginine), and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) to present a comprehensive proteome resource. An interactive web-based portal has been developed for an overall landscape of protein expression across the studied tissues of <i>Labeo rohita</i> (www.fishprot.org). This draft proteome map of <i>Labeo rohita</i> would advance basic and applied research in aquaculture to meet the most critical challenge of providing food and nutritional security to an increasing world population.

### Keywords
Labeo rohita, Expression, Proteomics, Rohu

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences and bioengineering, IIT Bombay, India, 400076
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay

### Submitter
Mehar Un Nissa

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Department of Biosciences and bioengineering, IIT Bombay, India, 400076


