### Accession
PXD018727

### Title
Arabidopsis CASEIN KINASE 2 controls Aluminium toxicity and phosphate deficiency through control of the DNA damage response

### Description
Aluminum (Al) toxicity and phosphate (Pi) limitation are widespread chronic abiotic and mutually enhancing stresses that profoundly affect crop yield. Both stresses causes a strong inhibition of root growth due to a progressive exhaustion of the stem cell niche. Here we report on a CASEIN KINASE 2 (CK2) inhibitor identified by its capability to maintain a functional root stem cell niche under Al toxic conditions. CK2 operates through phosphorylation of the cell cycle checkpoint activator SUPPRESSOR OF GAMMA RADIATION 1 (SOG1), priming its activity under DNA damaging conditions. In addition to yielding Al tolerance, both CK2 and SOG1 inactivation result in resistance to phosphate starvation, revealing the existence of a low phosphate induced cell cycle checkpoint that depends on the DNA damage activator ATAXIA-TELANGIECTASIA MUTATED (ATM). Overall, our data reveal an important physiological role for the plant DNA damage response pathway under agricultural limiting growth conditions and opening new avenues to cope with the problem of Pi limitation. SOG1 can be phosphorylated by both ATM and ATR (Sjogren et al., 2015; Yoshiyama et al., 2017). ATM phosphorylation of SOG1 can occur at five different S/TQ sites upon treatment with double-stand break inducing compounds such as zeocin. This phosphorylation is important for its activity, as demonstrated by the inability of a phosphor-mutant allele to complement the sog1 mutant. In addition to the ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation sites, 11 putative CK2 phosphorylation sites [T/SXXE/D, with S or T serving as the phospho-acceptor site (Meggio and Pinna, 2003)] are found within the full length SOG1 proteins. Among these, four sites are conserved among orthologous proteins, stressing their potential importance to protein function. Of these, three cluster at the extreme C-terminus of SOG1, which also is also the location of the ATM/ATR phosphorylation sites. To test putative phosphorylation of any of these sites, TAP-tagged SOG1 protein was extracted and purified from cell cultures and subjected to phosphorylation analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cloning of transgene encoding N-terminal GSrhino tag SOG1 fusion under control of the constitutive cauliflower tobacco mosaic virus 35S promoter, transformation of Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures (PSB-D) with direct selection in liquid medium and TAP experiments were performed with 100 mg of total protein extract as input as described in Van Leene et al., 2015. Bound proteins were digested on-bead after a final wash with 500 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). Beads were incubated with 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C in 50 µL 50 mM NH4OH and incubated at 37°C for 4 h in a thermomixer at 800 rpm. Next, the digest was separated from the beads, an extra 0.5 µg Trypsin/Lys-C was added and the digest was further incubated overnight at 37°C. Finally, the digest was centrifuged at 20800 rcf in an Eppendorf centrifuge for 5 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, and the peptides were dried in a Speedvac and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm internal diameter (I.D.) x 20 mm (length), 5 µm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen,  Germany). After back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 mm I.D. x 150 mm , 5 µm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile), and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a wash step reaching 100% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 20 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. In the Orbitrap Elite, full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 3E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 3E4 ion counts.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.4.0). Data were searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 database (TAIR10_pep_20101214.fasta). Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and phosphorylation of serines, threonines, tyrosines. Mass tolerance on precursor (peptide) ions was set to 4.5 ppm and on fragment ions to 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to Trypsin/P, allowing for 2 missed cleavages, and cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine was followed by proline. The complete list with the search parameters in MaxQuant is provided as Supplemental Table. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphate limitation, Aluminium toxicity, Arabidopsis, Dna damage response, Casein kinase 2

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Lieven De Veylder
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


