### Accession
PXD030161

### Title
Temporal and sex-linked protein expression dynamics in a familial model of Alzheimer’s Disease

### Description
Mouse models of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), which show progression through various AD stages reflective of human pathology, like 5XFAD, are well established tools for uncovering novel AD related pathways. In addition, they permit temporal examination of the intermingling of AD related pathways and can be used to potentially dissect initiating and propagating events in AD, which are critical for developing biomarkers or designing interventions in early stages of the disease. The present research offers a robust and exhaustive tandem MS examination of a familial AD mice model with a design including variables of: time (three, six, and nine months), genetic background (5XFAD vs. WT), and sex (equal males and females).

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampus tissue samples from 5XFAD and wild-type mice at different time points (three, six and nine months), were isolated and lysed with a 2% SDS solution supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Cat#P2714, Sigma) and PhosphoSTOP (Cat#04906837001, Roche). Cell lysates had their protein concentration determined by using Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit – BSA (Cat#5000002, Bio-Rad). Lysates were processed by FASP, digested using dual LysC (Cat#125-05061, Wako) and trypsin (Cat# 90057, Thermo Fisher) endoproteinase and desalted using by C18 cartridges. Samples were normalized to 300ng of digest and randomized for LC-MS/MS acquisition by Waters NanoAcquity UPLC chromatography system coupled to a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Elite™ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data was processed using Peaks v10.6 Software (Bioinformatics Solutions, ON, CA) as described in (PMID 30573815 and 28720701). Protein identification was set to trypsin enzyme specificity and included carbamidomethylation as a fixed variation plus methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Label-free quantification was performed using default settings, which included mass error tolerance of 10ppm, retention time shift tolerance of 5.0 min and FDR threshold of 1%. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) show progression through stages reflective of human pathology. Proteomics identification of temporal and sex-linked factors driving AD-related pathways can be used to dissect initiating and propagating events of AD stages to develop biomarkers or design interventions. In the present study, we conducted label-free proteome measurements of mouse hippocampus tissue with variables of time (3, 6, and 9 months), genetic background (5XFAD versus WT), and sex (equal males and females). These time points are associated with well-defined phenotypes with respect to the following: A&#x3b2;42 plaque deposition, memory deficits, and neuronal loss, allowing correlation of proteome-based molecular signatures with the mouse model stages. Our data show 5XFAD mice exhibit increases in known human AD biomarkers as amyloid-beta peptide, APOE, GFAP, and ITM2B are upregulated across all time points/stages. At the same time, 23 proteins are here newly associated with Alzheimer's pathology as they are also dysregulated in 5XFAD mice. At a pathways level, the 5XFAD-specific upregulated proteins are significantly enriched for DNA damage and stress-induced senescence at 3-month only, while at 6-month, the AD-specific proteome signature is altered and significantly enriched for membrane trafficking and vesicle-mediated transport protein annotations. By 9-month, AD-specific dysregulation is also characterized by significant neuroinflammation with innate immune system, platelet activation, and hyper-reactive astrocyte-related enrichments. Aside from these temporal changes, analysis of sex-linked differences in proteome signatures uncovered novel sex and AD-associated proteins. Pathway analysis revealed sex-linked differences in the 5XFAD model to be involved in the regulation of well-known human AD-related processes of amyloid fibril formation, wound healing, lysosome biogenesis, and DNA damage. Verification of the discovery results by Western blot and parallel reaction monitoring confirm the fundamental conclusions of the study and poise the 5XFAD model for further use as a molecular tool for understanding AD.

### Keywords
Brain, Alzheimer’s disease, Neurodegenerative diseases, Temporal, 5xfad, Mice, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Department of Nutrition, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA;  Case Center for Synchrotron Biosciences, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, USA

### Submitter
Filipa Blasco Lopes

### Lab Head
Dr Mark R. Chance
Department of Nutrition, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA;  Case Center for Synchrotron Biosciences, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, USA


