### Accession
PXD015089

### Title
Proteomics of non-host response in barley

### Description
Nonhost resistance, a resistance of plant species against all nonadapted pathogens, is considered the most durable and efficient immune system in plants. To increase our understanding of the response of barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) plants to infection by powdery mildew, Blumeria graminis f. sp. Tritici, we used quantitative proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS). We compared the response of two genotypes of barley cultivar Golden Promise, wild type (WT) and plants with overexpression of phytoglobin (previously hemoglobin) class 1 (HO), which has previously been shown to significantly weaken non-host resistance. A total of 8804 proteins were identified and quantified, out of which the abundance of 1044 proteins changed significantly in at least one of the four comparisons (‘i’ stands for ‘inoculated’)- HO/WT and HOi/WTi (giving genotype differences), and WTi/WT and HOi/HO (giving treatment differences). Among these differentially abundant proteins (DAP) were proteins related to structural organization, disease/defense, metabolism, transporters, signal transduction and protein synthesis. More proteins changed in abundance in WT than in HO after inoculation and most DAP increased in abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Two barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) genotypes were used in the experiments, wild type plants of cultivar Golden Promise (designated as WT) and transgenic Golden promise lines (designated as HO) overexpressing cDNA of the barley phytoglobin/hemoglobin gene HvHb1 (accession number: U94968) controlled by the maize ubiquitin2 promoter. The wheat-adapted isolate H8 of Blumeria graminis (DC.) Speer f.sp. tritici was used for inoculation. The isolate was kept and multiplied on seedlings of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cultivar Anja. Wheat seedlings were inoculated when they were 10 days old by dusting with spores from stock plants. The plants were then incubated in a dark cold room at 10 °C for 24 h and afterwards moved to spore-proof greenhouse cabins under the same conditions as described for barley plants. A 2-cm piece was cut from the central part of all leaves 72 h after inoculation (hai). Leaves pieces from three different plants in separate pots were placed in vials and frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen as one biological replicate, resulting in a total of 3 replicates for each of the four treatments: mock-treated wild type plants (WT), mock-treated overexpression plants (HO), inoculated wild type plants (WTi) and inoculated overexpression plants (HOi).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched using the Mascot search engine. The two fractionated TMT sets were searched through the processing workflow in batch mode, followed by a multiconsensus workflow combining the files. The Mascot parameters for protein identification were defined as follows: database – NCBI (NCBI Resource Coordinators, 2018), Hordeum vulgare protein database (updated on 18 October, 2018); precursor mass tolerance – 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance – 0.05 Da; digestion – trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term); variable modification: methionine oxidation (M). The Percolator was used for peptide validation. Protein quantification was performed using the Reporter Ion Quantifier node (processing workflow) to estimate the peak intensity of the reporter ions, followed by the use of the Peptide and Protein Quantifier (consensus workflow) node embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.1, where protein abundance is calculated as the average of the three most abundant distinct peptides identified for the protein. A cut-off value of at least one unique peptide per protein was applied. We checked whether it was possible to detect fungal proteins in the samples. After the identification of plant proteins, all peptides with lower than high confidence were checked against a fungal database – UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2019), Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici (updated on 4 October, 2018) with search parameters similar to the plant proteome analysis. Only 7 fungal proteins were identified, but all of them were present in both mock and infected samples. For this reason they were treated as a plant proteins with a conserved sequence and similar to fungal proteins and not analyzed further.

### Publication Abstract
Nonhost resistance, a resistance of plant species against all nonadapted pathogens, is considered the most durable and efficient immune system in plants. To increase our understanding of the response of barley plants to infection by powdery mildew, Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici, we used quantitative proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS). We compared the response of two genotypes of barley cultivar Golden Promise, wild type (WT) and plants with overexpression of phytoglobin (previously hemoglobin) class 1 (HO), which has previously been shown to significantly weaken nonhost resistance. A total of 8804 proteins were identified and quantified, out of which the abundance of 1044 proteins changed significantly in at least one of the four comparisons ('i' stands for 'inoculated')- HO/WT and HOi/WTi (giving genotype differences), and WTi/WT and HOi/HO (giving treatment differences). Among these differentially abundant proteins (DAP) were proteins related to structural organization, disease/defense, metabolism, transporters, signal transduction and protein synthesis. We demonstrate that quantitative changes in the proteome can explain physiological changes observed during the infection process such as progression of the mildew infection in HO plants that was correlated with changes in proteins taking part in papillae formation and preinvasion resistance. Overexpression of phytoglobins led to modification in signal transduction prominently by dramatically reducing the number of kinases induced, but also in the turnover of other signaling molecules such as phytohormones, polyamines and Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Thus, quantitative proteomics broaden our understanding of the role NO and phytoglobins play in barley during nonhost resistance against powdery mildew.

### Keywords
Barley, Phytoglobin/hemoglobin overexpression, Proteomics, Mildew

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark


