### Accession
PXD016527

### Title
EmhR is an indole-sensing transcriptional regulator responsive for the indole-induced antibiotic tolerance in Pseudomonas fluorescens

### Description
Indole is ubiquitously synthesized by plants and bacteria and functions as an inter species signaling molecule to modulate a wide variety of cellular activities. However, it is not clear how the indole signal is perceived and responded by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) at the rhizosphere. Here, we demonstrated that indole enhanced antibiotic tolerance of Pseudomonas fluorescens 2P24, a PGPR well known for its biocontrol capacity. By conducting quantitative proteomic analysis, we showed that indole influences the expression of multiple genes including the emhABC operon encoding the major multidrug efflux pump in P. fluorescens 2P24. The indole-induced antibiotic tolerance was not related to bacterial dormancy or slow growth, but depended on the emhABC operon and the divergently transcribed TetR-like regulator emhR. By binding to the semi-palindromic operator sequence, EmhR repressed the expression of emhABC. It was further revealed that indole bound to EmhR and weakened the interaction between EmhR and the operator. This is consistent with our finding that indole-induced expression of the EmhABC efflux pump is dependent on EmhR. Using homology modeling and molecular dynamics simulation, we found that indole binding resulted in significantly decreased distance between the two DNA-recognizing α3 helices within the EmhR dimer, which would possibly account for its compromised DNA binding capacity. EmhR was further shown to globally influence protein expressions, especially transporters and proteins involved in the denitrification pathway. This EmhR-dependent, indole-induced antibiotic tolerance is likely to be prevalent in the Pseudomonas species, as the EmhR homologue in Pseudomonas syringae was also shown to be responsible for the indole-induced antibiotic tolerance. Taken together, our results revealed an indole-sensing transcription factor EmhR responsible for indole-induced antibiotic tolerance in Pseudomonas species and have important implications on the general mechanism for the indole sensing and responses in rhizobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells of P. fluorescens treated with indole or DMSO were cultured in KB broth to an optical density (OD600) of 1.0 and collected by centrifuging. Then cells were lysed and the protein was reduced and alkylated by heating at 95 ℃ for 5 min followed by sonication for 20 min. The resulting mixture was diluted 10 times with the dilution buffer and the protein was digested with trypsin at 37 ℃ overnight. After digestion, the total protein was acidated with 5% TFA and loaded onto a C18-column which has been pretreated and equilibrated with methanol and buffer A, respectively. The total peptide was washed three times with buffer A, eluted with buffer B and dried down. For MS analysis, total peptides were desolved in 0.1% FA and analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) .

### Data Protocol
Raw datas were processed with PD against the sequence data of P. fluorescens 2P24. Meanwhile acetylation on protein N -terminal and oxidation on methionine were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. Bioinformatics analysis and statistics analysis were carried out with software perseus. Student's t test was used to determine the significance of differential expression of proteins between bacterial cells treated with indole or DMSO , and Fisher's-exact test was used for the functional enrichment analysis. P value <0.05 and fold change >=2 were used as cutoffs in all statistics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Indole is well known as an interspecies signalling molecule to modulate bacterial physiology; however, it is not clear how the indole signal is perceived and responded to by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) in the rhizosphere. Here, we demonstrated that indole enhanced the antibiotic tolerance of Pseudomonas fluorescens 2P24, a PGPR well known for its biocontrol capacity. Proteomic analysis revealed that indole influenced the expression of multiple genes including the emhABC operon encoding a major multidrug efflux pump. The expression of emhABC was regulated by a TetR-family transcription factor EmhR, which was demonstrated to be an indole-responsive regulator. Molecular dynamics simulation showed that indole allosterically affected the distance between the two DNA-recognizing helices within the EmhR dimer, leading to diminished EmhR-DNA interaction. It was further revealed the EmhR ortholog in Pseudomonas syringae was also responsible for indole-induced antibiotic tolerance, suggesting this EmhR-dependent, indole-induced antibiotic tolerance is likely to be conserved among Pseudomonas species. Taken together, our results elucidated the molecular mechanism of indole-induced antibiotic tolerance in Pseudomonas species and had important implications on how rhizobacteria sense and respond to indole in the rhizosphere.

### Keywords
Indole, Antibiotic tolerance, Efflux pump

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cell Activities and Stress Adaptations, School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University

### Submitter
Jianting Han

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Xing He
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cell Activities and Stress Adaptations, School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University


