### Accession
PXD018055

### Title
The interactome of BTN3A1 (Butyrophilin Subfamily 3 Member A1)

### Description
In this study we dissected the BTN3A1 interactome before or after the treatment with pamidronate to gain mehcanistic insights into the gamma9/delta2 T cell dependent recognition of target cells. Our approach relied on affinity purification couple with mass spectrometry from a BTN3A knock-out cell line stably reconstituted with FLAG-BTN3A1. Our findings revealed an important role of cellular trafficking of BTN3A1 in the gamma9/delta2 TCR-induced T cell activation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from HEK293T-BTN3Ako stably expressing FLAG-BTN3A1 untreated or treated with 100 μM pamidronate for 16 hours and from 3 biological replicates were lysed in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside, 10 μM MG132, Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and subjected to FLAG-immunoprecipitation. The proteins were eluted after immunoprecipitation using 3X FLAG peptide (Merck). The eluted proteins were subjected to SDS-Page until the front migrated through the gel for 1.5 cm. The gel was fixed and stained with Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and one band per sample excised and subjected to in gel digestion using Trypsin (Promega). The eluted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Agilent 1290 Infinity System (Agilent Technologies) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were then separated through reverse phase chromatography using a 100-μm inner diameter 2-cm trap column (prepared in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm) and coupled to a 75-μm inner diameter 50 cm analytical column (prepared in house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm) (Agilent Technologies). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with the following settings: Full scan MS spectra were acquired from 375-1,600 m/z at a resolution of 60000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6. The 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using HCD. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a 30000 resolution with an AGC target of 1e5.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS files were searched with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) using the standard settings and with methionine oxidation and phospho (STY) as variable modifications, the “match between runs” option and the label-free quantification (LFQ) as algorithm. The MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human protein database from April 2019. The protein and peptide spectrum matches FDR were set to 1%. The MaxQuant output was then analyzed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). The LFQ values were log2 transformed and the matrix filtered for proteins showing 3 valid values in at least one condition (PAM treated or untreated). Missing values were then imputed using the standard Perseus settings. To identify the proteins significantly enriched we set s0=1 and performed the Student’s t test followed by a Permutation-based FDR multiple testing correction with a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2T cells play a major role in cancer immune surveillance, yet the clinical translation of their in vitro promise remains challenging. To address limitations of previous clinical attempts using expanded &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2T cells, we explored the clonal diversity of &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2T cell repertoires and characterized their target. We demonstrated that only a fraction of expanded &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2T cells was active against cancer cells and that activity of the parental clone, or functional avidity of selected &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2 T cell receptors (&#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2TCRs), was not associated with clonal frequency. Furthermore, we analyzed the target-receptor interface and provided a 2-receptor, 3-ligand model. We found that activation was initiated by binding of the &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2TCR to BTN2A1 through the regions between CDR2 and CDR3 of the TCR &#x3b3; chain and modulated by the affinity of the CDR3 region of the TCR&#x3b4; chain, which was phosphoantigen independent (pAg independent) and did not depend on CD277. CD277 was secondary, serving as a mandatory coactivating ligand. We found that binding of CD277 to its putative ligand did not depend on the presence of &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2TCR, did depend on usage of the intracellular CD277, created pAg-dependent proximity to BTN2A1, enhanced cell-cell conjugate formation, and stabilized the immunological synapse (IS). This process critically depended on the affinity of the &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2TCR and required membrane flexibility of the &#x3b3;9&#x3b4;2TCR and CD277, facilitating their polarization and high-density recruitment during IS formation.

### Keywords
Btn3a1, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences , Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Domenico Fasci

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences , Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


