### Accession
PXD025537

### Title
On-tissue spatially-resolved glycoproteomics guided by N-glycan imaging reveal global dysregulation of canine glioma glycoproteomic landscape

### Description
Here we present an approach to identify N-linked glycoproteins and deduce their spatial localization using a combination of MALDI N-glycan MSI and spatially-resolved glycoproteomics. We subjected glioma biopsies to on-tissue PNGaseF digestion and MALDI-MSI and found that the glycan HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2 was predominantly expressed in necrotic regions of high-grade canine gliomas. To determine the underlying sialo-glycoprotein, various regions in adjacent tissue sections were subjected to microdigestion and manual glycoproteomic analysis. Results identified haptoglobin as the protein associated with HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2, making our study the first report that directly links glycan imaging with intact glycopeptide identification. In total, our spatially-resolved glycoproteomics technique identified over 400 N-, O-, and S- glycopeptides from over 30 proteins, demonstrating the diverse array of glycosylation present on the tissue slides and the sensitivity of our technique. Ultimately, this proof-of-principle work demonstrates that spatially-resolved glycoproteomics greatly complement MALDI-MSI in understanding dysregulated glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
All of the glycoproteomic samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC. The samples were reconstituted in 7 µL of 0.1% formic acid in water (“buffer A”). Then, a portion of the sample (6.5 µL) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a C18 nano pre-column using 0.1% formic acid in water (“Solvent A”). For pre-concentration and desalting, the column was washed with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water (“loading pump solvent”). Subsequently, the C18 nano pre-column was switched in line with the C18 nano separation column and injected at 0.3 µL/min onto a 75 µm x 250 mm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 2 µm C18 beads. The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were eluted at 0.3 µL/min using a 90-min gradient and a 185-min instrument method. Solvent A was comprised of 0.1% formic acid in water, whereas Solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient profile was as follows (min:%B) 0:3, 3:3, 93:35, 103:42, 104:98, 109:98, 110:3, 185:3. The instrument method used an MS1 resolution of 60,000 at FWHM 400 m/z, an AGC target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1,500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 10 s, exclusion duration of 10 s. Only charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 30% collision energy, Orbitrap detection with a resolution of 30,000, and an AGC target of 1e4 ions.

### Data Protocol
Glycoproteomic data analysis was performed as described previously.76 Raw files were searched using Byonic by ProteinMetrics against the Uniprot Canis familiaris database (downloaded November 2018). Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C- terminal site of R and K. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 for MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-term acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. Glycosylation was added in three separate searches to minimize search times. In the first search, N-glycans were set as variable modifications (common 2), using the “N-glycan 57 human plasma” database. In the second iteration, O-glycans were set as variable modifications (common 2), using the “O-glycan 6 most common” database. In the final search, an O-mannose database containing (Hex, Hex-HexNAc, Hex-HexNAc2, Hex2-HexNAc-NeuAc, and Hex2-HexNAc-Fuc) was used for a variable modification (common 2). Cysteine carbaminomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. All search result files have Byonic searches were used to assist in manual assignment of glycopeptides, but were not used to definitively assign glycan structures or the peptide sequence. All peptides were manually validated and/or sequenced using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Here, we present an approach to identify N-linked glycoproteins and deduce their spatial localization using a combination of matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) N-glycan mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and spatially resolved glycoproteomics. We subjected glioma biopsies to on-tissue PNGaseF digestion and MALDI-MSI and found that the glycan HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2 was predominantly expressed in necrotic regions of high-grade canine gliomas. To determine the underlying sialo-glycoprotein, various regions in adjacent tissue sections were subjected to microdigestion and manual glycoproteomic analysis. Results identified haptoglobin as the protein associated with HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2, thus directly linking glycan imaging with intact glycopeptide identification. In total, our spatially resolved glycoproteomics technique identified over 400 N-, O-, and S- glycopeptides from over 30 proteins, demonstrating the diverse array of glycosylation present on the tissue slices and the sensitivity of our technique. Ultimately, this proof-of-principle work demonstrates that spatially resolved glycoproteomics greatly complement MALDI-MSI in understanding dysregulated glycosylation.

### Keywords
Hypersialylation, Spatially resolved glycoproteomics, Glycoproteomics, Sialic acid, Spatially resolved glycoproteomicsglycan imaging, Haptoglobin, Glioblastoma, Maldi-msi, Glycan imaging

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
Stacy Malaker

### Lab Head
Dr Stacy Malaker
Yale University


