### Accession
PXD036466

### Title
Venomics of Iranian and Cypriot Macrovipera lebetina

### Description
the venom proteomes of Macrovipera lebetina lebetina from Cyprus and Macrovipera lebetina cernovi from Iran were characterized using bottom-up proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
RP-HPLC separation of the crude venom proteins, SDS-PAGE of fractionated proteins, and LC-MS/MS of peptides obtained from in-gel tryptic digestion of protein bands. Moreover, we also used high-resolution shotgun proteomics to gain more reliable identifi-cation, where the whole venom proteomes were subjected directly to in-solution digestion before LC-HR-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic raw files were searched against the UniProt protein database that was taxonomically set to the Viperidae (taxon ID # 8689) databases (downloaded on March 01, 2021) using Proteome Discoverer software suite, version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two search engines, SEQUEST and MS Amanda, were used with the peptide precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance set to 10 and 0.6 ppm, respectively. The parameters were set to maxi-mum of two missed cleavage sites of trypsin digestion, minimum peptide length of 6, MS1 and MS2 tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The dynamic modification was set to oxidation (+15.995 Da [M]) and static modifica-tion to carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da [C]). Percolator node was used to validate identified PSMs and filter the data with parameters of a strict Target FDR (false discovery rate) of 0.01 and a relaxed Target FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Envenoming by Macrovipera lebetina subspecies causes severe life-threatening difficulties for people living in North Africa and the Middle East. To better understand the pathophysiology of envenoming and improve patient management, knowledge about the venom components of the subspecies is essential. Here, the venom proteomes of Macrovipera lebetina lebetina from Cyprus and Macrovipera lebetina cernovi from Iran were characterized using RP-HPLC separation of the crude venom proteins, SDS-PAGE of fractionated proteins, and LC-MS/MS of peptides obtained from in-gel tryptic digestion of protein bands. Moreover, we also used high-resolution shot-gun proteomics to gain more reliable identification, where the whole venom proteomes were subjected directly to in-solution digestion before LC-HR-MS/MS. The data revealed that both venoms consisted of at least 18 protein families, of which snake venom Zn2+-dependent metalloprotease (SVMP), serine protease, disintegrin, phospholipase A2, C-type lectin-like, and L-amino acid oxidase, together accounted for more than 80% of the venoms&#x2019; protein contents. Although the two viper venoms shared mostly similar protein classes, the relative occurrences of these toxins were different in each snake subspecies. For instance, P-I class of SVMP toxins were found to be more abundant than P-III class in the venoms of M. l. cernovi compared to M. l. lebetina, which gives hints at a more potent myonecrotic effect and minor systemic hemorrhage following envenoming by M. l. cernovi than M. l. lebetina. Moreover, single-shot proteomics also revealed many proteins with low abundance (&lt;1%) within the venoms, such as aminopeptidase, hyaluronidase, glutaminyl-peptide cyclotransferase, cystatin, phospholipase B, and vascular endothelial growth factor. Our study extends the in-depth understanding of the venom complexity of M. lebetina subspecies, particularly regarding toxin families associated with envenoming pathogenesis and those hard-detected protein classes expressed in trace amounts.

### Keywords
Giant viper, Venom, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Germany

### Submitter
Parviz Ghezellou

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Spengler
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany


