### Accession
PXD024916

### Title
One-day thermal regime extends lifespan

### Description
Environmental factors such as temperature can modulate animal’s lifespan. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely undefined. Through proteomic analysis of C. elegans at different time points (young adult, middle age, and old age) and under two temperature conditions (20°C and 25°C), we found that temperature affects C. elegans lifespan largely by modulating the proteostasis. Surprisingly, although animals live shorter at the higher temperature, we found that worms cultured at 25°C for one day at early adulthood promotes the protein homeostasis by decreasing the synthesis and increasing the degradation, suggesting the beneficial effects. Consistent with the finding, animals shifting from 20°C to 25°C for 24 hours between the larval L4 to adult Day 3 stages indeed live longer and are more resistant to stresses. Furthermore, we found that the one-day thermal induced lifespan extension is mediated by the FOXO transcriptional factor DAF-16. These results reveal an unexpected and complicated mechanism underlying the temperature effects on aging, which could potentially aid to develop strategies for treating aging related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
4.1 Strains and maintenance     Bristol N2, daf-16 (mu86), daf-12(rh61rh441), and hsf-1(sy441) strains were received from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC). The worms were cultivated on NGM plates using E. coli OP50 as the food source(Brenner, 1974). 4.2 Sampling     To achieve age-synchronized L1 populations, eggs were isolated initially from gravid adult nematodes with alkaline hypochlorite treatment and suspended overnight in M9 buffer. The age-synchronized L1 worms were cultivated on NGM plates at 20°C until late L4 stage, then divided into two groups and kept at 20°C and 25°C, respectively. The worms at late L4 (Day 0), 1 day post L4 (Day 1), 5 days post L4 (Day 5), and 10 days post L4 (Day 10) were further purified using 25 μm filter membrane(Larance et al., 2011) and then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  4.3 Proteomic analysis     Briefly, worms were resuspended with lysis buffer (4 M Guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.0, and proteases inhibitor) and sonicated for 6 minutes (2 second sonication with 5 second intervals) in ice incubation. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 20,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin as previously described.Peptide mixtures were labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer's protocol. Three biological replicates from late L4 (Day 0), Day 1 at 20°C, Day 1 at 25°C, Day 5 at 20°C, Day 5 at 25°C, Day 10 at 20°C, Day 10 at 25°C, and the mixture of the seven samples were labeled with 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 iTRAQ reagents, respectively. 4.4 Basic RPLC fractionation     The labeled peptides were pooled with same amount each and then fractionated using Dionex UltiMate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A high pH reverse phase separation was employed as the first dimensional separation. Peptides were fractionated on a Kinetex EVO C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 3 mm i.d. × 150 mm (Phenomenex, USA)) using Dionex UltiMate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  The mobile phase A was 10 mM NH4COOH (pH 10), the mobile phase B was 10 mM NH4COOH in 80% ACN (pH 10).  300 μg of the generated peptides were loaded onto the column using mobile phase A, and the flow rate was set as follows: 0.1 mL/min for 10 min, 0.1-0.2 mL/min in 1 min and 0.2 mL/min for 34 min. The separation gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 11 min, 0-40% B in 25 min, 40-100% B in 2 min, 100% B for 2min, 100-0% B in 2 min, and 0% B for 2min. Fractions were collected from the sixth minute with 1-min intervals in the next 40-min gradient, and the 40 fractions were mixed into 12 fractions by pooling fractions 7-19-31, 8-20-32, and so on. By this way, finally 12 fractions were collected. 4.5 Nanoflow LC.ESI-MS/MS     LC.ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)) and then analyzed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The derivatized peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2-5% B in 2 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min and 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400-1,600, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and maximum ion injection time (IIT) of 100 ms) and followed by 15 MS/MS scans of the most intense ions using HCD (normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35; isolation width of 2 m/z; resolution of 15,000; AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IIT of 100 ms). Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis     Raw data was processed by Proteome Discover (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and matched against the C. elegans database (20161228, 17,392 sequences) scored with the Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Parameters are set as: up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, iTRAQ8plex on lysine and N-term as fixed modifications, oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results (FDR ≤ 0.01).      Functional annotation and KEGG pathway analysis was performed by David bioinformatics resources according to G. Dennis et al.(Dennis et al., 2003). PCA analysis and volcano plots of proteins were done using Omicbean tools (www.omicsbean.cn). The heat map analysis was performed using Omicshare tools (www.omicshare.com/tools). Box plots of expressional changes of proteins were displayed using R.      Unbiased hierarchical clustering analysis was separately done for the altered proteins at different temperatures. To avoid the bias caused by the large abundance difference, all change ratios were scaled to range between -1 (maximum decrease) and +1 (maximum increase) comparing to that in L4 (Day 0)

### Publication Abstract
Environmental factors, including temperature, can modulate an animal's lifespan. However, their underlying mechanisms remain largely undefined. We observed a profound effect of temperature on the aging of <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> (<i>C. elegans</i>) by performing proteomic analysis at different time points (young adult, middle age, and old age) and temperature conditions (20&#xa0;&#xb0;C and 25&#xa0;&#xb0;C). Importantly, although at the higher temperature, animals had short life spans, the shift from 20&#xa0;&#xb0;C to 25&#xa0;&#xb0;C for one day during early adulthood was beneficial for protein homeostasis since; it decreased protein synthesis and increased degradation. Consistent with our findings, animals who lived longer in the 25&#xa0;&#xb0;C shift were also more resistant to high temperatures along with oxidative and UV stresses. Furthermore, the lifespan extension by the 25&#xa0;&#xb0;C shift was mediated by three important transcription factors, namely FOXO/DAF-16, HSF-1, and HIF-1. We revealed an unexpected and complicated mechanism underlying the effects of temperature on aging, which could potentially aid in developing strategies to treat age-related diseases. Our data are available in ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD024916.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Temperature, Proteomics, Lifespan

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, P. R. China
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Jichang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, P. R. China


