### Accession
PXD020503

### Title
Secretome Analysis of hippocampal and cortical murine neurons

### Description
To understand how cells communicate with each other, it is essential to define the cellular secretome, a collection of proteins including soluble secreted, unconventionally secreted and proteolytically-shed proteins. Quantitative methodologies to decipher the secretome are challenging, due to the requirement of large cell numbers and abundant serum proteins that interfere with the detection of low-abundant cellular secretome proteins. Here, we have use the highe perfomance secretome-protein-enrichment-with-click-sugars method (hiSPECS) for glyco-secretome analysis. We applied this method to investigate differences of hippocampal and cortical murine neurons. Additionally, we have inhibited the Alzheimer related protease BACE1 to identify potential substrates in the secretome of hippocampal neurons.

### Sample Protocol
After washing the primary cells with 1x PBS, cell-type specific growth media containing serum supplements with 50 µM of ManNAz (Thermo) was added for 48h. Afterwards, conditioned media was collected and filtered through Spin-X 0.45 µM cellulose acetate centrifuge tube filter (#8163, Costar) and stored at -20Â°C in protein Lobind tubes until further usage. Glycoprotein enrichment was performed using 60 µL Concanavalin A (ConA) bead slurry per sample (Sigma). ConA beads were washed twice with 1 mL of binding buffer (5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM MnCl2, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.5 M NaCl, in 20 mM TrisHCL pH 7.5) before use. The conditioned medium was incubated with the ConA beads for 2h in an overhead rotator at room temperature. The ConA beads were pelleted by centrifugation (2000 g, 1 min) and the supernatant containing unbound proteins was discarded. The beads were washed three times with 1 mL binding buffer before adding 500 ÂµL of elution buffer (500 mM Methyl-alpha-D-mannopyranoside, 10 mM EDTA in 20 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5) and rotating over-head for 30 min at RT. The eluate was filtered through pierce spin columns (Thermo) to remove remaining ConA beads and then the filtrate was transferred to a 1.5 mL protein Lobind tube. The elution step was repeated with another 500 ÂµL elution buffer and combined with the first eluate. 50 ÂµL of magnetic DBCO beads (Jena bioscience) were washed twice with mass spec grade water and added to the eluate. Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) was added to a final concentration of 0.1% (w/v) (except otherwise noted).The click reaction was performed overnight at 4Â°C on an Eppendorf Thermomixer R shaker at 1200 rpm to covalently couple metabolically labeled glycoproteins to the magnetic beads. The next day, beads were washed three times with 1 mL 1% SDS buffer (100mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, 1% SDS, 250 mM NaCl), three times with 1 mL 8 M UREA buffer (8 M Urea in 100mM TrisHCl pH 8.5) and three times with 1 mL 20% (v/v) acetonitrile. Beads were retained with a magnetic rack. Beads were transferred to a new 1.5 mL low binding tube using 2 x 500 ÂµL mass spec grade water and the supernatant was removed. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced in 50 µL of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ABC for 30 min at 1200 rpm at 37°C. Afterwards, the supernatant was discarded. Alkylation of cysteines was performed using 50 µL of 55 mM IAA in 100mM ABC for 30 min at 1200 rpm and 20°C in the dark. The supernatant was discarded and beads were washed twice with 100 ÂµL of 100 mM ABC. The protein digestion was performed by adding 0.2 Âµg LysC (Promega) in 50 ÂµL of 100 mM ABC for 3h at 1200 rpm at 37Â°C followed by overnight trypsin digestion using 0.2 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample in 100 mM ABC without 0.1% SDC. The supernatant containing the tryptic peptides was transferred to a 0.5 mL protein Lobind tube. Beads were washed twice with 100 mM ABC without 0.1% SDC and added to the same tube. Each sample was acidified with 50 ÂµL of 8% FA and incubated for 20 min at 4Â°C. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation at 18.000 g for 20 min at 4°C. Peptides were cleaned up using C18 Stage tips. Dried peptides were resuspended in 18 µL 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2 µL of 1:10 diluted iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked into the samples. CSF samples were processed as previously described (Pigoni et al. 2016). The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo) which was online coupled with a NanoFlex ion source equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to a Q Exactiveâ„¢ HF Hybrid Quadrupol-Orbitrapâ„¢ mass spectrometer (Thermo). 8 µL per sample were injected. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm self-made C18 column (75 Âµm ID) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ resin (1.9Âµm, Dr. Maisch). For peptide separation, a binary gradient of water and 80% acetonitrile (B) was applied for 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and a column temperature of 50°C: 3% B 0 min; 6% B 2 min; 30% B 92 min; 44% B 112 min; 75% B 121 min. DDA was used with a full scan at 120,000 resolution and a scan range of 300 to 1400 m/z, AGC of 3x106 ions and a maximum IT of 50 ms. The top 15 most intense peptide ions were chosen for HCD fragmentation. An isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum IT of 100 ms, AGC of 1x105 were applied and scans were performed with a resolution of 15,000. A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used. DIA was performed using a MS1 full scan followed by 20 sequential DIA windows with variable width for peptide fragment ion spectra with an overlap of 1 m/z covering a scan range of 300 to 1400 m/z. Full scans were acquired with 120,000 resolution, AGC of 5xE6 and a maximum IT time of 120 ms. Afterwards, 20 DIA windows were scanned with a resolution of 30,000 and an AGC of 3xE6. The maximum IT for fragment ion spectra was set to auto to achieve optimal cycle times. The m/z windows were chosen based on the peptide density map of the DDA run of a representative iSPECS sample and optimized in a way that allowed the detection of 8 points per peak.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1 or 1.6.1.0) using the murine UniProt reference databases (canonical, downloaded on: 17.01.2018 which consisted of 16,954 proteins or isoform, downloaded on: 11.04.2017 which consisted of 24,992 proteins) and the Biognosys iRT peptide database for label free quantification and indexed retention time spectral library generation. Default settings were chosen, however, the minimal peptide length was set to six. Two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethlyation was defined as a fixed modification, and N-termini acetylation as well as oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to less than 1% for protein and peptide identifications. The results of the MaxQuant analysis were used to generate DIA spectral libraries of proteins in Spectronout Pulsar X. Data generated with DIA were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar X using the self-generated spectral libraries applying default settings: quantification on the MS2 level of the top N (1 to 3) peptide spectra and a FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
To understand how cells communicate in the nervous system, it is essential to define their secretome, which is challenging for primary cells because of large cell numbers being required. Here, we miniaturized secretome analysis by developing the "high-performance secretome protein enrichment with click sugars" (hiSPECS) method. To demonstrate its broad utility, hiSPECS was used to identify the secretory response of brain slices upon LPS-induced neuroinflammation and to establish the cell type-resolved mouse brain secretome resource using primary astrocytes, microglia, neurons, and oligodendrocytes. This resource allowed mapping the cellular origin of CSF proteins and revealed that an unexpectedly high number of secreted proteins in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo are proteolytically cleaved membrane protein ectodomains. Two examples are neuronally secreted ADAM22 and CD200, which we identified as substrates of the Alzheimer-linked protease BACE1. hiSPECS and the brain secretome resource can be widely exploited to systematically study protein secretion and brain function and to identify cell type-specific biomarkers for CNS diseases.

### Keywords
Neurons, Secretome, Bace1

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Neuroproteomics DZNE Munich Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
Neuroproteomics DZNE Munich Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


