### Accession
PXD015594

### Title
Affinity purification of DNA binding proteins from HeLa extracts LC-MS/MS

### Description
The enhancer/promoter of the vitellogenin II (VTG) gene has been extensively studied as a model system of vertebrate transcriptional control. While deletion mutagenesis and in vivo footprinting identified the transcription factor (TF) binding sites governing its tissue specificity, DNase hypersensitivity- and DNA methylation studies revealed the epigenetic changes accompanying its hormone-dependent activation. Moreover, upon induction with estrogen (E2), the region flanking the estrogen-responsive element (ERE) was reported to undergo active DNA demethylation. We now show that although the VTG ERE is methylated in embryonic chicken liver and in LMH/2A hepatocytes, its induction by E2 was not accompanied by extensive demethylation. In contrast, E2 failed to activate a VTG enhancer/promoter-controlled luciferase reporter gene methylated by SssI. Surprisingly, this inducibility difference could be traced not to the ERE, but rather to a single CpG in an E-box (CACGTG) sequence upstream of the VTG TATA box, which is unmethylated in vivo, but methylated by SssI. We demonstrate that this E-box binds the upstream stimulating factor USF1/2.  Selective methylation of the CpG within this binding site with an E-box-specific DNA methyltranferase Eco72IM was sufficient to attenuate USF1/2 binding in vitro and abolish the hormone-induced transcription of the VTG gene in the reporter system.

### Sample Protocol
Different CpG-containing oligonucleotides with 5’-TTAA overhangs were annealed and end-to-end ligated overnight at 16°C with T4 ligase (NEB). Oligos were ethanol-precipitated and filled-in with 1 mM biotinylated dUTP (Thermo Fisher) using Klenow fragment (NEB). Reactions were passed twice through a Sephadex G-25 desalting column (GE Healthcare) to get rid to free dUTP and subsequently bound to Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (Invitrogen) by rotating 20 min at RT. 1.5 mg of nuclear extracts were pre-incubated with 30 µg of poly(dI-dC), before an equal volume was added to the beads. Binding was allowed to take place in 1x EMSA buffer without BSA for 30 min on a rotating wheel at 4 °C. Beads were washed 2x with 60 µl 1x EMSA buffer without BSA. Bound proteins were eluted with 60 µl of elution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 5 % glycerol, 1M NaCl) 30 min rotating at 4°C. TCA precipitation: 50 ul sample + 50 ul water + 100 ul 20% TCA, washed twice with cold acetone. Dry pellets dissolved in 45 ul buffer (10 mM Tris/2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2) + 5 ul trypsin (100 ng/ul in 10 mM HCl). Microwave for 30 min at 60°C. Samples were dried, dissolved in 20 ul 0.1% formic acid. 2 ul + 18 ul 0.1% formic acid were transferred to autosampler vials for LC/MS/MS. 4 ul injected.

### Data Protocol
The peptide ions selected by an instrument algorithm for fragmentation were recorded as a peptide signature, which was analyzed by a sequence algorithm (MASCOT). The peptides were scored according to the average probability using total spectra counts.

### Publication Abstract
The enhancer/promoter of the vitellogenin II gene (<i>VTG</i>) has been extensively studied as a model system of vertebrate transcriptional control. While deletion mutagenesis and <i>in vivo</i> footprinting identified the transcription factor (TF) binding sites governing its tissue specificity, DNase hypersensitivity and DNA methylation studies revealed the epigenetic changes accompanying its hormone-dependent activation. Moreover, upon induction with estrogen (E<sub>2</sub>), the region flanking the estrogen-responsive element (ERE) was reported to undergo active DNA demethylation. We now show that although the <i>VTG</i> ERE is methylated in embryonic chicken liver and in LMH/2A hepatocytes, its induction by E<sub>2</sub> was not accompanied by extensive demethylation. In contrast, E<sub>2</sub> failed to activate a <i>VTG</i> enhancer/promoter-controlled luciferase reporter gene methylated by SssI. Surprisingly, this inducibility difference could be traced not to the ERE but rather to a single CpG in an E-box (CACGTG) sequence upstream of the <i>VTG</i> TATA box, which is unmethylated <i>in vivo</i> but methylated by SssI. We demonstrate that this E-box binds the upstream stimulating factor USF1/2. Selective methylation of the CpG within this binding site with an E-box-specific DNA methyltransferase, Eco72IM, was sufficient to attenuate USF1/2 binding <i>in vitro</i> and abolish the hormone-induced transcription of the <i>VTG</i> gene in the reporter system.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Lc-ms/ms, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich
ETHZ

### Submitter
Lia Kallenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Jiricny
Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich


