### Accession
PXD028772

### Title
Peroxiredoxin 6 protects irradiated cells from oxidative stress and shapes their senescence-associated cytokine landscape, secretome analysis

### Description
Cellular senescence is a complex stress response defined as an essentially irreversible cell cycle arrest mediated by the inhibition of cell cycle-specific cyclin dependent kinases. The imbalance in redox homeostasis and oxidative stress have been repeatedly observed as one of the hallmarks of the senescent phenotype. However, a large-scale study investigating protein oxidation and redox signaling in senescent cells in vitro has been lacking. Here we applied a proteome-wide analysis using SILAC-iodoTMT workflow to quantitatively estimate the level of protein sulfhydryl oxidation and proteome level changes in ionizing radiation-induced senescence (IRIS) in hTERT RPE-1 cells. We observed that senescent cells mobilized the antioxidant system to buffer the increased oxidation stress. Among the antioxidant proteins with increased expression in IRIS, an atypical 1-Cys peroxiredoxin family member, peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), was identified as an important contributor to protection against oxidative stress. PRDX6 silencing increased ROS production in senescent cells,  decreased their resistance to oxidative stress-induced cell death, and impaired their viability. Subsequent SILAC-iodoTMT and secretome analysis after PRDX6 silencing showed the downregulation of PRDX6 in IRIS affected protein secretory pathways, decreased expression of extracellular matrix proteins, and led to unexpected attenuation of senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The latter was exemplified by decreased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 which was also confirmed after treatment with an inhibitor of PRDX6 iPLA2 activity, MJ33. Altogether, our findings suggested PRDX6 has an important and complex role in IRIS.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were seeded at a density of 20,000/cm2 and irradiated (20 Gy) 16 h after seeding. The cells were first transfected 2 days after irradiation; the second transfection was performed 5 days after irradiation. Seven days after irradiation, the cells were washed 6 times with PBS, and the cell culture media replaced by serum-free media. The cell culture supernatant was collected after 48 h, i.e., 9 days after irradiation. To remove dead cells and debris, the conditioned media were first centrifuged (200 x g, 10 min, 4°C) and then filter-sterilized using a 0.22 µm syringe filter. Protein concentration was performed using Amicon® Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Unit (#UFC801096, Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, the protein concentrate was washed three times with 4 mL of 8 M urea/50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), and further centrifuged to reach the volume of 60 – 100 µL. For protein digestion, 20 µg of proteins in 8 M urea/50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) buffer were reduced using 10 mM TCEP (1,000 rpm, 1 h, RT), cysteines were alkylated with 20 mM MMTS (1,000 rpm, 30 min, RT, no light exposure), the samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) to reach the final urea concentration of 2 M, and protein digestion was performed using trypsin at 1 : 20 enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight (300 rpm, RT). Peptide samples were acidified using TFA (f.c. = 0.5%) and desalted using Harvard Apparatus C18 Ultra Micro Spin Columns preconditioned by methanol and equilibrated using 0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted by 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN and evaporated to dryness.  Samples were re-dissolved and injected into an LC-MS/MS system. The UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system was used for the liquid chromatography separation. The analytical system consisted of Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm × 5 mm trap column and EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size analytical column. The samples were loaded onto the trap column in 0.05% TFA in 2% acetonitrile at 17.5 µL/min for 3 min. Peptides were separated by a gradient running from 3% to 35% of 80% ACN with 0.1% FA for 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were electrosprayed into Exploris 480 using an EASY-Spray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For library generation, positive ion full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range of 350 – 1500 m/z using normalized AGC target of 300% and 120,000 resolution with a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. For MS2, monoisotopic peptide precursor charges 2-6 were selected using an isolation window of 1.6 Da and 60 s of dynamic exclusion. MS2 scans were acquired using NCE 30, 15,000 resolution, normalized AGC target of 75%, and maximum injection time of 75 ms. The instrument was run in a top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert et al., 2014). DIA data acquisition was performed as described previously (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). Positive ion full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range of 350 – 1400 m/z using normalized AGC target of 300% and 120,000 resolution with a maximum ion injection time of 45 ms. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 1,000%. Forty nine windows of 13.7 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 15,000, a maximum injection time to 22 ms, and NCE was set to 27.

### Data Protocol
DIA data analysis was performed in Spectronaut (v14). All DDA and DIA files were used for library generation using the default settings with minor modifications (dithiomethylthiolation of cysteine residues was selected as fixed modification). The targeted data extraction was performed using the default BGS Factory Settings. Both precursor and protein FDR were controlled at 1%. For quantification, “Qvalue” workflow was used for filtering; mean precursor quantity was used for peptide quantification (TOP 3). Cross Run Normalization was performed using “Global Normalization” on “Median” normalization strategy. Interference correction was enabled with minimum 3 MS2 precursors to keep. Other parameters were kept as default unless specified. Pivot protein groups report was exported from Spectronaut and further normalized using LOESS normalization (Smyth, 2005) within the NormalyzerDE package (Willforss et al., 2019). Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (v1.6.14.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, three siNC-treated samples and four siPRDX6-treated samples (two samples from each siRNA) were grouped, and the data matrix was filtered to only contain protein groups quantified in all samples within at least one group. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3 x standard deviation, downshift 1.8 x standard deviation of the original distribution). Permutation-based FDR was used to identify differentially secreted proteins (FDR < 0.05, S0 = 0.4, both sides).

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is a complex stress response defined as an essentially irreversible cell cycle arrest mediated by the inhibition of cell cycle-specific cyclin dependent kinases. The imbalance in redox homeostasis and oxidative stress have been repeatedly observed as one of the hallmarks of the senescent phenotype. However, a large-scale study investigating protein oxidation and redox signaling in senescent cells in vitro has been lacking. Here we applied a proteome-wide analysis using SILAC-iodoTMT workflow to quantitatively estimate the level of protein sulfhydryl oxidation and proteome level changes in ionizing radiation-induced senescence (IRIS) in hTERT-RPE-1&#xa0;cells. We observed that senescent cells mobilized the antioxidant system to buffer the increased oxidation stress. Among the antioxidant proteins with increased relative abundance in IRIS, a unique 1-Cys peroxiredoxin family member, peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), was identified as an important contributor to protection against oxidative stress. PRDX6 silencing increased ROS production in senescent cells, decreased their resistance to oxidative stress-induced cell death, and impaired their viability. Subsequent SILAC-iodoTMT and secretome analysis after PRDX6 silencing showed the downregulation of PRDX6 in IRIS affected protein secretory pathways, decreased expression of extracellular matrix proteins, and led to unexpected attenuation of senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The latter was exemplified by decreased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 which was also confirmed after treatment with an inhibitor of PRDX6 iPLA2 activity, MJ33. In conclusion, by combining different methodological approaches we discovered a novel role of PRDX6 in senescent cell viability and SASP development. Our results suggest PRDX6 could have a potential as a drug target for senolytic or senomodulatory therapy.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Cellular senescence, Secretome analysis, Peroxiredoxin 6, Dia, Exploris

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences
Department of Genome Integrity, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Barbora Salovska

### Lab Head
Dr Zdenek Hodny, MD, PhD
Department of Genome Integrity, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic


