### Accession
PXD003825

### Title
Aspergillus flavus Induced Alterations in Tear Protein Profile Reveal Pathogen-Induced Host Response to Fungal Infection

### Description
Aspergillus flavus and Fusarium sp. are primary causative agents of keratitis that results in corneal tissue damage leading to vision loss. The tear proteome of control and keratitis patients was profiled and compared. A total of 1873 proteins from control and 1400 proteins from patient tear were identified by mass spectrometry. While 847 proteins were found to be glycosylated in the patient tear, only 726 were glycosylated in control tear. Some tear proteins showed alterations in their glycosylation pattern after infection. Complement system proteins, proteins specific for neutrophil extracellular traps and proteins involved in would healing were found only in the patient tear. The presence of these innate immune system proteins in patient's tear supports previous data indicating the involvement of neutrophil and complement pathways in antifungal defense. High levels of wound healing proteins in keratitis patient tear implied activation of tissue repair. The early appearance of host defense proteins and wound healing response indicates that tear proteins could be used as an early marker system for monitoring the progression of pathogenesis. Identification of negative regulators of the defense pathways in keratitis tear indicates an intricate balance of pro and anti-defense mechanisms operating in fungal infection of the eye.

### Sample Protocol
Tear Samples Reflex tears samples (50–150 µl) were collected from A. flavus keratitis patients. Nine control samples (4 male and 5 female) and seven early infected tear samples (one female and 6 male) were included in this study. The samples were centrifuged at 7800xg for 10 min at 4°C to remove cellular debris and stored in liquid nitrogen until analysis. Samples were collected from patients before treatment. Protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford’s method (Bradford, 1976). Enrichment of tear samples for N-linked glycoproteins using ConA lectin spin column ConA lectin columns (Pierce) were used to enrich the N -linked glycoproteins in the tear samples. Five hundred microgram of tear sample was loaded onto the column and the enrichment done as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Both the flow-through for glycoprotein enrichment, pooled neat tear sample (Pool - 500µg) and tear sample from A. flavus infected patients (500µg) were taken and processed by manufacturer’s instructions. The flow-through with the non-N-glycosylated proteins and the eluate with the N-glycosylated proteins were collected. Both the fractions were desalted and concentrated by ultrafiltration using Amicon’s 3kDa cutoff membrane filters. Prefractionation using 1D SDS-PAGE Three experiments were carried out using control tear with different concentrations - 50 μg of tear from one female sample, 100 μg of pooled control tear from pool 1 and 100 μg of pooled control tear from pool. Hundred micrograms of pooled tear collected from keratitis patients (pool 3) was taken for identification experiment. Control tear sample from pool was used for glycoprotein enrichment and 100 μg each of the eluate (glycoproteins) and flow-through (non-N-glycoproteins) were used. All protein samples were reduced and alkylated before pre-fractionation by 1D SDS- PAGE. The entire lane for a sample was cut separately and then sliced into6 equal sized bands. The proteins in each band were then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. In-gel tryptic digestion and peptide purification Every band was cut into 1 mm3 gel pieces and was incubated in 100mM NH4HCO3 in 50% CAN at room temperatue for ten minutes. This step was repeated until complete destaining was achieved. Then 100 µl of 100% ACN was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 10 min at RT. After removing ACN, the gel pieces were dried in speed vac for0 min. To the dried gel pieces, 7.5 µl (600ng) of trypsin in 100mM NH4HCO3 in 10% ACN was added and incubated for 16 hrs at 37°C. After digestion, 35 µl of 50mM NH4HCO3 was added to the gel pieces and incubated at RT for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. To the gel pieces,5 µl of 0.1%TFA in 60% ACN was added and sonicated for 3min. After transferring the supernatant,0 µl of 100% ACN was added to the gel pieces, vortexed briefly and incubated for ten minutes. The supernatant was collected and pooled to the previously collected ones and dried in a speed vac. Dried peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Pierce) as per the manufacture’s instruction. LC-MS/MS parameters Tryptic peptides were analyzed by nano-RPLC-MS/MS using a Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo, USA) coupled to Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). A capillary RSLC column (EASY-spray column PepMap® RSLC, C18,μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm or 15cm Thermo SCIENTIFIC, CA) was used for separation of peptides. Samples were first loaded onto a pre- column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, C18, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å, 75 μm × cm Thermo SCIENTIFIC ,CA) from an autosampler at a maximum pressure of 700 bar. Following the pre-column, the tryptic digested peptides were separated in an analytical column with a linear gradient programme where the percentage of solution B (95% ACN in 0.1% FA) was changed from 5% to 100 % over 90 minutes at a constant flow rate of00 nL/min (5% to 30% over 72 min, 30% to 100% over 10 min, maintained at 100% for 5 min). Positive mode electrospray ionization with an ion spray voltage of.4 kV and capillary temperature of00ºC with an RF lens voltage of 69 and maximum injection time 50 ms.The LTQ was calibrated using the positive ion calibrant solution (Pierce) and tuned to optimize the response of the ion at m/z 524 for the tetrapeptide Met-Arg-Phe-Ala MS/MS. Acquisition was performed using Nth Order Double Play mode with Xcalibur software (Thermo SCIENTIFIC, USA). Full scan profile mass spectra was acquired over an m/z of 400-2000 Da at a frequency of 1 spectrum every sec. Top 10 intense ions were targeted for MS/MS under an isolation width of m/z units in CID mode with a collision energy of 35. Switching criteria were set to include ions greater than m/z 400 and smaller than m/z000 with charge state of–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 500 counts and the target ions were excluded for 30 s with a repeat duration of 30 s and repeat count set one.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS raw data acquired from Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v1.4 using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version.4.1.0) and with an inbuilt SequestHT algorithm. Both Mascot and SequestHT was setup to search a database containing the complete human proteome (including the isoforms) downloaded from the UniProt database on 31th July013 (141130 entries) and its Decoy database. The database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide tolerance of 10 PPM and fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da to 0.80 Da, allowing two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was given as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from SequestHT and Mascot were post-processed using the Percolator algorithm (Kall et al.,007). Those peptides having a q-value lesser than the threshold of 0.01 were considered for protein identification. The search result data from all bands from a sample were combined to generate a multi-consensus report to get a non-redundant list of identified proteins. This list was further filtered for proteins identified with high peptide confidence as well as with rank 1 peptide to get reliable identification results for further data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycotic keratitis; tear proteomics; complement; netosis; wound healing; glycosylation

### Affiliations
Director-Research, Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai

### Submitter
Naveen Luke

### Lab Head
Dr Dharmalingam Kuppamuthu
Director-Research, Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India


