### Accession
PXD025897

### Title
Validation of filter aided sample preparation (FASP) approach for quantitative plant shotgun proteomics

### Description
Gel-free LC-based shotgun proteomics represents the current gold standard of proteome analysis due to its outstanding throughput, analytical resolution and reproducibility. Thereby, the efficiency of sample preparation, i.e., protein isolation, solubilization and proteolysis, directly affects the correctness and reliability of quantification, being therefore the bottle neck of shotgun proteomics. The desired performance of the sample preparation protocols can be achieved by application of detergents. However, these ultimately compromise reverse phase chromatographic separation and disrupt electrospray ionization. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) represents an elegant approach to overcome these limitations. Although this method is comprehensively validated for cell proteomics, its applicability to plants and compatibility with plant-specific protein isolation protocols is still unknown, i.e., no data on linearity of underlying protein quantification methods for plant matrices is available. To fill this gap, we address here the potential of FASP in combination with two protein isolation protocols for quantitative analysis of pea (Pisum sativum) seed and Arabidopsis thaliana leaf proteomes by the shotgun approach. For this, in comprehensive spiking experiments with bovine serum albumin (BSA), we evaluated the linear dynamic range (LDR) of protein quantification in the presence of plant matrices. Further, we addressed the interference of two different plant matrices in quantitative experiments, accomplished with two alternative sample preparation workflows in comparison to conventional FASP-based digestion of cell lysates, considered here as a reference. Our results indicate very good applicability of FASP to quantitative plant proteomics with an only limited impact of the protein isolation technique on the methods overall performance.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein isolation Protein isolation relied on two approaches: (i) the phenol extraction method described in detail previously [1] and (ii) treatment with an SDS-based solution according to the procedure recently described by Bassal et al [2] with minor modifications.  The total protein fractions from pea seeds and mixtures of pea seed powder and Arabidopsis leaf material were isolated by the phenol extraction procedure described in detail previously [1], and dry protein pellets were reconstituted in 10% (w/v) SDS solution. The protein contents were determined by the 2D Quant Kit according to the manufacturer instructions. 2. FASP protocol The Amicon® Ultra 30K filter units were conditioned (passivated) on the day prior to digestion with 5% (v/v) aqueous Tween® 20 under continuous shaking overnight. Afterwards, filters were washed three times for 10 min with distilled water. The protein aliquots (50 µg) were adjusted to the total volume of 200 µL with urea solution (8 mol/L urea in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), applied to the filter unit and centrifuged (here and below – 14 000 g, 10 min). The concentrated samples were washed three times with 200 µL of urea solution followed each time by centrifugation. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 100 µL of a solution of 100 mmol/L DTT, 8 mol/L urea in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and incubation at 22°C for 1 h under continuous shaking (450 rpm) followed by centrifugation. Alkylation of sulfhydryl groups was accomplished by addition of 100 µL of 50 mmol/L iodoacetamide in a solution of 8 mol/L urea in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and incubation at 22°C for 1 h in the dark under continuous shaking followed by centrifugation. The resulted concentrated samples were washed three times with 200 µL of urea solution and three times with 100 µL of 50 mmol/L aq. NH4HCO3 followed each time by centrifugation. Afterwards, the proteins were digested by sequential addition of two aliquots of 2.5 and 1 µg trypsin, reconstituted in 50 µL of 50 mmol/L aq. NH4HCO3 (enzyme to protein ratio 1:20 and 1:50 w/w, respectively) and incubation at 37°C for 4 and 12 h under continuous shaking (450 rpm), respectively. The digests were collected by centrifugation, and the filter units were rinsed with 40 µL of 50 mmol/L aq. NH4HCO3 three times followed by centrifugation. The resulting filtrates were desalted by solid phase extraction (SPE) as described by Mamontova et al [3]. The completeness of tryptic digestion was verified by SDS-PAGE as described by Greifenhagen et al [4].  3. LC-MS/MS analysis All samples were analyzed by nanoRP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a NanoFlex source, coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Proteolytic peptides were loaded on a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, particle size 5 μm) during 15 min with 0.1 % (v/v) TFA at a flow rate of 30 μL/min and resolved on a separation column (PepMap 100 C18, 75 μm × 150 mm, particle size 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were separated with linear gradient 3–35% eluent B over 90 min (A: 0.1% v/v aqueous formic acid, B: 0.08% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile) at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. The raw files were acquired as data-dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments accomplished in positive ion mode. Dependent tandem mass spectrometric (MS/MS) experiments relied on higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS data (m/z range 300-1500) were recorded with R = 120 000, the target of the automated gain control (AGC) was set to 2 x 105 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. Each full scan was followed by high-resolution HCD product ion scans within 5 s, starting with the most intense signal in the mass spectrum, with charge states ranging from 2 to 6. For MS/MS scans, the following parameters were applied: resolution (R) of 15 000, AGC of 5 × 104 and maximum injection time of 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion of multi-charged peptide ions was set to 60 s.  1. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20153659. 2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2020.09.024. 3. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24081603. 4. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.702860.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides relied on Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and Sequest HT search engine. For database search, the enzyme was set to trypsin, tolerating two missed cleavages. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was employed as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable one. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05. Proteotypic peptides were selected for integration if they were confidently (XCorr ≥ 2.20) annotated as [M+2H]2+ ions, did not contain missed cleavage sites, modifications and methionine or cysteine amino acid residues. The peak integration was accomplished in the Quan Browser application of the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Detection and integration of the peptide-specific peaks in corresponding extracted ion chromatograms (XICs, m/z ± 0.02) were accomplished by ICIS algorithm with following parameters: Smoothing Points 15, Baseline Window 40-80, Area Noise Factor 5, Peak Noise Factor 10. The linearity of protein quantification was assessed for several proteotypic peptides by Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Due to its outstanding throughput and analytical resolution, gel-free LC-based shotgun proteomics represents the gold standard of proteome analysis. Thereby, the efficiency of sample preparation dramatically affects the correctness and reliability of protein quantification. Thus, the steps of protein isolation, solubilization, and proteolysis represent the principal bottleneck of shotgun proteomics. The desired performance of the sample preparation protocols can be achieved by the application of detergents. However, these compounds ultimately compromise reverse-phase chromatographic separation and disrupt electrospray ionization. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) represents an elegant approach to overcome these limitations. Although this method is comprehensively validated for cell proteomics, its applicability to plants and compatibility with plant-specific protein isolation protocols remain to be confirmed. Thereby, the most important gap is the absence of the data on the linearity of underlying protein quantification methods for plant matrices. To fill this gap, we address here the potential of FASP in combination with two protein isolation protocols for quantitative analysis of pea (<i>Pisum sativum</i>) seed and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaf proteomes by the shotgun approach. For this aim, in comprehensive spiking experiments with bovine serum albumin (BSA), we evaluated the linear dynamic range (LDR) of protein quantification in the presence of plant matrices. Furthermore, we addressed the interference of two different plant matrices in quantitative experiments, accomplished with two alternative sample preparation workflows in comparison to conventional FASP-based digestion of cell lysates, considered here as a reference. The spiking experiments revealed high sensitivities (LODs of up to 4 fmol) for spiked BSA and LDRs of at least 0.6 &#xd7; 10<sup>2</sup>. Thereby, phenol extraction yielded slightly better recoveries, whereas the detergent-based method showed better linearity. Thus, our results indicate the very good applicability of FASP to quantitative plant proteomics with only limited impact of the protein isolation technique on the method's overall performance.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Sodium dodecyl sulfate, Phenol extraction, Plant proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Filter aided sample preparation (fasp), Detergent-assisted proteolysis, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut of Plant Biochemistry
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Tatiana Leonova

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Frolov
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Halle (Saale), Germany


