### Accession
PXD045471

### Title
Human breast adipose tissue extracellular vesicles

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed on extracellular vesicles from human breast adipose tissue

### Sample Protocol
EVs from 48 cases were analyzed for protein content. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 5mM DTT and 14mM iodoacetamide, respectively, and then trypsinized overnight at 37 C. Digests were then lyophilized and desalted by micro-C18 columns. Proteomic analysis was performed as described previously 26. Briefly, samples were analyzed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 coupled on-line to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with peptide separation performed using a 75 µm x 15 cm chromatography column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, German) packed in-house. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a range of 300-1500 m/z with resolution 60,000. MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 15,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.5.5.1 (Max Planck Institute, Munich, Germany) for protein identification. The fragmentation spectra were used to search the UniProt human protein database (downloaded on 09/21/2017). Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate based on decoy search using a database with the protein sequences reversed.

### Publication Abstract
Breast adipose tissue is an important contributor to the obesity-breast cancer link. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanosized particles containing selective cargo, such as miRNAs, that act locally or circulate to distant sites to modulate target cell functions. Here, we find that long-term education of breast cancer cells with EVs obtained from breast adipose tissue of women who are overweight or obese (O-EVs) results in increased proliferation. RNA-seq analysis of O-EV-educated cells demonstrates increased expression of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, such as ATP synthase and NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase. O-EVs increase respiratory complex protein expression, mitochondrial density, and mitochondrial respiration in tumor cells. The mitochondrial complex I inhibitor metformin reverses O-EV-induced cell proliferation. Several miRNAs-miR-155-5p, miR-10a-3p, and miR-30a-3p-which promote mitochondrial respiration and proliferation, are enriched in O-EVs relative to EVs from lean women. O-EV-induced proliferation and mitochondrial activity are associated with stimulation of the Akt/mTOR/P70S6K pathway, and are reversed upon silencing of P70S6K. This study reveals a new facet of the obesity-breast cancer link with human breast adipose tissue-derived EVs causing metabolic reprogramming of breast cancer cells.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Breast adipose tissue

### Affiliations
University of Kansas Medical Center
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, USA

### Submitter
Kristy Brown

### Lab Head
Dr Kristy Angela Brown
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, USA


