### Accession
PXD021873

### Title
Molecular architecture and domain arrangement of the placental malaria protein VAR2CSA suggests a model for carbohydrate binding

### Description
VAR2CSA is the placental-malaria specific member of the antigenically variant Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family. It is expressed on the surface of Plasmodium falciparum infected host red blood cells and binds to specific chondroitin-4-sulfate chains of the placental proteoglycan receptor. The functional ~310 kDa ectodomain of VAR2CSA is a multi-domain protein that requires a minimum 12- mer chondroitin-4-sulfate molecule for specific, high affinity receptor binding. However, it is not known how the individual domains are organized and interact to create the receptor binding surface, limiting efforts to exploit its potential as an effective vaccine or drug target. Using small angle X-ray scattering and single particle reconstruction from negative stained electron micrographs of the ectodomain and multidomain constructs, we have determined the structural architecture of VAR2CSA. The relative locations of the domains creates two distinct pores that can each accommodate the 12-mer of chondroitin-4-sulfate, suggesting a model for receptor binding. This model has important implications for understanding cytoadherence of IRBCs and potentially provides a starting point for developing novel strategies to prevent and/or treat placental malaria.

### Sample Protocol
The entire rVAR2CSA protein gel bands were used for in-gel digested by trypsin. Briefly, proteolysis was performed by taking 2.0 μg of protein band was diluting to 50 μl with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.3. Cysteine sulfhydryl groups were reduced by the addition of 5 μl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56°C followed by alkylated with 5 μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark condition. Proteolytic digestion was performed using 60 ng of trypsin (1:30 trypsin/protein, w/w; Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 12 hrs.  Proteolysis was acidified by addition of 0.5 μl of 98 % trifluoroacetic acid. Subsequently, the acidified peptide solution was centrifuged at 12000 × g at 4°C for 15 min to remove any precipitate. Desalting was done using C-18 Ziptips (Millipore) and peptides were eluted using 50% acetonitrile containing 0.5% formic acid, and lyophilized. Before LC-MS/MS analysis lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 10 μl of 3% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data (.wiff files) were analyzed using ProteinPilot™ version 5.0.1 software with in-built Paragon algorithm version 5.0.1.0, 4874 against of rVAR2CSA database.  For, mapping of tryptic peptides of rVAR2CSA was performed using aa sequence in FASTA format and ProteinPilot™ version 5.0.1 software with in-built Paragon algorithm version 5.0.1.0, 4874. Precursor mass tolerance for peptide identification was set to 5 ppm, with fragment mass tolerance at 50 ppm, and modifications such as S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) were included within search parameters, and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was set at 1%. The identified peptides were assessed by the following criteria at peptide level: score above 10, confidence >99.9%, peak elution time within 30 s, and intensity of peaks 1000 counts. The identified peptides were manually mapped to rVAR2CSA sequence.  For phosphor peptide analysis, the peptide precursor mass tolerance for peptide identification was set to 5 ppm, with fragment mass tolerance at 50 ppm, and modifications such as N-protein acetylation, S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine,  oxidation of methionine,  and thorough search effort setting allowing for biological modifications with phosphorylation emphasis (STY) were considered as variable modifications and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was set at 1%. The identified peptides were assessed by the following criteria at peptide level: score above 10, confidence >99%, peak elution time within 30 s, peptide intensity of peaks 500 counts and modified phosphorylation sites were confirmed by combinations of phosphosite-determining b and y ions.

### Publication Abstract
VAR2CSA is the placental-malaria-specific member of the antigenically variant <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family. It is expressed on the surface of <i>Plasmodium falciparum-</i>infected host red blood cells and binds to specific chondroitin-4-sulfate chains of the placental proteoglycan receptor. The functional &#x223c;310 kDa ectodomain of VAR2CSA is a multidomain protein that requires a minimum 12-mer chondroitin-4-sulfate molecule for specific, high affinity receptor binding. However, it is not known how the individual domains are organized and interact to create the receptor-binding surface, limiting efforts to exploit its potential as an effective vaccine or drug target. Using small angle X-ray scattering and single particle reconstruction from negative-stained electron micrographs of the ectodomain and multidomain constructs, we have determined the structural architecture of VAR2CSA. The relative locations of the domains creates two distinct pores that can each accommodate the 12-mer of chondroitin-4-sulfate, suggesting a model for receptor binding. This model has important implications for understanding cytoadherence of infected red blood cells and potentially provides a starting point for developing novel strategies to prevent and/or treat placental malaria.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA 17033
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA17033

### Submitter
JagadeeshaPrasad MG

### Lab Head
Dr John Flangan
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA 17033


