### Accession
PXD034911

### Title
TNAP - a potential cytokine in the cerebral inflammation in Spastic Cerebral Palsy

### Description
Our study was designed to pinpoint the chief molecule playing the specific and critical role in the neuroinflammation in spastic CP, which may provide promising target for diagonosis and treatment of spastic CP. To further our exploration, our future study will focus on the molecular mechanism of how TNAP regulates the pro- inflammatory factors related to CP neuroinflammation

### Sample Protocol
A 100 µg protein sample was taken from each sample and digested overnight at 37°C. Each sample was processed and labeled with the instruction of iTRAQ Reagent-8 Multiplexing Kit (AB Sciex, UK). The labeled sample was mixed in equal volumes, desalted, and lyophilized. High-performance liquid chromatography was performed with a Rigol L3000 system and a C18 chromatographic column (Waters BEH C18, 5 mm). A Diane NCS3500 system (Thermo Science FicTM) equipped with a trap and an analytical column was used to fractionate the labeled samples, and the precursor ions decomposed by the higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) method were sent to a tandem mass spectrometry Q Exactive HF-X MS (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) for data acquisition and analysis

### Data Protocol
A 100 µg protein sample was taken from each sample and digested overnight at 37°C. Each sample was processed and labeled with the instruction of iTRAQ Reagent-8 Multiplexing Kit (AB Sciex, UK). The labeled sample was mixed in equal volumes, desalted, and lyophilized. High-performance liquid chromatography was performed with a Rigol L3000 system and a C18 chromatographic column (Waters BEH C18, 5 mm). A Diane NCS3500 system (Thermo Science FicTM) equipped with a trap and an analytical column was used to fractionate the labeled samples, and the precursor ions decomposed by the higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) method were sent to a tandem mass spectrometry Q Exactive HF-X MS (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) for data acquisition and analysis

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective:</b> Several studies have shown the significance of neuroinflammation in the pathological progress of cerebral palsy (CP). However, the etiology of CP remains poorly understood. Spastic CP is the most common form of CP, comprising 80% of all cases. Therefore, identifying the specific factors may serve to understand the etiology of spastic CP. Our research aimed to find some relevant factors through protein profiling, screening, and validation to help understand the pathogenesis of cerebral palsy. <b>Materials and methods:</b> In the current study, related clinical parameters were assessed in 18 children with spastic CP along with 20 healthy individuals of the same age. Blood samples of the spastic CP children and controls were analyzed with proteomics profiling to detect differentially expressed proteins. On the other hand, after hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) was induced in the postnatal day 7 rat pups, behavioral tests were performed followed by detection of the differentially expressed markers and inflammatory cytokines in the peripheral blood and cerebral cortex of the CP model rats by Elisa and Western blot. Independent sample <i>t</i>-tests, one-way analysis of variance, and the Pearson correlation were used for statistical analysis. <b>Results:</b> Through proteomic analysis, differentially expressed proteins were identified. Among them, tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), the gene expression product of alkaline phosphatase <i>(ALPL)</i>, was downregulated in spastic CP. In addition, significantly lower TNAP levels were found in the children with CP and model rats. In contrast, compared with the sham rats, the model rats demonstrated a significant increase in osteopontin and proinflammatory biomarkers in both the plasma and cerebral cortex on the ischemic side whereas serum 25 hydroxyvitamin D and IL-10 were significantly decreased. Moreover, serum TNAP level was positively correlated with serum CRP and IL-10 in model rats. <b>Conclusion:</b> These results suggest that TNAP is the potential molecule playing a specific and critical role in the neuroinflammation in spastic CP, which may provide a promising target for the diagnosis and treatment of spastic CP.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Jinshan Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University
fudan university

### Submitter
wang xiaokun

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Li
Jinshan Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University


