### Accession
PXD011135

### Title
TGF-β1/p65/MAT2A: a novel pathway involved in the regulation of intracellular SAM and liver fibrogenesis - Part2

### Description
Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation induced by transforming growth factor β (TGF-β1) plays a pivotal role in the fibrogenesis. The complex downstream mediators of TGF-β1 are largely unknown. Here, proteomics analysis and biological validation demonstrated that methionine adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) was significantly upregulated in a CCl4-induced fibrosis mice model and a small molecule NPLC0393, known to block TGF-β1/Smad3 signaling, inhibited its upregulation. In HSC cells, TGF-β1 induced elevation of MAT2A and MAT2β expression as well as reduction of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) content, which further promoted HSC activation. Functionally, in vivo and in vitro knockdown of MAT2A alleviated CCl4- and TGF-β1-induced HSC activation, whereas in vivo overexpression of MAT2A facilitated hepatic fibrosis and abolished therapeutic effect of NPLC0393. TGF-β1 induced p65 phosphorylation and NF-κB activation, thereby promoted the transcription of MAT2A and its protein expression. In addition, overexpression of p65 abrogated NPLC0393 mediated inhibition of HSC activation. This study identified a novel pathway TGF-β1/p65/MAT2A that was involved in the regulation of intracellular SAM contents and liver fibrogenesis, suggesting that this pathway is a potential therapeutic target for hepatic fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
SAM levels were determined by UHPLC (DIONEX, UltiMate 3000) with a TSQ QUANTIVA (Thermo) using a ACQUITY UPLC BEH Amide column (2.1×100 mm, 1.7 μm) equilibrated with mobile phase A (H2O containing 1‰ Formic Acid). Mobile phase B consisted of 1‰ FA，ACN (MERCK). The samples were eluted at room temperature with a linear gradient of 93% eluent B (acetonitrile containing 1‰ Formic Acid) from 0 to 0.5 min, 93% -45% eluent B from 0.5 to 7min, 45% eluent B from 7 to 9.5min, then return in 0.2 min and equilibrated for 2.5min. The flow rate was maintained at 0.4 mL/min. All data were acquired in positive electrospray ionization (ESI) and multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. The transitions monitored were 399 → 136， 399 → 250，399 → 298 m/z for S-adenosylmethionine.

### Data Protocol
SAM contents of samples were calculated using standard curve of SAM prepared at the same time as the samples and are reported as nmol/mg protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics;liver fibrosis;mat2a

### Affiliations
SIMM
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
SIMM


