### Accession
PXD036728

### Title
Specific post-translational modifications of VDAC3 in ALS-SOD1 model cells identified by High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Damage induced by oxidative stress is a key driver of the selective motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mitochondria are among the main producers of ROS, but they also suffer particularly from their harmful effects. Voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDACs) are the most represented proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane where they form pores controlling the permeation of metabolites responsible for mitochondrial functions. For these reasons, VDACs contribute to mitochondrial quality control and the entire energy metabolism of the cell. In this work we assessed whether oxidative stress in ALS induces post-translational modifications (PTMs) in VDAC3, a member of the VDAC family of outer mitochondrial membrane channel proteins, known for its role in redox signaling. At this end, protein samples enriched in VDACs were prepared from mitochondria of an ALS model cell line, NSC34 expressing human SOD1G93A, and analyzed by nUHPLC/High-Resolution nESI-MS/MS. Specific over-oxidation, deamidation, succination events were found in VDAC3 from ALS-related NSC34-SOD1G93A but not in non-ALS cell lines. We also report evidence that some PTMs may affect VDAC3 functionality. In particular, deamidation of Asn215 alone results in channel instability. Overall, our results suggest modifications of VDAC3 that can impact its protective role against ROS, which is particularly important in the ALS context.

### Sample Protocol
The NSC34wt, NSC34-SOD1, NSC34-SOD1G93A cell lines were cultured using DMEM, 10% FBS and 1% P/S. The total cell pellet obtained, after centrifugation, was resuspended in 1 mL of hypotonic buffer (HB) (200 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA pH 8), incubated in ice for 10 min and then lysed. The lysate obtained was centrifuged (700xg, 25 min, 4°C). To have a better yield, after recovering the supernatant, the pellet containing the mitochondria, was again suspended in HB. Again, the suspension was lysed and centrifuged. The total resulting supernatants were centrifuged (7,000xg, 15 min, 4°C). The supernatant was removed while the pellet was washed with HB. The suspension was then centrifuged (7,000xg, 15 min, 4°C) and the mitochondria pellet, was resuspended in 500 μL of HB. The total yield was determined by BCA method, resulting 0.474 mg, 0.524 mg, 0.628 mg for each cell line respectively. The HB was removed. Reduction/alkylation was carried on before VDACs purification in order to avoid any possible artefact. 0.237 mg, 0.262 mg and 0.314 mg protein of intact mitochondria from each cell line respectivelywere incubated for 3h at 4°C in 1 mL of Tris-HCl 10mM (pH 8.3) containing 0.00474 mmol, 0.00524 mmol and 0.00628 mmol of DTT respectively for each cell line, which corresponds to an excess of 50:1 (mol/mol) over the estimated protein thiol groups. The temperature was kept at 4 °C in order to unactivate the sulfoxide reductase. After centrifugation (10,000×g, 30 min, 4°C), alkylation was performed by IAA at the 2:1 M ratio over DTT for 1h in the dark at 25°C. Mixture was centrifuged (10,000×g, 30 min, 4°C). Mitochondria were lysed in buffer A (10mM TrisHCl, 1mM EDTA, 3% Triton X-100, pH 7) in ratio 5:1 (mitochondria mg/buffer mL) for 30 min on ice and centrifuged (17,400×g, 30 min, 4°C). The supernatant with mitochondrial proteins was loaded onto a homemade glass column 5×80 mm, packed with 0.6 g of dry hydroxyapatite (HTP). Column was eluted with buffer A at 4°C and fractions of 500 μL were collected, tested for protein content by a fluorometer assay and dried under vacuum. The HTP eluatewas divided in two aliquots, which were reduced to less than 100 µL and purified from contaminating molecules. Protein pellet was suspended in 100 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.3) and incubated at 4°C for 15 min. Next, 100 μL of 0.2% RapiGest SF in 50mM NH4HCO3 were added and the samples were kept at 4°C for 30 min. Another aliquot of pellet was suspended in 100 μL of 100 mMTris-HCl, 10mM CaCl2 (pH 8) and incubated at 4°C for 15 min. Next, 100 μL of 0.2% RapiGest SF in 100 mMTris-HCl, 10mM CaCl2, were added and the samples were kept at 4°C for 30 min. For each fraction, protein amount was determined in 100μg by a fluorometer assay. Proteins were then subjected separately to digestion using trypsin and chymotrypsin, respectively. Mass spectrometry data were acquiredin triplicate on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a ThermoFisher Scientific DionexUltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). Samples were reconstituted in 100 μL of 5% FA aqueous solution and 1 μL was loaded onto an Acclaim®Nano Trap C18 column (100 μm i.d.×2 cm, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O+0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASYSpray, 75 μm×50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å column and were separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.250 μL/min, at 40 °C, with a linear gradient of solvent B (CH3CN+0.1% FA) in A from 5% to 20% in 32 min, followed by 20% to 40% in 30 min, and 40% to 60% in 20 min. Eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray (Easy-spray ion source, Thermo Scientific) using a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275°C).Survey scans of peptide precursors in the m/z range 400–1600 were performed at resolution of 120,000 (@ 200 m/z) with a AGC target for Orbitrap survey of 4×105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, and HCD was performed in the IRM, using a normalized collision energy of 35 and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 1–3 and an intensity above the threshold of 5x103were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. AGC target and maximum injection time (ms) for MS/MS spectra were 1×104 and 100, respectively. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminishes to zero or 3s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data were processed by PEAKS de novo sequencing software (v. X, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). The data were searched against the 17,527 entries “Mus musculus” SwissProt database (release December 2021). The common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP) contaminant database was included in the database search. Full tryptic or chymotrypsin peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites were subjected to bioinformatic search. Cysteine carboxyamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, trioxidation and succination of cysteine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, ubiquitin (m/z 114.0429) and ubiquitination (m/z 383.2281) of lysine, transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residues in the form of pyroglutamic acid and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 0.1% False Discovery Rate (FDR). A protein was considered identified with minimum of two peptides of which at least one had to be "unique". Proteins containing the same peptides which could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Finally, all the protein hits obtained were processed by using the InChorus function of PEAKS. This tool combines the database search results of PEAKS software with those obtained by the Mascot search engine with the aim not only to increase the coverage, but also the confidence since the engines use independent algorithms and therefore the results confirm each other.The raw data were also processed by MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 in order to further investigate about deamidation. MaxQuant, in fact, gives information about intensity of peptides in both unmodified and modified form, allowing for a deamidation ratio estimation. The main parameters of the previous search were maintained: database, contaminant database, type of digestion, fixed and variable modifications. The principles of parsimony were still applied. Match type was “match from and to”. The decoy mode was “revert”. PSM, Protein and Site decoy fraction FDR were set at 0.01 as threshold for peptide and protein identifications. All the other parameters were set as default. An estimation of the percentage of deamidation in VDAC3 for each cell line was calculated with the aid of a freely available command-line script for Python 2.x (https://github.com/dblyon/deamidation), which use the MaxQuant “evidence.txt” file. It has to be considered that the method is intended for comparative purposes and not as an absolute measure of deamidation. For each peptide containing N and Q residues, the ratio between the number of the residues in the modified form and the total number of the residues was calculated (N and Q ratios were calculated separately), and this value was then multiplied for the intensity of the peptide. The values obtained were summed. The result was then divided by the total sum of all intensity values of the peptides in the modified and unmodified form. 1000 bootstrap iterations were applied to calculate mean, standard deviation and 95% lower and upper confidence intervals and to estimate the error of the calculation.

### Publication Abstract
Damage induced by oxidative stress is a key driver of the selective motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mitochondria are among the main producers of ROS, but they also suffer particularly from their harmful effects. Voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDACs) are the most represented proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane where they form pores controlling the permeation of metabolites responsible for mitochondrial functions. For these reasons, VDACs contribute to mitochondrial quality control and the entire energy metabolism of the cell. In this work we assessed in an ALS cell model whether disease-related oxidative stress induces post-translational modifications (PTMs) in VDAC3, a member of the VDAC family of outer mitochondrial membrane channel proteins, known for its role in redox signaling. At this end, protein samples enriched in VDACs were prepared from mitochondria of an ALS model cell line, NSC34 expressing human SOD1G93A, and analyzed by nUHPLC/High-Resolution nESI-MS/MS. Specific over-oxidation, deamidation, succination events were found in VDAC3 from ALS-related NSC34-SOD1G93A but not in non-ALS cell lines. Additionally, we report evidence that some PTMs may affect VDAC3 functionality. In particular, deamidation of Asn215 alone alters single channel behavior in artificial membranes. Overall, our results suggest modifications of VDAC3 that can impact its protective role against ROS, which is particularly important in the ALS context. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036728.

### Keywords
Deamidation; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; voltage dependent anion channel; post-translational modifications; mitochondria; ros; mass spectrometry analysis; orbitrap fusion tribrid; neurodegeneration; sod1.

### Affiliations
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy
University of Catania

### Submitter
Rosaria Saletti

### Lab Head
Dr Rosaria Saletti
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy


