### Accession
PXD026329

### Title
YBX1 mediates translation of oncogenic transcripts to control cell competition in AML

### Description
Persistence of malignant clones following cytotoxic or targeted therapy is a major determinant of adverse outcome in patients with hematologic malignancies. Despite the fact that the majority of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) achieve complete remission after chemotherapy, a large proportion of them relapse as a result of residual malignant cells. After discontinuation of treatment, these persistent clones have a competitive advantage and re-establish disease. Therefore, targeting strategies that specifically reduce competitive advantage of malignant cells while leaving normal cells unaffected are clearly warranted. Recently, our group identified cold-shock protein and splicing factor YBX1 as a mediator of disease persistence in JAK2-mutated myeloproliferative neoplasia. The role of cold-shock proteins in AML, however, remained so far elusive. Using genetic screening, we identified YBX1 as a relevant functional dependency in AML. Inactivation of YBX1 in vitro and in vivo confirmed its role as an essential driver of leukemia development and maintenance. Here, we identified its ability to bind specific mRNAs, including MYC, and amplify their translation at the ribosomes by recruitment to polysomal chains. Genetic inactivation of YBX1 disrupted this regulatory circuit and displaced a number of oncogenic drivers from polysomes, with subsequent depletion of protein abundance. As a consequence, leukemia cells showed reduced proliferation and were out-competed in vitro and in vivo, while normal cells remained largely unaffected. Collectively, this data establishes YBX1 as a specific dependency and therapeutic target in AML that is essentially required for oncogenic protein expression.

### Sample Protocol
Molm13 cells expressing sgRNA non-target control and sgRNA targeting Ybx1 were lysed in 1%SDC buffer (1%SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 40mM CAA and 10mM TCEP), incubated on ice for 20 minutes, boiled at 95°C, sonicated for 15 mins on a Biorupter plus and heated again for 5minutes at 95°C (Kulak NA, Nature Methods 2014). Proteins were digested with Trypsin (1:100 ratio) and LysC (1:100 ratio) for overnight at 37°C. To the peptides 5x volume Isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed to stop the digestion. The peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Purified peptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Maxquant (Cox J, Nat Biotech 2008) version 1.5.5.2 supported by Andromeda search engine. The data was searched for proteins and peptides using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human (version 2016) fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the levels of protein and peptide. Default settings were enabled such as oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Trypsin as enzyme specificity. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids set. The proteins were assigned to the same protein groups if two proteins could not be discriminated by unique peptides. The label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox J et al, 2014) and match between run feature was enabled for identification of peptide across runs based on mass accuracy and normalized retention times. For label free protein quantification minimum ratio count was set to 2. The Maxquant output table was analyzed in Perseus (Tyanova et al, Nat Method 2016), prior to the analysis contaminants marked as reverse hits, contaminants and only identified by site-modification were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Persistence of malignant clones is a major determinant of adverse outcome in patients with hematologic malignancies. Despite the fact that the majority of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) achieve complete remission after chemotherapy, a large proportion of them relapse as a result of residual malignant cells. These persistent clones have a competitive advantage and can&#xa0;re-establish disease. Therefore, targeting strategies that specifically diminish cell competition of malignant cells while leaving normal cells unaffected are clearly&#xa0;warranted. Recently, our group identified YBX1 as a mediator of disease persistence in JAK2-mutated myeloproliferative neoplasms. The role of YBX1 in AML, however, remained so far&#xa0;elusive. Here, inactivation of YBX1 confirms its role as an essential driver of leukemia development and maintenance. We identify its ability to amplify the translation of oncogenic transcripts, including MYC, by recruitment to polysomal chains. Genetic inactivation of YBX1 disrupts this regulatory circuit and displaces oncogenic drivers from polysomes, with subsequent depletion of protein levels. As a consequence, leukemia cells show reduced proliferation and are out-competed in vitro and in vivo, while normal cells remain largely unaffected. Collectively, these data establish YBX1 as a specific dependency and therapeutic target in AML that is essential for oncogenic protein expression.

### Keywords
Aml, Translation, Oncogene, Proteome, Ybx1

### Affiliations
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction. MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr.Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction. MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry


