### Accession
PXD019367

### Title
Structural mechanism underlying primary and secondary coupling between GPCRs and the Gi/o family

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest receptor superfamily that can propagate various extracellular stimulus into cells by coupling with heterotrimeric G proteins. G proteins are divided into four families, Gs, Gi/o, Gq/11 and G12/13, which are responsible for the transduction of discrete downstream signaling pathways. Interestingly, one receptor can couple to more than one G protein subtype with different coupling efficiency or kinetics; coupling with the highest efficiency and/or kinetics is known as ‘primary coupling’ whereas the one with lower efficiency and/or slower kinetics is known as ‘secondary coupling’. Due to its significance in human physiology, there has been a great effort to elucidate the precise mechanism of GPCR-G protein coupling, however, the complex nature of GPCR and G protein interaction raises more unanswered questions. Here, we utilized hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to understand the molecular mechanism underlying primary and secondary Gi/o coupling using muscarinic acetylcholine receptor type 2 (M2R) and β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR) as the primary and secondary Gi/o-coupling receptors, respectively. Results showed the engagement of the distal C-terminus of Gi/o with the receptor differentiates primary and secondary Gi/o couplings. In addition, the interaction between the intracellular loop 2 (ICL2) of the receptor and Gi/o in primary Gi/o coupling is not as critical as in primary Gs coupling.

### Sample Protocol
Gi/o (65 µM) was mixed with 1.15-fold molar excess of agonist bound receptors at room temperature. Apyrase (200 mU mL-1) was added after 90 min of incubation to hydrolyze GDP, and to generate a stable complex. For continuous labeling deuterium exchange, 5 µL of complex, agonist bound receptor, or GDP-bound Gi/o was mixed with 25 µL of D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES (pD 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 100 mM TCEP, and 0.1% DDM supplemented with 5 µM agonist, 20 µM GDP, or both for receptor alone, G protein alone, or complex, respectively) and incubated for 10 s, 100 s, 1000 s, and 10,000 s at room temperature. For pulse-labeling deuterium exchange, GPCR and Gi/o were mixed at room temperature as described above, and 5 µL aliquots were collected at the indicated time points (before mixing, 10 s, 5 min, 20 min, 60 min, 90 min, 110 min, 150 min, and 180 min), mixed with 25 µL of D2O buffer, and incubated for 10 s or 100 s at room temperature. The deuterated samples were quenched using 30 µL of ice-cold quench buffer (0.1 M NaH2PO4 pH 2.01 and 20 mM TCEP), snap-frozen on dry ice, and stored at −80°C. Non-deuterated samples were prepared by following the protocol above in their respective H2O buffers.  The quenched samples were digested and isolated using the HDX-UPLC-ESI-MS system (Waters). First, the samples were thawed and immediately injected to an immobilized pepsin column (2.1 × 30 mm) (Life Technologies) at a flow rate of 100 µL min-1 in 0.05% formic acid. The peptic peptides were then collected on a C18 VanGuard trap column (1.7 µm × 30 mm) (Waters) for desalting for 3 min and subsequently separated by ultra-pressure liquid chromatography using an Acquity UPLC C18 column (1.7 µm, 1.0 × 100 mm) (Waters) at a flow rate of 40 µL min-1 with an acetonitrile gradient starting from 8% to 85% over 8.5 min using two pumps (Pump A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O, Pump B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Buffers were adjusted to pH 2.5 and the system was maintained at 0.5°C (except pepsin digestion was performed at 12°C) to minimize the back-exchange of deuterium. Mass spectra were analyzed by Xevo G2 quadrupole-time of flight (Q-TOF) equipped with a standard electrospray ionization (ESI) source in MSE mode (Waters) with positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with sodium iodide solution (2 µg µL-1). [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B was utilized for the lock-mass correction with a mass window of ±0.5 Da. Two independent interleaved acquisitions were automatically created: the first function, typically set at 4 eV, collected low energy or unfragmented data while the second function collected high energy or fragmented data typically obtained by using a collision ramp from 30-55 eV. Ar gas was used for collision induced dissociation (CID). Mass spectral were acquired in the range of m/z 100-2000 for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx Global Server 2.4 (Waters) was utilized to identify peptic peptides from the non-deuterated samples with variable methionine oxidation modification and a peptide score of 6. Fragment mass and peptide mass tolerance were set to automatic. DynamX 2.0 software (Waters) was used to determine the level of deuterium uptake for each peptide by measuring the centroid of isotopic distribution. The average back-exchange in our system was approximately 30‒40%, but we did not correct for back exchange because the proteins aggregate in fully deuterated samples. All the data were derived from at least three independent experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Heterotrimeric G proteins are categorized into four main families based on their function and sequence, Gs, Gi/o, Gq/11, and G12/13. One receptor can couple to more than one G protein subtype, and the coupling efficiency varies depending on the GPCR-G protein pair. However, the precise mechanism underlying different coupling efficiencies is unknown. Here, we study the structural mechanism underlying primary and secondary Gi/o coupling, using the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor type 2 (M2R) as the primary Gi/o-coupling receptor and the &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR, which primarily couples to Gs) as the secondary Gi/o-coupling receptor. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and mutagenesis studies reveal that the engagement of the distal C-terminus of G&#x3b1;i/o with the receptor differentiates primary and secondary Gi/o couplings. This study suggests that the conserved hydrophobic residue within the intracellular loop 2 of the receptor (residue 34.51) is not critical for primary Gi/o-coupling; however, it might be important for secondary Gi/o-coupling.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Secondary coupling, Primary couplling, Gpcr, G protein

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea

### Submitter
Hee Ryung Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Young Chung
School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea


