### Accession
PXD033684

### Title
Polyphenols and IUGR Pregnancies: Effects of the Antioxidant Hydroxytyrosol on the Hippocampus Proteome in a Porcine Model

### Description
Supplementation of the mother's diet with antioxidants such as hydroxytyrosol (HTX) has been proposed to ameliorate adverse phenotypes of foetuses affected by intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Our previous studies showed, in a porcine model of IUGR, an effect of maternal HTX supplementation on the neurotransmitter profile of several brain areas and the morphology of the hippocampus in 100-days old foetuses. The present study analyzed the impact of maternal HTX supplementation on the hippocampus proteome at this foetal age by TMT10plex labelling. Eleven differentially abundant proteins were identified comparing both conditions, eight of them downregulated and three upregulated in the HTX-treated group. Downregulated proteins were mainly involved in protein synthesis and RNA metabolism, and may explain the differences in neuron differentiation in the HTX-treated group. Upregulated proteins were related to cell detoxification and could represent a potential mechanism to explain the neuroprotective effect of HTX.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared by sonication (30% amplitude, 1s x 10) in 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% NP-40 plus a cocktail of protease inhibitors and followed by centrifugation. Protein quantification was performed using the microBCA method (ThermoFisher, #23235). Trypsin digestion was performed following the FASP protocol and digestion performance control was conducted by spotting 0.5 µL of the eluted peptides from each sample onto a MALDI plate by the dried droplet method and analysed at 800 to 4000 m/z range in a 4800 AB-Sciex MALDI-TOF/TOF MS.  Peptides were evaporated in speed-vac and the evaporated tryptic peptide samples were reconstituted with 100 µL 20 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer; Sigma, # T7408) and labelled with TMT10plex isobaric label reagents (ThermoFisher, #15285743). The experimental design for the TMT10 labelling is shown in Table 1.  Table 1. Experimental design for the TMT10-plex labelling. Two experiments and ten labelling reactions were performed for a total of twenty samples randomly distributed to avoid labelling bias. Samples are identified as C (Ctrl), T (treated with HTX), sex (male M, female F) and number of the individual.    Reporter  126 127N 127C 128N 128C 129N 129C 130N 130C 131 Exp.1 CH.1 CM.5 CH.2 TM.1 TH.5 CH.3 CM.4 TH.4 TM.2 TH.3 Exp.2 CM.3 TH.2 TM.3 CH.4 CM.2 TM.4 TH.1 CM.1 CH.5 TM.5  Each labelling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min before each batch was mixed into a single TMT 10-plex tube. Labelled peptide mixes were cleaned-up in C18 cartridges (Agilent, #A5320320). Each 10-plex mix (corresponding to ~600 µg initial protein) was reconstituted with 300 µL 5mM ammonium formate, pH 10, 2% ACN, to create a 2 µg/µL solution. Two hundred µL of each mix (~400 µg) were fractionated in a HPLC 1100 UV-Vis (Agilent), with a XBridge Peptide BEH C18, 130Å, 5 µm, 2.1mm x 100mm column (Waters, #186003575).  HP-RP chromatographic gradient started at 97% solvent A (5mM ammonium formate, pH 10, 2% ACN) and 3% solvent B (5mM ammonium formate, pH 10, 90% ACN) at 200 µL/min flow for a total run time of 76 min. Fractions were collected every 2 min (400 µL) and maintained at -40ºC. In accordance with the chromatographic profiles obtained, fractions from 26 to 60 min were considered for further analysis. Six mixes of 40 µL of 3 different fractions were conducted for each labelled mix. Aliquots of 40 µL of these fraction mixes were frozen and evaporated in speedvac before LC-MS/MS analysis. High-resolution LC-MS/MS was conducted for the 12 fraction mixes. The MS system used was a Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system. The equivalent to 500 nanogram from each fraction was loaded into a Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at 15 μL/min, connected to a NanoEase MZ HSS T3 column (75 μm × 250 cm, 1.8 μm, 100 Å; Waters). The separation was done at 250 nl/min, gradient 3-35% ACN (0.1% FA) in 60 min. The end of the chromatographic column was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate system coupled to the spectrometer and working at 1.7 kV.  The spectrometric analysis was performed in a data dependent mode, m/z range 375-1500, SPS3 fragmentation, Top speed method with a collision energy of 35% for MS2 CID and 65% for MS3 HCD. The detection was done in the Orbitrap (MS1 120k), Ion trap (MS2) and Orbitrap (MS3 60 kDa). The software for instrument acquisition was Xcalibur v 4.2.28.14 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The identification of the peptides in the database was carried out using Proteome Discoverer v2.5 software using a 1% FDR and the Uniprot database restricted to Sus scrofa taxonomy (released 2021/02) and contaminants (released 2017). The enzyme was set to trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed. The dynamic modifications were oxidation in methionine, acetylation in protein N-terminus, Met-loss in methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl in methionine. The car-bamidomethylation of cysteines and the TMT in peptide N-terminus and in K were set as static modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 100 ppm and 0.6 Da. Quantification of the proteins was based on the intensity of the reporter ions derived from the TMT labelling. Only peptides with SPS mass matches higher to 55% and unique were used for quantification. The TMT intensity of the reporter ions was normalized using the total abundance of each TMT-label to minimize the error due to the different protein load of each channel. Statistical analysis to determine differential proteins and peptides was performed using DanteR software (http: //omics.pnl.gov/software/danter). Detailed information on how this software works can be found at http://omics.pnl.gov/sites/defaμlt/files/DanteR_Overview.pdf. An ANOVA analysis of Control versus Treated samples using the normalized data has been performed. The variability introduced by the labelling and by the sex of the samples is included in the linear model. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini & Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
Supplementation of a mother's diet with antioxidants such as hydroxytyrosol (HTX) has been proposed to ameliorate the adverse phenotypes of foetuses affected by intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Our previous studies showed, in a porcine model of IUGR, an effect of maternal HTX supplementation on the neurotransmitter profile of several brain areas and the morphology of the hippocampus in 100 days old foetuses. The present study analyzed the impact of maternal HTX supplementation on the hippocampus proteome at this foetal age by TMT10plex labelling. Eleven differentially abundant proteins were identified by comparing both conditions, and eight of them downregulated and three upregulated in the HTX-treated group. The downregulated proteins were mainly involved in protein synthesis and RNA metabolism and may explain the differences in neuron differentiation in the HTX-treated group. The upregulated proteins were related to cell detoxification and could represent a potential mechanism to explain the neuroprotective effect of HTX.

### Keywords
Hydroxytyrosol; hippocampus; intrauterine growth restriction; brain; pig; proteome; tmt labelling

### Affiliations
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular. Facultat de Veterinària. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Cerdanyola del Vallès. 08193 Barcelona. Spain
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Bassols
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular. Facultat de Veterinària. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Cerdanyola del Vallès. 08193 Barcelona. Spain


