### Accession
PXD020352

### Title
Proteomic analysis of plasma from firefighters that underwent an intense exercise session

### Description
This project has the aim to understand the systemic regulation of physiological processes during a high-demand exercise session. The exercise session consisted of a group of 13 volunteer firefighters that run for 45 min (~2 miles) with full combat gear in a hilly terrain in Santa Clarita, CA. Blood, urine and saliva were collected prior and after the exercise session and submitted to multi-omics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was depleted of the 14 most abundant proteins with MARS column (Agilent Technologies). Samples were dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 8 M urea. Dissulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (diluted from a 500 mM stock solution) for 1 h at 37C. Cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (from a 500 mM stock solution) for 45 min at 25C. Samples were diluted 4 folds with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:50 enzyme‐to‐substrate ratio at 25 ºC for 2 h.  The same amount of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the samples for 14 h incubation at 25 °C. Pure formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to a final concentration of 1% formic acid and the digested peptides were extracted with tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA). Peptides were labeled with 11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and fractionated into 24 fractions by high pH reverse phase chromatography (DOI: 10.1038/s41596-018-0006-9). Fractionated peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoAquity UPLC® system (Waters) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out on a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) with a gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) both containing 0.1% formic acid (1-8% B in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min). Peptides were analyzed online by nanoelectrospray ionization in mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in the 400–2000 m/z range with a 35,000 resolution at 400 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of top 12 most intense ions (excluding singly charged molecules) were collected with high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Decon2LS_V2 combined with DTA Refinery for mass recalibration and peak list extraction. Peptides were identified with MSGF+ by searching against the human version of SwissProt database downloaded from Uniprot Knowledgebase on February 22, 2019. The searching parameters consisted of (1) parent ion mass tolerance of ±6 ppm, (2) tryptic digestion in at least one of the termini with 2 missed cleavages allowed, (3) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) and N-terminal/lysine TMT labeling (+229.1629 Da) derivatization as static modifications, and (4) following variable modifications: oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine, cysteine, tyrosine and tryptophan; dioxidation (+31.9898 Da) on cysteine; and deamidation/deamination (+ 0.98402 Da) on asparagine, glutamine and arginine residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Exercise, Human performance, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


