### Accession
PXD010412

### Title
The gut microbiota promotes hepatic fatty acid desaturation and elongation in mice

### Description
Interactions between the gut microbial ecosystem and host lipid homeostasis are highly relevant to host physiology and metabolic diseases. We present a comprehensive multi-omics view of the effect of intestinal microbial colonization on hepatic lipid metabolism, integrating transcriptomic, proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and lipidomic analyses of liver and plasma samples from germfree and specific pathogen-free mice. Microbes induced monounsaturated fatty acid generation by stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 and polyunsaturated fatty acid elongation by fatty acid elongase 5, leading to significant alterations in glycerophospholipid acyl-chain profiles. Germfree mice contained more abundant saturated and poly-unsaturated lipids, whereas colonized mice primarily contained mono-unsaturated lipids. A composite classification score calculated from the observed alterations in fatty acid profiles in germfree mice clearly differentiated antibiotic-treated mice from untreated controls with high sensitivity. Mechanistic investigations revealed that acetate originating from gut microbial degradation of dietary fiber serves as precursor for hepatic synthesis of C16 and C18 fatty acids and their related glycerophospholipid species that are also released into the circulation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue lysis and protein digestion and TMT labeling  The liver tissues of 10 mice were lysed and digested according to the method of Ruprecht et al. (Ruprecht, Wang, et al., 2017). Samples containing 300 μg of protein were digested with trypsin overnight. After digestion, the samples were acidified with TFA to pH 2 and desalted according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a SepPack column [C18 cartridges, Sep-Pak Vac, 1 cc (50 mg)](Waters Corp., Eschborn, Germany). Eluates were dried down and stored at −80°C. TMT labelling of 300 μg protein was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Scientific). FE-IMAC column phosphopeptide enrichment and fractionation Before phosphopeptide enrichment, the 10 TMT-labeled samples were combined. Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed using an analytical Fe-IMAC column (4 x 50 mm ProPac IMAC-10, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an HPLC system (AEKTA Explorer FPLC system, Amersham Biosciences Pharmacia) (Ruprecht et al., 2017; Ruprecht et al., 2015).  Reversed phase fractionation was performed only for the phospho-peptide-enriched samples (Ruprecht et al., 2017). Sample fractionation was performed by sequential elution of the bound peptides using each of the six buffers (40 μL) containing an increasing concentration of ACN (5%,7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, and 50% ACN in 25 mM NH4FA). The desalted sample flow-through fraction was combined with the 17.5% ACN fraction and the 5% ACN fraction combined with the 50% ACN fraction. Samples were dried down and were stored at –20°C before LC-MS/MS measurement. Only the flow-through of the FE-IMAC column phosphopeptide enrichment was used for further separation using the hydrophilic strong anion exchange separation (hSAX) (Ruprecht et al., 2017b). A Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex Corp., Idstein, Germany) equipped with an IonPac AG24 guard column (2 x 50 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a IonPac AS24 strong anion exchange column (2 x 250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for the hSAX separation of the full proteome sample (IMAC flow-through). A total of 36 hSAX fractions (1 min per fraction) was collected manually, pooled according to the UV trace, and desalted, giving a total of 24 fractions for LC-MS/MS measurement (Rappsilber et al., 2007). LC-MS/MS analysis The 24 hSAX fractions (50 μL of 0.1% FA) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). μLof Each sample (5 μL) was delivered to the trap column (100 μm ID × 2 cm, 5 μm C18 resin; Reprosil FUR AQ, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in solution A (0.1% FA in water) for 10 min. For peptide separation, peptides were transferred to the analytical column (75 μm × 40 cm, 3 μm C18 resin; Reprosil, PUR AQ Dr. Maisch) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 110 min gradient (2% to 4% solution B in 1 min; 4% to 32% in 102 min). The Q-Exactive HF was operated in the data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2. The fullscan MS spectra from 360 to 1300 m/z was acquired at 60 000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 charges and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for MS1. Up to 25 precursor ions were allowed for fragmentation in tandem mass spectra using a normalized collision energy of 33. MS2 spectra were acquired at 30 000 resolution, with an AGC target value of 2 ×105 charges and max injection time of 57 ms. The precursor ion isolation width was set to 1.0 Th and the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s. The 6 IMAC fractions were reconstituted in 10 μL of 1% FA in 50 mM citrate. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra 1D+ coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A 5-μL sample of IMAC-enriched phosphopeptides was delivered to the trap column (100 μm ID × 2 cm; 5 μm C18 resin; Reprosil FUR AQ, Dr. Maisch)at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in solution A (0.1% FA in water) for 10 min. Peptides were transferred to the analytical column (75 μm ×x 40 cm; 3 μm C18 resin; Reprosil, PUR AQ Dr. Maisch) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 110-min gradient (2% to 4% solution B in 2 min; 4% to 32% in 102 min) for peptide separation. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2. The full-scan MS spectra from 360 to 1300 m/z was acquired at 70 000 resolution with an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges and a maximum injection time of 100 ms for MS1. Up to 20 precursor ions were allowed for fragmentation in tandem mass spectra. MS2 spectra were acquired at 35000 resolution and a normalized collision energy of 33. An AGC target value of 2 × 105 charges and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. We set the precursor ion isolation width to 1.0 Th and the dynamic exclusion to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by comparing the raw data to the UniProtKB mouse database, version v06.06.14 (35098 sequences) using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and its built-in Andromeda search engine for peak detection and quantification (Cox et al., 2011). Search parameters for the full proteome samples were as follows: full tryptic specificity, up to two missed cleavage sites;carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. TMT10plex was used for quantification. Mass spectra were recalibrated within MaxQuant (first search 20 ppm precursor tolerance) and subsequently searched again with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Search results were filtered to a maximum FDR of 0.01 for proteins and peptides. A peptide length of at least seven amino acids was required. Search parameters for phosphopeptide enrichment data were similar to those used for the full proteome data, with the phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues as additional variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Interactions between the gut microbial ecosystem and host lipid homeostasis are highly relevant to host physiology and metabolic diseases. We present a comprehensive multi-omics view of the effect of intestinal microbial colonization on hepatic lipid metabolism, integrating transcriptomic, proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and lipidomic analyses of liver and plasma samples from germfree and specific pathogen-free mice. Microbes induce monounsaturated fatty acid generation by stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 and polyunsaturated fatty acid elongation by fatty acid elongase 5, leading to significant alterations in glycerophospholipid acyl-chain profiles. A composite classification score calculated from the observed alterations in fatty acid profiles in germfree mice clearly differentiates antibiotic-treated mice from untreated controls with high sensitivity. Mechanistic investigations reveal that acetate originating from gut microbial degradation of dietary fiber serves as precursor for hepatic synthesis of C16 and C18 fatty acids and their related glycerophospholipid species that are also released into the circulation.

### Keywords
Fatty acid signature, Fatty acyls, Data integration, Lipidomics, Lipid metabolism, Classification score, Stable isotope labelling, Short chain fatty acids, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Lehrstuhl für Ernährungsphysiologie,  Technische Universität München (TUM),  Gregor-Mendel-Str. 2, 85354 Freising, Germany;  Phone: +498161-71-2385
EMBL PCF

### Submitter
Dominic Helm

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Ecker
Lehrstuhl für Ernährungsphysiologie,  Technische Universität München (TUM),  Gregor-Mendel-Str. 2, 85354 Freising, Germany;  Phone: +498161-71-2385


