### Accession
PXD028886

### Title
Paeonia lactiflora extract increase the muscle function via downregulation of high mobility group box 1 and NF-kB signaling in mdx mice, an animal model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Description
Mouse gastrocnemius muscle tissue was collected from three groups: wildtype (N1, N2, N3), mdx (C1, C2, C3), and mdx+PL (RP1, RP2, RP3). Proteins were digested to peptide mixtures using FASP and analyzed using LC-MS/MS. The DIA files for individual sample were processed using mouse reference spectral library MouseRefSWATH(PASS01569). The results of protein quantification were further processed and analyzed using R (ver. 3.6.0).

### Sample Protocol
The digestion step was conducted with FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) on Microcon 30K centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Each 100 μg of protein sample was adjusted to a volume of 200 μL with lysis buffer. Incubation with TCEP at 37℃ for 30 min and alkylation with iodoacetic acid (IAA) at 25℃ for an hour in dark were done to reduce proteins. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37℃ for 18 hr following washing with lysis buffer and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) sequentially. The resulting peptide mixtures were collected to new tubes, and trypsin was inactivated with 15 μL of formic acid (100%).

### Data Protocol
The DIA files for individual sample were processed using mouse reference spectral library MouseRefSWATH(PASS01569). Analysis settings were set default with the following minor changes: the false discovery rate (FDR) of protein identification was set to 1%. The results of protein quantification were further processed and analyzed using R (ver. 3.6.0). Log2 transformation was applied to all data and unpaired t-tests with Benjamini’s-Hochberg’s correction of the p-value (q-value) was done to compare the differences between protein levels in groups. The resulting q-value of 0.05 was set as a cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Lc-ms/ms, Muscle

### Affiliations
ebiogen Inc.
Chung-Ang University

### Submitter
Gyusik Hwang

### Lab Head
Dr Yoosik Yoon
Chung-Ang University


