### Accession
PXD026772

### Title
Investigation of cell wall proteins of Camellia sinensis leaves by combining cell wall proteomics and N-glycoproteomics

### Description
Cell wall proteins (CWPs) probably play a vital role in fluoride accumulation/detoxification of C. sinensis leaves. However, there has been a lack in CWP identification and characterization up to now. This study is aimed to characterize cell wall proteome of C. sinensis leaves and to develop more CWPs related to stress response. Cell wall proteomics and N-glycoproteomics was employed to investigate CWPs. CWPs were extracted by sequential salt buffers, while N-glycoproteins were enriched by hydrophilic interaction chromatography method, and subsequently all proteins were subjected to UPLC-MS/MS analysis. A total of 501 CWPs and 195 CWPs were identified respectively by cell wall proteomics and N-glycoproteomics profiling with 118 CWPs in common. Among identified CWPs, proteins acting on cell wall polysaccharides, proteases and oxidoreductases represent the top three functional groups. This was the first large-scale investigation of CWPs in C. sinensis.

### Sample Protocol
Materials: uniform 2-year-old cutting seedlings of the Echa 1 variety (C. sinensis cv. ‘Echa 1’).  Methods:  Cell wall fractions were obtained from C. sinensis leaves using sequential extraction buffers (0.4, 0.6, and 1.0 M sucrose buffer) and washing buffer (5 mM sodium acetate). Cell wall proteins (CWPs) were extracted from cell wall fractions successively using 0.2 M CaCl2 buffers, 50 mM EGTA buffers, and3 M LiCl buffers twice, respectively. Meanwhile, total proteins were also extracted using homogenization buffers. Afterwards, all proteins were precipitated by Tris-phenol (pH ≥ 8.0) and 0.1 M ammonium acetate. All proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide. Afterwards, CWPs and total proteins were digested by trypsin and desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column. Before MS/MS analysis, N-glycosylation peptides were firstly enriched by HILIC micro-column. Finally, all tryptic peptides were subjected to UPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) with tea tree genome database (Camellia_sinensis_4442 with 53512 sequences), reverse decoy database, and mass spectrometry contaminants database. The following query parameters were set: (ⅰ) Trypsin/P for enzyme cleavage and 2 missing cleavages; (ⅱ) mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 5 ppm for peptide ions in first search and main research, respectively, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions; (ⅲ) length of 7 amino acid residues as minimum peptide length, and 5 as maximum modification number in a peptide; (ⅳ) Cysteine alkylation as fixed modification; (ⅴ) Variable modification: methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation for CWPs, and methionine oxidation and deamidation (NQ), asparagine deamidation (18O）for N-glycoproteins; (ⅴⅰ) FDR≤1% for protein identification and peptide-spectrum match identification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Camellia sinensis; leaves; cell wall proteins;

### Affiliations
Fruit and Tea Research Institute, Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Yanli Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanli Liu
Fruit and Tea Research Institute, Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences


