### Accession
PXD004280

### Title
Quantitative Secretome Analysis of Activated Jurkat Cells

### Description
A quantitative label-free secretome analysis protocol using a click chemistry-based approach for the enrichment of secreted glycoproteins was adapted for and applied to a T cell model. There, Jurkat cells were activated via PMA/ionomycin and the dynamic modulation of the T cell secretome was investigated and compared to the dynamic modulation of the T cell proteome of the same model.

### Sample Protocol
For secretome analyses, glycoproteins were metabolically marked using ManNAz (Life Technologies) at a concentration of 50 μM. 0.25 x 10^6 cells/ml were added to prepared media and incubated for 72 h. After 48 h cells were activated using 50 ng/ml PMA (Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) and 500 ng/ml Ionomycin calcium salt (Sigma-Aldrich). The 24 hour-activation was initiated during metabolic marking to warrant simultaneous ending. Cells were removed by centrifugation (5 min, 4000 x g) and supernatants were filtered through 0.45 μm filters (Sarstedt) into centrifugal filter units (Amicon Ultra, 10 kDa cut-off, Merck). Excess ManNAz was removed by ultrifiltration (4 °C, 4000 x g) and concentrated media was transferred into smaller Amicons (3 kDa cut-off). Buffer exchange with PBS followed three times (20 min, 4 °C, 16,100 x g). For the proteome analysis, 1 x 10^6 cells/ml were activated identically. Cells were harvested after 8h, 16h and 24h by centrifugation (4 min, 300 x g), washed twice with ice-cold PBS and pellets were stored at - 80°C until further processing.  Metabolically marked glycoproteins were biotinylated over night at 4 °C with 20 μM of either DBCO-Sulfo-Link-Biotin Conjugate or DBCO-PEG4-Desthiobiotin (Jena Bioscience), respectively. Buffer exchange was performed as before to remove free biotin. Enrichment procedures varied slightly for the two reagents.  Enrichment using DBCO-Sulfo-Link-Biotin Conjugate Samples were diluted to 1 ml using 2 % SDS and 2 μM TCEP in PBS. After incubation on High Capacity NeutrAvidin Agarose Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over night at 4 °C, samples were washed on columns (Bio-Rad) with 10 ml of 1 % SDS in PBS, 2 M NaCl in PBS and 0.1 M Glycin (pH 3), respectively. For elution, the resin was transferred into Spin Columns (Life Technologies). Samples were incubated with elution buffer (2 % SDS, 30 mM Biotin, 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea in PBS) for 15 min at RT before being heated at 95 °C for 15 min. After cooling, eluates were collected via centrifugation (5 min; 16,100 x g).  Enrichment using DBCO-PEG4-Desthiobiotin Conjugate Samples were diluted to 1 ml with PBS before incubation on resin as described for biotin. Washing was performed solely with PBS (30 ml). Elution was achieved by displacement with free biotin (30 mM Biotin in PBS). Samples were incubated with elution buffer for one hour at RT before eluates were collected via centrifugation (5 min; 16,100 x g).  Cell lysis (Proteome analysis) Cell pellets were lysed with 0.1% DOC in TBS supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (complete mini, Roche,) and Benzonase (25 U per sample, Merck). Samples were sonicated for 10 min on ice before lysis buffer (30 mM Tris, 7M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.5) was added to solubilize proteins. Samples were centrifuged (10 min; 16,100 x g) to remove insoluble material and supernatant concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad).   Sample Preparation For the proteome analysis, 20 µg per sample were used for tryptic digestion and about 15µg for secretome analyses. For both approaches, the proteins were applied to 18 % Tris-Glycine-Gels (Anamed Elektrophorese, Rodau, Germany) at 100 V for 10-15 min to collect the proteins in a single band for each sample. Proteins were stained with Coomassie and protein bands were dissected. Digestion with trypsin (SERVA) was performed over night at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted using 0.05 % TFA, 50 % ACN (1:1), dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 0.1 % TFA. Peptide concentration was determined via amino acid analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric measurements were perfomed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an upstream connected Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC System (Dionex, Idstein, Germany. 350 ng of peptides were injected and pre-concentration of peptides was carried out on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μl/min with 0.1 % TFA. Peptides were then transferred onto an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm x 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å). There, peptide separation was achieved with a gradient from 5-40 % solvent B over 98 min at 400 nl/min at 60 °C (solvent A: 0.1 % FA, solvent B: 0.1 % FA, 84 % acetonitrile). Acquisition of MS/MS spectra followed in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra in the Orbitrap analyzer were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z and within a mass range of 350-1400 m/z. The spray voltage was 1,600 V (+), and the capillary temperature was 250 °C. For MS/MS measurements the ten most abundant peptide ions (charge state + 2, + 3, + 4) were chosen and fragmented via higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27% and a fixed first mass at 130 m/z and measured in the orbitrap mass analyzer (m/z values initiating MS/MS were set on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 s, 35,000 resolution at 200 m/z).

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative secretome analyses are a high-performance tool for the discovery of physiological and pathophysiological changes in cellular processes. However, serum supplements in cell culture media limit secretome analyses, but serum depletion often leads to cell starvation and consequently biased results. To overcome these limiting factors, we investigated a model of T cell activation (Jurkat cells) and performed an approach for the selective enrichment of secreted proteins from conditioned medium utilizing metabolic marking of newly synthesized glycoproteins. Marked glycoproteins were labeled via bioorthogonal click chemistry and isolated by affinity purification. We assessed two labeling compounds conjugated with either biotin or desthiobiotin and the respective secretome fractions. 356 proteins were quantified using the biotin probe and 463 using desthiobiotin. 59 proteins were found differentially abundant (adjusted p-value &#x2264;0.05, absolute fold change &#x2265;1.5) between inactive and activated T cells using the biotin method and 86 using the desthiobiotin approach, with 31 mutual proteins cross-verified by independent experiments. Moreover, we analyzed the cellular proteome of the same model to demonstrate the benefit of secretome analyses and provide comprehensive data sets of both. 336 proteins (61.3%) were quantified exclusively in the secretome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004280.

### Keywords
T cell model, Quantitative label-free lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Jurkat

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Clinical Proteomics  Medizinisches Proteom-Center  Ruhr-Universität Bochum  Universitätsstraße 150  44801 Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Clinical Proteomics  Medizinisches Proteom-Center  Ruhr-Universität Bochum  Universitätsstraße 150  44801 Bochum


