### Accession
PXD009511

### Title
Protein complex identification in Arabidopsis thaliana root membranes through SEC-MS

### Description
With the information gathered through mass-shift- and correlation-analysis, we predict PPi on a proteomic scale and describe the results in form of a network. This experiment was done with 3 week old Arabidopsis thaliana wt seedlings grown in hydroponic culture (1/2 MS-Medium)

### Sample Protocol
Isolating membrane proteins in native form: slow grinding with Glass/PTFE Potter Elvehjem Tissue Grinder, differential centrifugation for purification of microsomal fraction. Sample preparation for mass spec. analysis: Predigestion of ca. 6µg protein with 1µl Lys-C (0.5µg/µl Wako Chemicals, Neuss), 4-fold dilution with 10mM Tris-HCl (pH8); Digestion with 1µl Sequencing Grade modified Trypsin (0.5µg/µl, Promega) overnight at 25°C Inactivation of Trypsin with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, ca. 0.2% TFA (v/v)) Digested peptides were desalted over C18 Stage-Tips (Rappsilber, 2003)

### Data Protocol
Analysis by LC/MS/MS nanoflow Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific) and a Quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Usage of a 75µmx25cm C18 analytical column (PepMan, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient 4%-64% acetonitrile in 180min. Data Analysis with MaxQuant Version 1.5.3.8

### Publication Abstract
Biological processes consist of several consecutive and interacting steps as, for example, in signal transduction cascades or metabolic reaction chains. These processes are regulated by protein-protein interactions and the formation of larger protein complexes, which also occur within biological membranes. To gain a large-scale overview of complex-forming proteins and the composition of such complexes within the cellular membranes of Arabidopsis roots, we use the combination of size-exclusion chromatography and mass spectrometry. First, we identified complex-forming proteins by a retention shift analysis relative to expected retention times of monomeric proteins during size-exclusion chromatography. In a second step we predicted complex composition through pairwise correlation of elution profiles. As result we present an interactome of 963 proteins within cellular membranes of Arabidopsis roots. Identification of complex-forming proteins was highly robust between two independently grown root proteomes. The protein complex composition derived from pairwise correlations of coeluting proteins reproducibly identified stable protein complexes (ribosomes, proteasome, mitochondrial respiratory chain supercomplexes) but showed higher variance between replicates regarding transient interactions (e.g., interactions with kinases) within membrane protein complexes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Root, Size exclution chromatography, Membrane

### Affiliations
Universität Hohenheim, Institut für Pflanzenphysiologie, Abteilung Systembiologie der Pflanze
Universität Hohenheim Institut für Pflanzenphysiologie 260 Abteilung Systembiologie der Pflanze 260b

### Submitter
Max Gilbert

### Lab Head
Dr Waltraud Schulze
Universität Hohenheim Institut für Pflanzenphysiologie 260 Abteilung Systembiologie der Pflanze 260b


