### Accession
PXD038161

### Title
Ureter proteomics analysis following stent placement and removal in a porcine model

### Description
Symptoms including pain and discomfort commonly present during ureteral stenting is not well understood.  We investigated global changes in ureters at the transcriptional, translational, and functional levels while stents are indwelling and following removal and recovery using a porcine model. Polaris stents (6Fr, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) were cystoscopically inserted with placement confirmed using fluoroscopy.  For proteomics samples, ureters were stented for 14 days and recovered for 7 days and each pig was stented unilaterally so that the contralateral unstented kidney and ureter served as an internal control.

### Sample Protocol
Porcine ureteral specimens (~100mg) were minced, taken up in 2% SDS, 0.1% NP40, 0.1% Triton X100, 10mM DTT, homogenized (bead mill), heated to 65°C for 30min, alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30min and the resulting protein extract centrifuged 5min at 20000g.  6 volumes ice cold acetone were added to aliquots of extract and kept at -20°C overnight.  Precipitated protein was sedimented (10min, 20000g) and pellet washed with 0.2ml acidified 1/6 water/acetone. The residue was taken up in 50mM HEPES, pH8, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was then added (0.4% final) and the sample centrifuged 5 minutes at 20000g.   A 50mg Waters C18 SepPak was used for sample clean up (1ml acetonitrile/0.1% TFA followed by 1ml water/0.1% TFA conditioning; load sample; 1ml water/0.1% FA wash; 1ml 70% acetonitrile/0.1% FA elution), the eluate dried using a CentriVap at 30°C and the residue dissolved in 50µl 50mM HEPES pH8.  Nanodrop (OD260) was used for protein/peptide quantification.  A common sample comprised of an aliquot from all samples was prepared for inclusion with each TMT set.  35µg of each sample was then used for the subsequent 10plex TMT labeling done according to vendor specifications and combined into their designated sets of the predetermined layout.  Each of the four pooled labeled sample sets were again put through SPE after which 120μg underwent high pH fractionation using a Waters Acquity UPLC coupled with an Acquity Photodiode Array detector (1mm BEH C18 column: 2mM ammonium formate pH 10 in both the water and acetonitrile buffers; 0-2min, 2%; 2-30min, 2-25%, 30-35min, 25-40%; 35-40min, 40-90%; 40-42min, 90-98%; 42-44min, 98%; 44-44.5, 98-2% at a flow rate of 0.1ml/min, total run time 50min.  Fractions were collected every minute in the interval from 3-43minutes and concatenated as follows: F1 (5, 17, 29); F2 (6, 18, 30); F3 (7, 19, 31) etc with 1-4 added to F9-12 respectively for a total of 12 fractions.  The concatenated samples were dried and redissolved in 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of 1µg/ml. LCMS was with an EasyNano1200/Lumos using a Thermo ES800 column, 2µg loading and mobile phase A (water/0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 0.4µl/min as follows: 2%B, 0-2min; 2-30%B, 2-96min; 30-40% B, 96-113min; 40-95% B, 113-114min; 95%B 114-120min at 50 deg C. Data acquisition (control software version 3.1.2412.25) was carried out using a data-dependent method with Synchronous Precursor Detection (SPS). Spray voltage 1900V; transfer tube 325°C. Survey scans (MS1) resolution of 120K (375 – 1500 m/z); RF lens 30; an AGC target of 4e5; max inject time 50ms, profile mode; intensity threshold 5e3; charge states 2-6; dynamic exclusion 70 seconds/10ppm with dependent scans set on single charge state per precursor.  For MS2 scans charge state 2, quadrupole isolation was used with a 1.2m/z window, CID activation with fixed 35% collision energy, 10 msec activation time and activation Q of 0.25 using the ion trap in turbo mode, scan range auto, AGC target 1e4 and max inject time 50 msec in centroid mode; similar parameters were used for charge state 3 and 4-6 except quadrupole isolation windows were 0.7 and 0.5 respectfully.  For charge state 2, Precursor Selection range was m/z 400-1200, exclusion mass widths were both 25ppm, and isobaric tag loss exclusion set to TMT.  For charge state 3 and 4-6 precursor selection ranges were 100-500 and 50-4000 respectfully with precursor ion exclusions of 25ppm and m/z 0.5.  For all charge states, MS3 was with SPS, n=10, isolation window m/z 2, with HCD activation 65%, Orbitrap detection at 50K resolution, scan range 100-500 and AGC target 1e5 and maximum injection time 105msec, centroid mode with parallelizable time off.  

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with Protein Discoverer 2.2.0.388. Spectrum files were recalibrated using 20ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6Da fragment tolerance with static peptide N-terminus and K TMT 6plex modification in addition to C carbamidomethyl modification. Searches were carried out using Sequest HT against the Sus Scrofa SwissProt TaxID=9823 (v2017-10-25) database with trypsin cleavage, maximum missed cleavage 2, minimum peptide length 5, precursor mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6Da with K,M,P oxidation and K TMT6plex as permitted peptide dynamic modifications, N terminal acetyl as dymanic protein modification, and with static carbamidomethyl C and peptide N terminus TMT6plex modifications.  Decoy database strict and relaxed FDR targets were 0.01 and 0.05 based on q value.  Unique+Razor peptides were selected and a co-isolation threshold of 75% with S/N cutoff of 10 used with total peptide amount normalization mode.  Ratios were versus the pooled arm (TMT131) in each set with quan roll up based on summed abundance with a maximum allowable fold change of 100 and no missing value imputation and p-values calculated using the background based ANOVA test.  Sample arms were grouped into stented vs stented/recovered proximal ureter and renal pelvis along with corresponding non-stented controls for each group.  Output was filtered for master protein and exported to Excel for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
To explore the pathways and mechanisms driving inflammation and fibrosis in stented ureters. In total, six healthy female pigs underwent cystoscopic unilateral ureteral stent insertion (6 Fr). After 14&#xa0;days indwelling time, ureteral tissue was harvested in three pigs, while the remaining three pigs had their stents removed, and were recovered for 7&#xa0;days. Three separate pigs served as controls. Tissue from stented and contralateral ureters was analysed histologically to evaluate tissue remodelling and classify the degree of inflammation and fibrosis, while genome, proteome and immunohistochemistry analysis was performed to assess changes at the transcriptional and translational levels. Finally, immunofluorescence was used to characterize the cell composition of the immune response and pathways involved in inflammation and fibrosis. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism and RStudio for Welch ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis and Dunnett's T3 multiple comparison test. Stents cause significant inflammation and fibrosis of ureters. Gene set enrichment analysis confirmed fibrotic changes and tissue proliferation and suggests that epithelial-mesenchymal transition is a driver of fibrosis. Moreover, IL-6/JAK/STAT and TNF&#x3b1; via NF-&#x3ba;B signalling might contribute to chronic inflammation promoting a profibrotic environment. Immunostaining confirmed epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the urothelium and NF-&#x3ba;B expression in ureters stented for 14&#xa0;days. Tissue alterations do not fully recover after 7&#xa0;days. Histological evaluation showed that contralateral, unstented ureters are affected by mild inflammation. Our study showed that stenting has a significant impact on the ureter. Chronic inflammation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition are drivers of fibrosis, potentially impairing ureteral functionality in the long term. Furthermore, we observed mild inflammation in contralateral, unstented ureters.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Porcine, Proteomics, Tmt, Ureter, Stent

### Affiliations
Vancouver Prostate Centre
Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Hans Adomat

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Lange
Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia


