### Accession
PXD036160

### Title
Differential virulence of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans serotypes explained by exoproteome heterogeneity

### Description
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) is a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen associated with periodontitis and non-oral diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer´s disease. Aa isolates with the serotypes a, b and c are globally most prevalent. Importantly, isolates displaying these serotypes have different clinical presentations. While serotype b isolates are predominant in severe periodontitis, serotypes a and c are generally encountered in mild periodontitis or healthy individuals. It was so far not known how these differences are reflected in the overall secretion of virulence factors. Therefore, this study was aimed at a comparative analysis of exoproteomes from different clinical Aa isolates with serotypes a, b or c by mass spectrometry, and a subsequent correlation of the recorded exoproteome profiles with virulence. Overall, we identified 425 extracellular proteins. Significant differences in the exoproteome composition of isolates with different serotypes were observed in terms of protein identification and abundance. In particular, serotype a isolates presented more extracellular proteins than serotype b or c isolates. These differences are mirrored in their virulence in infection models based on human salivary gland epithelial cells and neutrophils. Remarkably, serotype a isolates displayed stronger adhesive capabilities and induced more lysis of epithelial cells and neutrophils than serotype b or c isolates. Conversely, serotype c isolates showed relatively low leukotoxicity, while provoking NETosis to similar extents as serotype a and b isolates. Altogether, we conclude that the differential virulence presentation by Aa isolates with the dominant serotypes a, b or c can be explained by their exoproteome heterogeneity.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial isolates and cultivation The Aa isolates 4R, 5R, 23R, 30R and 31R and the reference strain ATCC 29522 with serotype b were identified in a collection of 27 Aa isolates from Dutch periodontitis patients as previously described [Fu, Y., et al., Connections between Exoproteome Heterogeneity and Virulence in the Oral Pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. mSystems, 2022: p. e0025422]. To identify representative Aa isolates with the serotypes a and c, our collection of Aa isolates from Dutch periodontitis patients was screened by PCR using serotype a or c-specific primers [Kawamoto, D., et al., Genetic diversity and toxic activity of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans isolates. Oral Microbiol Immunol, 2009. 24(6): p. 493-501.]. In brief, the primers used to identify serotype a isolates were 5’- TGGGTCATGGGAGGTACTCC- 3’ and 5’- GCTAGGAACAAAGCAGCATC- 3’, and the primers to identify serotype c isolates were 5’-GAAACCACTTCTATTTCTCC-3’ and 5’-ARAAYTTYTCWTCGGGAATG-3’. PCR was performed using the following conditions: initial denaturation at 94°C for 5 min; amplification by 30 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, 72°C for 30 s; and final extension at 72°C for 5 min. The sequenced Aa isolates 14R (serotype a) and 1R (serotype c) were used as controls. The size of the serotype a and c-specific amplified DNA fragments thus obtained was 293 bp and 268 bp, respectively (Supplementary Figure S1). The serotype a isolates 3R, 7R, 14R, 16R and 25R, and the serotype c isolates 2R, 8R, 9R, 20R and 27R were selected for further analyses. Furthermore, the Aa strain ATCC 29522, which belongs to the serotype b and displays an S colony phenotype was used as a reference strain. Brain heart infusion (BHI) agar (OXOID, UK) and broth (OXOID, UK) supplemented with 5% L-cysteine, 5 mg/L hemin and 1 mg/L menadione were used for Aa cultivation. To collect secreted proteins, the different Aa isolates were cultured in BHI broth until stationary phase at 5% CO2, 37°C. To ensure the homogeneity of cultures with Aa bacteria with the R phenotype, the culture media were always inoculated from frozen glycerol stocks that were kept at -80°C.  Aa isolates were cultured in BHI broth for 40 h and, subsequently, cells were separated from the growth medium by centrifugation. Subsequently, extracellular proteins in the growth medium fraction were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 4°C. The precipitated proteins were then collected by centrifugation (13,200 rpm), washed with pure acetone, dried at 60°C, and resuspended in 6 M urea, 0.1 M Hepes and 0.25 M NaCl. Subsequently, the concentration of extracellular proteins was measured with the PierceTM bichinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Thermofisher Scientific, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The extracellular proteins of each investigated Aa isolate were isolated from three independent replicate cultures.  Extracellular proteins were prepared for MS/MS analyses as previously described [Bonn, F., et al., Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal Chem, 2014. 86(15): p. 7421-7]. In brief, for each Aa isolate, a total amount of 37.5 μg of extracellular proteins was separated on 10% NuPAGE gels with a separation distance of 1 cm. Subsequently, the gel was stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain. The different lanes with separated proteins were excised from the gel and then sliced into smaller pieces that were transferred to low-binding tubes. Once the gel pieces were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge, a solution of 0.02 μg/mL trypsin (Promega, USA) was added and the proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were eluted in water using an ultrasonic bath. The supernatant containing peptides was then transferred into a fresh vial and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Lastly, the dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). In particular, the tryptic peptides were loaded with a self-packed analytical column (OD 360µm, length 20cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). Peptides were then eluted using a binary non-linear gradient of 5-99% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 151 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and subjected to electrospray ionization-based MS. A full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the five most abundant precursor ions. MS/MS experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap.  A non-redundant database for protein identifications was created by RAST annotation of the hybrid-assembled whole-genome sequences of the 15 selected Aa isolates with serotypes a, b or c. Importantly, the resulting non-redundant database with 11156 protein sequences and Uniprot identifiers also included homologous proteins with only one amino acid difference. Subsequently, the database was supplemented with protein sequences of Bos taurus, retrieved from Uniprot on 05 December 2019 (Proteome ID 9913), as well as common laboratory contaminants and a reverse entry for every forward entry, resulting in a total of 115,316 entries . Database searching was then performed with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, USA) by applying fully specific tryptic cleavage (KR/P) with up to two missed cleavages and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Validation of the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed using Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exhibited at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3, and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Lastly, protein identifications were accepted if at least two unique peptides were identified in two out of three replicates with the above criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (<i>Aa</i>) is a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen associated with periodontitis and nonoral diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer&#xb4;s disease. <i>Aa</i> isolates with the serotypes a, b, and c are globally most prevalent. Importantly, isolates displaying these serotypes have different clinical presentations. While serotype b isolates are predominant in severe periodontitis, serotypes a and c are generally encountered in mild periodontitis or healthy individuals. It is currently unknown how these differences are reflected in the overall secretion of virulence factors. Therefore, this study was aimed at a comparative analysis of exoproteomes from different clinical <i>Aa</i> isolates with serotypes a, b, or c by mass spectrometry, and a subsequent correlation of the recorded exoproteome profiles with virulence. Overall, we identified 425 extracellular proteins. Significant differences in the exoproteome composition of isolates with different serotypes were observed in terms of protein identification and abundance. In particular, serotype a isolates presented more extracellular proteins than serotype b or c isolates. These differences are mirrored in their virulence in infection models based on human salivary gland epithelial cells and neutrophils. Remarkably, serotype a isolates displayed stronger adhesive capabilities and induced more lysis of epithelial cells and neutrophils than serotype b or c isolates. Conversely, serotype c isolates showed relatively low leukotoxicity, while provoking NETosis to similar extents as serotype a and b isolates. Altogether, we conclude that the differential virulence presentation by <i>Aa</i> isolates with the dominant serotypes a, b, or c can be explained by their exoproteome heterogeneity. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease that causes progressive destruction of alveolar bone and supporting tissues around the teeth, ultimately resulting in tooth loss. The bacterium Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (<i>Aa</i>) is a prevalent causative agent of periodontitis, but this oral pathogen is also associated with serious extraoral diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer's disease. Clinical <i>Aa</i> isolates are usually distinguished by serotyping, because of known serotype-specific differences in virulence. <i>Aa</i> with serotype b is associated with aggressive forms of periodontitis, while isolates with serotypes a or c are usually encountered in cases of mild periodontitis or healthy individuals. The molecular basis for these differences in virulence was so far unknown. In the present study, we pinpoint serotype-specific differences in virulence factor production by clinical <i>Aa</i> isolates. We consider these findings important, because they provide new leads for future preventive or therapeutic approaches to fight periodontitis and associated morbidities.

### Keywords
Infection, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Virulence, Exoproteome, Serotype

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany


