### Accession
PXD019079

### Title
Quantitative proteome fin(ger)prints of propylthiouracil interference with the thyroid system in zebrafish embryos as 3R alternative in environmental hazard assessment

### Description
Endocrine disruption (ED) can trigger far-reaching effects on environmental populations, justifying a refusal of market approval for chemicals with ED properties. For the assessment of ED effects on the thyroid system, regulatory decisions mostly rely on amphibian studies. Here we present a rapid and reproducible data dependent proteomics approach for identifying comprehensive molecular signatures of interference with the thyroid system in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos as an alternative to animal testing. For this, we have analysed the thyroid peroxidase inhibitor 6-propyl-2-thiouracil (6-PTU) as model substances for anti-thyroidal activity in a modified zebrafish embryo toxicity test (zFET). These fingerprints allow for a definition of solid biomarkers as tools in screening approaches and for integration in chronic toxicity studies for suspect substances, such as the fish early life-stage test (OECD TG 210).

### Sample Protocol
6-Propyl-2-thiouracil (6PTU, CAS: 51-52-5) was tested as a model substance for thyroidal inducing activity. In a modified version of the zebrafish embryo toxicity test (OECD 236), 15 fertilized eggs were exposed to two different sub lethal concentrations of T3 for 96 hours under semi-static conditions. The test was performed in triplicate. This comprised of a low exposure (LE), high exposure (HE) and a negative control (NC) group. At 96 hours post fertilization (hpf), 10 larvae were randomly picked for each sample and pooled for RNA and protein extraction with NucleoSpin RNA/Protein kit (Macherey-Nagel). Digested proteins were labelled with isobaric TMT tags using 3 of a 6-plex TMT kit (ThermoFisherScientific), following the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative proteomic data were acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were loaded onto a C18 µPAC-trap column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) for 3mins at a flow rate of 1 µL/min. After trapping, the TMT labelled peptides were eluted onto a 50 cm long μPAC™ C18 separation column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) and separated by elution using a linear gradient from 1 to 97.5 % B in 150 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile A= 0.1 % FA in water, mobile B= 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN). The separated peptides were ionized by electrospray (nanospray ion source, ThermoFisher Scientific) while applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275 °C. The MS survey scans were acquired at 375-1500 m/z range, using a resolving power of 70,000 at 200 m/z for the MS and 35,000 for MS2 scans. Precursor ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 8+ and intensity threshold above 2×104 were sampled. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds within a 10-ppm window. The automatic gain control and maximum injection time for MS2 spectra were set at 1.0 × 105 and 250, respectively. MS calibration was performed using the LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The LC–MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) against the reference proteome of zebrafish, obtained from Ensembl database (downloaded on December 23rd 2019 with 42,306 target sequences). A precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm and the integration of fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were applied in the database search. Cysteine carbamidomethyl, peptide N-terminus TMT6plex and lysine TMT6plex were set as static modifications, whereas the acetylation of protein N-terminal and the oxidation of methionine were included as variable  modifications. Percolator was applied with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % to filter the peptide spectrum matches. Protein significance was analyzed using MSstatsTMT package (version 1.5.4) in R statistical software (Choi et al., 2014). The Proteome Discoverer PSM output file were utilized for this analysis. Only unique peptides with no importation of missing values were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Endocrine disruption (ED) can trigger far-reaching effects on environmental populations, justifying a refusal of market approval for chemicals with ED properties. For the hazard assessment of ED effects on the thyroid system, regulatory decisions mostly rely on amphibian studies. Here, we used transcriptomics and proteomics for identifying molecular signatures of interference with thyroid hormone signaling preceding physiological effects in zebrafish embryos. For this, we analyzed the thyroid hormone 3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T3) and the thyroid peroxidase inhibitor 6-propyl-2-thiouracil (6-PTU) as model substances for increased and repressed thyroid hormone signaling in a modified zebrafish embryo toxicity test. We identified consistent gene expression fingerprints for both modes-of-action (MoA) at sublethal test concentrations. T3 and 6-PTU both significantly target the expression of genes involved in muscle contraction and functioning in an opposing fashion, allowing for a mechanistic refinement of key event relationships in thyroid-related adverse outcome pathways in fish. Furthermore, our fingerprints identify biomarker candidates for thyroid disruption hazard screening approaches. Perspectively, our findings will promote the AOP-based development of in vitro assays for thyroidal ED assessment, which in the long term will contribute to a reduction of regulatory animal tests.

### Keywords
Ecotoxicological testing, Endocrine disruption, Lc-ms/ms, Thyroid hormone, Zebrafish embryo

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer IME
Fraunhofer Attract Eco’n’OMICs, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Auf dem Aberg 1, 57392 Schmallenberg.

### Submitter
Steve Ayobahan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sebastian Eilebrecht
Fraunhofer Attract Eco’n’OMICs, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Auf dem Aberg 1, 57392 Schmallenberg.


