### Accession
PXD014228

### Title
Effects of N-acetylcysteine on the neurotoxicity induced by acute exposure to acrylamide

### Description
In this study, we used the adult zebrafish model of ACR acute neurotoxicity for determining the suitability of NAC to protect the brain against ACR toxicity. First, the potential protective effects of NAC on the ACR neurotoxicity were evaluated at the behavioral and molecular (transcriptome and proteome) levels. Then, in order to understand the mild to negligible protective effect of NAC, the ability of this drug to cross BBB by passive diffusion was evaluated by different approaches. Whereas the BBB parallel artificial membrane permeability assay (BBB-PAMPA) was used to determine the ability of NAC to cross BBB-like phospholipid membranes by passive diffusion, the determination of the NAC content in the brain provides direct evidences of the BBB permeability in vivo. Finally, we evaluated the ability of drug to recover the depleted GSx stores and to scavenge ACR in the brain of ACR-exposed fish.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fractions were extracted from control and CPO exposed larvae using Trizol Reagent, precipitated by 80% acetone and dried for the proteomicsstudy. Proteins were extracted, proteolyzed and analysed by capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (μLC-MS/MS)using Q Exactive plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
he mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org)(Cox and Mann 2008) fitted with the Andromeda search engine searching against the Danio rerio Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Two essential key events in acrylamide (ACR) acute neurotoxicity are the formation of adducts with nucleophilic sulfhydryl groups on cysteine residues of selected proteins in the synaptic terminals and the depletion of the glutathione (GSx) stores in neural tissue. The use of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) has been recently proposed as a potential antidote against ACR neurotoxicity, as this chemical is not only a well-known precursor of the reduced form of glutathione (GSH), but also is an scavenger of soft electrophiles such as ACR. In this study, the suitability of 0.3 and 0.75&#x2009;mM NAC to protect against the neurotoxic effect of 0.75&#x2009;mM ACR has been tested in vivo in adult zebrafish. NAC provided only a mild to negligible protection against the changes induced by ACR in the motor function, behavior, transcriptome and proteome. The permeability of NAC to cross blood-brain barrier (BBB) was assessed, as well as the ACR-scavenging activity and the gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase (&#x3b3;-GCL) and acylase I activities. The results show that ACR not only depletes GSx levels but also inhibits it synthesis from NAC/cysteine, having a dramatic effect over the glutathione system. Moreover, results indicate a very low NAC uptake to the brain, probably by a combination of low BBB permeability and high deacylation of NAC during the intestinal absorption. These results strongly suggest that the use of NAC is not indicated in ACR acute neurotoxicity treatment.

### Keywords
Acrylamide, Neurotoxicity, Acetylcysteine, Danio

### Affiliations
Technion
aInstitute for Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC). Jordi Girona, 18. 08034 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Demetrio Raldua Perez
aInstitute for Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC). Jordi Girona, 18. 08034 Barcelona, Spain


