### Accession
PXD028933

### Title
Competitive binding of E3 ligases TRIM26 and WWP2 controls SOX2 in glioblastoma

### Description
The pluripotency transcription   factor SOX2   is   essential   for   the   maintenance   of glioblastoma stem cells (GSC), which drive tumor growth and treatment resistance.To understand how SOX2 is regulated in GSCs, we utilized a proteomic approach and identified the  E3  ubiquitin  ligase TRIM26 as  a  direct  SOX2-interacting  protein.  Unexpectedly,  we found TRIM26  depletion  decreased  SOX2  protein  levels  and  increased  SOX2  polyubiquitination  in patient-derived  GSCs,  suggesting  TRIM26  promotes  SOX2  protein  stability.  Accordingly, TRIM26  knockdown  reduced  SOX2  transcriptional  activity, self-renewal  capacity,  and in  vivo tumorigenicity in  multiple  GSC  lines.  Mechanistically,  we  found  TRIM26,  via  its  C-terminal PRYSPRY  domain,  but  independent  of  its  RING  domain,  stabilizes  SOX2  protein  by  directly inhibiting the interaction of SOX2 with WWP2, which we identify as a bona fide SOX2 E3 ligase in GSCs. Our work identifies E3 ligase competition as a critical mechanism of SOX2 regulation, with functional consequences for GSC identity and maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations  of  endogenous  human  SOX2  were  performed  with  anti-SOX2 antibodies  or  (or  goat  IgG  control)  using  1%  NP-40  lysates  from  GSC  line  B36.  Immune complexes were pulled down with protein G sepharose beads, and beads were washed 7 times with lysis buffer. Immunoprecipitates were boiled in 1X Laemmli buffer and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Following  Commassie  brilliant  blue  staining,  gel  lanes  were  excised,  avoiding  heavy  and  light chain bands.  LC-MS/MS was then performed (Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School). Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm^3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a  modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure38.  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated  with  acetonitrile  for  10  min.  followed  by  removal  of  acetonitrile.    Pieces  were  then completely  dried  in  a  speed-vac.    Rehydration  of  the  gel  pieces  was  with  50  mM  ammonium bicarbonate   solution   containing   12.5   ng/μl   modified   sequencing-grade   trypsin   (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a  37ºC  room  overnight.    Peptides  were  later  extracted  by  removing  the  ammonium  bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.  On theday of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 -10 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 μm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip 39.  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sox2, E3 ligase, Brain cancer, Glioblastoma, Trim26, Wwp2

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis
Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine

### Submitter
Albert Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Albert H. Kim
Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine


