### Accession
PXD025022

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the cellular effects of AHR activation by microbial tryptophan catabolites in endotoxin-activated human macrophages

### Description
Sensing of microbial tryptophan catabolites by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) plays a pivotal role in host-microbiome homeostasis by modulating the host immune response. Thereby the involved cellular processes triggered by the metabolites are largely unknown. We analyzed proteomic changes in macrophages trough 24h after treatment with the tryptophan metabolites indole-3-acetic acid (I3AA) or indole-3-aldehyde (IAld), as well as the prototypic AhR-ligand Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) in the absence and presence of LPS to identify affected processes and pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis 20µg protein per sample were digested and labeled with tandem mass tags as described previously. In short, the volume of protein containing lysate was adjusted to 100µl with 100mM TEAB. Proteins were reduced with 9.5mM TCEP for 1 h at 55 °C, followed by alkylation with 17.05mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were acidified with formic acid and 120µl ACN were added to reach an organic content higher than 50% (v/v). Proteins were loaded on 30µg SpeedBead™ Magnetic Carboxylate modified particles. After an incubation time of 8min the samples were washed twice with 200µl 70% (v/v) EtOH and once with 200µl ACN. To perform the protein cleavage Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin in 100mM TEAB was used in an enzyme:protein ratio of  1:50 over night at 37°C. The samples peptides were labeled with 109µg TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent in ACN for 1h. The reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. ACN was added to reach ≥ 95 % (v/v) organic content facilitating peptide binding to the beads. The differentially labeled samples of one biological replicate were combined. Bead bound peptides were cleaned up by washing with ACN two times. The peptides were eluted in two steps, first with 87 % (v/v) ACN in 10 mM ammonium formiate (pH 10), then with 2 % (v/v) DMSO, resulting in two fractions per sample. Fractions were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid directly before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of samples was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, online coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer by a chip-based electrospray ionization source. Peptides (20µg) were trapped and desalinated on a C18 pre-column, and subsequently separated on a C18 analytical column. A bipartite linear 55 min gradient starting from 4 % eluent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN) in eluent A (0.1 % FA in water) to 55 % eluent B via 30 % eluent B after 47.5 min was used. The flow rate was 0.3µl/min. After each sample, the column was flushed to 99% eluent B and reconstituted to starting conditions. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner. For MS1 scans, the following parameters were set: m/z range 350-1550, maximum injection time = 120 ms, AGC = 3x106, R = 120 000. The top 15 most abundant ions were selected for MS2 acquisition using the following parameters: isolation window of 1.4 m/z, maximum injection time 120 ms, AGC = 2x105, NCE = 28, R = 60 000, m/z range 200-2000. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were examined with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.2.0.388 and database search was performed against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens RefSet (03/2019, 73947 entries). The following search parameters were used; Maximum missed cleavages = 2, minimal peptide length = 6 amino acids, minimum number of peptide sequences = 2, first search peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, second search peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, third search peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, FTMS MS/MS match tolerance = 20 ppm. For the first search carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT labeling at Lys was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and and TMT labeling at the N-terminus set as variable modifications. For the second search deamidation of Asn and Gln, carbamyliation, TMT labeling and acetylation of the N-terminus, Gln -> pyro-Glu were additionaly set as dynamic modifications. TMT labeling of th N-terminus was set as dynamic modifications in the third analysis. Peptides, proteins, and sites were filtered by a target-decoy approach to an FDR ≤ 0.01 using a reversed decoy database. As quantification method TMT 10plex was used.

### Publication Abstract
Sensing microbial tryptophan catabolites by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) plays a pivotal role in host-microbiome homeostasis by modulating the host immune response. Nevertheless, the involved cellular processes triggered by the metabolites are mainly unknown. Here, we analyzed proteomic changes in macrophages after treatment with the tryptophan metabolites indole-3-acetic acid (I3AA) or indole-3-aldehyde (IAld), as well as the prototypic exogenous AhR-ligand benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) in the absence and presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to identify affected cellular processes and pathways. The AhR-ligands regulated metabolic and immunologic processes in dependency of LPS co-stimulation. All investigated ligands time-dependently enhanced fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation. Differences due to the combination with LPS were observed for all three ligands. Additionally, oxidative phosphorylation was significantly increased by IAld and I3AA in a time and LPS-dependent manner. Immunoregulatory processes were affected in distinct ways. While BaP and I3AA up-regulated IL-8 signaling, IL-6 signaling was decreased by IAld. BaP decreased the inflammasome pathway. Thus, AhR-ligand-dependent regulations were identified, which may modulate the response of macrophages to bacterial infections, but also the commensal microbiota through changes in immune cell signaling and metabolic pathways that may also alter functionality. These findings highlight the relevance of AhR for maintaining microbial homeostasis and, consequently, host health.

### Keywords
Tryptophan catabolites, Indole-3-aldehyde, Proteomics, Human macrophages, Lc-ms/ms, Indole-3-acetic acide, Tmt, Benzo[a]pyrene, Ahr, Metabolism, Lipopolysaccharides

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ
Leipzig, Germany
Department of Molecular Systems Biology; Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Henning Großkopf

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology; Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


