### Accession
PXD046030

### Title
Structural Similarities on Hymenoptera Allergenic Dipeptidyl Peptidases IV (DPPIVs). Overall comparison also including a new DPPIV sequence from Vespa velutina.

### Description
(1)Background: Dipeptidyl Peptidases IV (DPPIVs), present in many organisms, are minor components in the venoms of Hymenoptera, where they have been shown as cross-reactive allergenic molecules. Since the structure of homologous DPPIVs is well characterized, we explain which regions have higher similarity among these proteins and present a comparison including a new Vespa velutina DPPIV sequence. Moreover, two cases of sensitization to DPPIV in wasps- and honeybees-sensitized patients are presented. (2) Methods: Proteomic analyses have been performed on the venom of the Asian Hornet V.velutina, in order to demonstrate the sequence of its DPPIV (putative allergen Vesp v 3). Comparison by alignments and analysis of the three-dimensional structure allow to show a region with higher similarity among Hymenoptera DPPIVs. Besides, ImmunoCAP™ determinations (including specific inhibition experiments), as well as IgE-immunoblotting, demonstrate the presence of Api m 5 and Ves v 3. (3) Results and conclusions: The data presented explain that the similarities among Hymenoptera DPPIVs are most probably localized at the C-terminal region of these enzymes. The clinical cases analyzed demonstrate the presence of this minor component in the preparations used in venom immunotherapy. Moreover, a new DPPIV sequence is published (Accession Number P0DRB8).

### Sample Protocol
5.1. Venom Collection The Vespa velutina (VV) nest was collected in Galicia (NW Spain) during the winter of 2023 and was stored at -20º C until used in the study. After sex and female caste differentiation based on external morphological characteristics, the venom sac was extracted from frozen insects by pulling the stinging apparatus from the wasp abdomen with forceps. The venom sac of each wasp was dissected form the posterior apparatus of 32 workers; eight venom sacs were then pooled, resulting in a total of four pooled samples, representing four biological replicates (VV 1 to 4). The pooled samples were then eluted it through a Spin-X 0.45 cellulose acetate centrifuge filter (Corning Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, USA) and the residual tissue from the venom sac was removed by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 10 minutes. The Spin-X was then washed with 250 l PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 minutes. The eluted total venom protein was transferred to a new tube and stored at -20 ºC. Total venom proteins were quantified by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). 5.2. Mass Spectrometric Analysis The tryptic digestion for mass spectrometry was performed with 24 g protein concentrated in a SDS-PAGE single band (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., 2011; Perez-Hernandez et al., 2013), followed by manual digestion as describe in (Shevchenko et al., 1996), and finally, the peptides extracted were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for further analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer 6600+ (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled to a Ekspert nLC425 micro-liquid chromatography (LC) system (Eksigen, Dublin, CA, USA). The ProteinPilot software v.5.0.1. (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) was used for the protein and peptide identification. A customizer database containing Vespa + Vespa velutina + Apis mellifera + poison + toxins UniProtKB databases (available online: https://www.uniprot.org/ (accessed on February 2, 2023) was used, specifying iodoacetamide as alkylation of the cystines and digestion by trypsin. A pool was created using 3 l of the peptides extracted of each individual sample (VV 1-4). The pool was chromatographed for a total time of 40 min and analyzed using a with a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method in positive ion mode to build the MS/MS spectral libraries, as previously described (Peñas-Martínez et al., 2021; Camino et al., 2022; Chantada-Vázquez et al., 2022a). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for both peptides and proteins with a confidence level above 99% (Shilov et al., 2007).  The MS/MS spectra, the ion data, and the retention time of the identified peptides and proteins were used to generate the spectral library that was used to create the spectral window acquisition used in the SWATH-MS method. Subsequently, 4 l from each sample were analyzed individually. The SWATH-MS method (DIA_data-independent acquisition) is based on the repetition of a cycle consisting of the acquisition of 100 TOF MS/MS scans or time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF MS/M) windows. The width of the variable windows was optimized for each set of samples according to the ion density found in the previous DDA by means of the SWATH variable window calculator (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) spreadsheet.

### Data Protocol
Skyline v.3.7 was used to process the DDA and DIA data files. The new DDPIV sequence was used to generate the best monoisotopic peak of each precursor ion. This peak was extracted using the software´s default settings for MS1 quantification. In addition, the best transitions for MS2 of each precursor were also selected in the DIA files. After importing the raw data into the Skyline software, the data files were queried against the protein sequence; peptide and fragment signals were manually checked to ensure the correct peak assignment and peak boundaries. Those peptides with and aa different from the Vespa basalis sequence were selected to better define and confirm the new peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Dipeptidyl Peptidases IV (DPPIVs), present in many organisms, are minor components in the venoms of Hymenoptera, where they have been identified as cross-reactive allergenic molecules. Considering that the structure of homologous DPPIVs is well characterized, we aimed to explain which regions have higher similarity among these proteins and present a comparison among them, including a new <i>Vespa velutina</i> DPPIV sequence. Moreover, two cases of sensitization to DPPIVs in wasp- and honeybee-sensitized patients are presented. (2) Methods: Proteomic analyses have been performed on the venom of the Asian hornet <i>Vespa velutina</i> to demonstrate the sequence of its DPPIV (allergen named Vesp v 3, with sequence accession number P0DRB8, and with the proteomic data available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD046030). A comparison performed through their alignments and analysis of the three-dimensional structure showed a region with higher similarity among Hymenoptera DPPIVs. Additionally, ImmunoCAP&#x2122; determinations (including specific inhibition experiments), as well as IgE immunoblotting, are performed to demonstrate the allergenicity of Api m 5 and Ves v 3. (3) Results and Conclusions: The data presented demonstrate that the similarities among Hymenoptera DPPIVs are most likely localized at the C-terminal region of these enzymes. In addition, a higher similarity of the <i>Vespa</i>/<i>Vespula</i> DPPIVs is shown. The clinical cases analyzed demonstrated the allergenicity of Api m 5 and Ves v 3 in the sera of the allergic patients, as well as the presence of this minor component in the preparations used in venom immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Dppiv vespa velutina allergen sequence cross-reactivity

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Fundacion Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Belen Bravo Lopez
Fundacion Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de santiago de Compostela


