### Accession
PXD012344

### Title
Maize Root system iTRAQ result under drought stress

### Description
In order to clarify the molecular mechanisms of drought tolerance between different maize (Zea mays L.) varieties at the protein level, iTRAQ (the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) quantitative proteomics were used for the comparative analysis of protein expression in the seedling roots of the drought-tolerant Chang 7-2 and drought-sensitive TS141 maize varieties under 20% PEG 6000 (polyethylene glycol 6000)-simulated drought stress. A total of 7723 proteins were identified using iTRAQ in the maize seedling roots. We detected 39371 peptides and 30148 unique peptides. The identified protein molecular mass was mainly distributed between 10–60 kDa. COG analysis divided these proteins into 24 categories, among which general function prediction contained the largest number of proteins (19.1%), followed by posttranslational modification, protein turnover, and chaperones (10.52%). In the identified differentially expressed proteins, 1552 of which were significantly differentially expressed. Of these, 1249 were differentially expressed in Chang 7-2 following drought stress, 577 of which were up-regulated and 672 were down-regulated. Four hundred and twenty five differentially expressed proteins were identified in TS141, 249 of which were up-regulated and 176 were down-regulated. Of these proteins, 32 demonstrated opposite expression levels in the two varieties, and there were 56 up-regulated proteins that were common between the two varieties. Comparing the Chang 7-2 treatment group and control group, the DEPS in the cellular component category were mainly enriched in cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicles, cytoplasmic vesicles, membrane-bound vesicles and vesicles; in the molecular function category, the DEPs were mainly enriched in cation binding and metal ion binding; and in the biological process category, the major enriched categories included phosphate-containing compound metabolic process, single-organism transport cellular component organization or biogenesis, carbohydrate metabolic process, and cellular component organization. Comparing the TS141 treatment group and control group, the DEPS in the cellular component category were primarily enriched in cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicles, cytoplasmic vesicles, membrane-bound vesicles, and vesicle; in the molecular function category, the DEPs were mainly enriched in cation binding and metal ion binding; and in the biological process category, the major enrichment categories included oxidation-reduction process and carbohydrate metabolic process. In Chang 7-2, the differentially expressed proteins were associated with ribosome pathway, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, and amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism. In TS141, the differentially expressed proteins were associated with metabolic pathway, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway, and starch and sucrose metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Materials and Drought Treatment: The drought-tolerant Chang 7-2 and drought-sensitive TS141 were used in our experiment. Using 20% PEG to simulate drought stress. Seeds were surface sterilized with 0.5% NaClO for 10 min and washed five times with sterile distilled water. The seeds were soaked in 20% PEG under dark conditions for 48 h at 25°C and germinated on a double layer of sterilized filter paper. Germinated seeds were then plated in pots (size: 15 cm×13 cm; 10 seedlings per pot). The greenhouse conditions were controlled at 25/20°C day/night with a photoperiod of 16/8 light/dark and 60% relative humidity. Fifty milliliters of distilled water was added every other day, and 50 mL of 20%PEG was applied every three days. The control was supplied with distilled water only. Seedlings at the three-leaf stage were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C cryogenic refrigerator for the protein extraction and proteome analysis.  Protein Extraction: Samples weighing 1−2 g were placed into a mortar to which 10% polyvinylpolypyrrolidone was added. The samples were then ground in liquid nitrogen, and Lysis Buffer 3 was added and the samples were placed in an ultrasonic ice bath for 5 min, following which they were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube to which 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 10 mM DTT were added at five times the volume of the supernatant, and the solution was precipitated for 2 h at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant discarded. The sediment was transferred into a new tube to which 1 mL TCA and 10 mM DTT were added. After being ground, the sediment was placed at -20°C for approximately 30 min, centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant discarded. This process was repeated several times until the supernatant became colorless. The precipitate was air-dried and the appropriate amount of amount of Lysis Buffer 3, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM DTT were added. The mixture was sonicated for 5 min in an ice bath and then centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 44°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube to which 10 mM DTT was added, and the tube was placed in a water bath at 56°C for 1 h. Upon returning to room temperature, 55 mM iodoacetamide was added and the tube was kept in the dark for 45 min. The samples were precipitated in 5 times the volume of cold acetone for 2 h and then centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, following which the supernatant was discarded. The appropriate amount of Lysis Buffer 3 was added and the sample was placed in a sonicating ice bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and then the supernatant was collected.  iTRAQ Quantification: Following trypsin digestion, the Chang 7-2 control groups were labeled with iTRAQ115 and 116; the Chang 7-2 treatment groups were labeled with iTRAQ113 and 114; the TS141 control groups were labeled with iTRAQ119 and 121; and the TS141 treatment groups were labeled with iTRAQ117 and 118. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. A LC-20AB liquid phase system (Shimadzu. Kyoto, Japan) and 5 μm 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 separation column were used for liquid phase separation of the sample. All peptide mixtures were dissolved in 2 mL of buffer A and loaded onto the column. Elution was performed using a linear binary gradient at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 min, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min, buffer B for 3 min, and 5% buffer B for 10 min to equilibrium. The elution peak was monitored at 214 nm, one fraction was collected per minute, and 20 fractions were pooled by combining the chromatographic elution peaks, and then dried under vacuum. LC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis: The drained peptide samples were resuspended in buffer A, centrifuged at 20,000 r/min for 10 min, and then the supernatant was injected into the LC. Separation was carried out using a LC-20AD-type nanoliter liquid chromatograph. The sample first entered the trap column for enrichment and desalting, following which it entered a self-contained C18 column. The flow rate was 300 nL/min with the following effective gradient separation: 0–8 min, 5% buffer B; 8–43 min, buffer B linearly increased from 8% to 35%; 43–48 min, buffer B increased from 35% to 60%; 48–50 min, buffer B increased from 60% to 80%; 50–55 min, 80% buffer B; 55–65 min, 5% buffer B. The nanoliter liquid phase separation terminal was directly connected to the mass spectrometer. The liquid phase-separated peptides were then sent to an ESI tandem mass spectrometer. A TripleTOF 5600 was used with a Nanospray III ion source and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter. When collecting data, the parameters of the mass spectrometer were set as follows: ion source spray voltage of 2300 V, nitrogen pressure of 30 psi, spray gas of 15, and a spray interface temperature of 150°C.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis: The raw mass spectral data were converted to mgf format, and the final protein identification was obtained by comparison with sequences in the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and the Uniprot Zea mays L. database (40,026 sequences). Protein identification had a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da for intact peptides and 0.1 Da for fragmented peptides, allowing for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. The parameters were set to Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y) as potential variables, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at a 95% confidence interval (P < 0.05) with a false discovery rate (FDR) estimation ≤1% were counted as being successfully identified. Each of the selected proteins involved at least one specific peptide segment, and a significant DEP was screened based on the trusted protein. The screening of DEPs was performed under the conditions of fold change >1.2 or <0.83 and P<0.05. Inverse library data and invalid blank values were removed. The number of DEPs for each term was calculated using the Gene Ontology (GO) database (http://www.geneontology.org/), and the hypergeometric test was used to find significant enrichment GO entries by comparing significantly different proteins with the overall identified proteins as background. If the hypergeometric test had a P<0.05, then the DEPs were significantly enriched in the GO terms. Cluster of Orthologous Groups of Proteins (COG) analysis was also conducted (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/). Using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway as a unit, the hyperpathic test was used to identify the pathways that were significantly enriched in DEPs compared to the entire protein background.

### Publication Abstract
The growth and development of maize roots are closely related to drought tolerance. In order to clarify the molecular mechanisms of drought tolerance between different maize (<i>Zea mays</i> L.) varieties at the protein level, the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) quantitative proteomics were used for the comparative analysis of protein expression in the seedling roots of the drought-tolerant Chang 7-2 and drought-sensitive TS141 maize varieties under 20% polyethylene glycol 6000 (PEG 6000)-simulated drought stress. We identified a total of 7723 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), 1243 were significantly differentially expressed in Chang 7-2 following drought stress, 572 of which were up-regulated and 671 were down-regulated; 419 DEPs were identified in TS141, 172 of which were up-regulated and 247 were down-regulated. In Chang 7-2, the DEPs were associated with ribosome pathway, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, and amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism. In TS141, the DEPs were associated with metabolic pathway, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway, and starch and sucrose metabolism. Compared with TS141, the higher drought tolerance of Chang 7-2 root system was attributed to a stronger water retention capacity; the synergistic effect of antioxidant enzymes; the strengthen cell wall; the osmotic stabilization of plasma membrane proteins; the effectiveness of recycling amino acid; and an improvement in the degree of lignification. The common mechanisms of the drought stress response between the two varieties included: The promotion of enzymes in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway; cross-protection against the toxicity of aldehydes and ammonia; maintenance of the cell membrane stability. Based on the proteome sequencing information, the coding region sequences of eight DEP-related genes were analyzed at the mRNA level by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The findings of this study can inform the future breeding of drought-tolerant maize varieties.

### Keywords
Root, Drought stress, Maize, Itraq

### Affiliations
Gansu Agricultural University
Department of Crop Genetics and Breeding, College of Agronomy, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China.

### Submitter
Yunling Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yunling Peng
Department of Crop Genetics and Breeding, College of Agronomy, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China.


