### Accession
PXD027769

### Title
Systematic investigation of protein phosphorylation in biomolecular condensates

### Description
We have adapted a recently developed quantitative proteomics based approach to measure protein solubility following a lysate centrifugation assay to determine the proportion of a protein in distinct subpopulations in a proteome-wide manner (Sridharan et al., 2019). Further, by combining the solubility measurements with phosphoproteomics (Potel et al., 2021), we have quantitatively mapped phosphorylation sites enriched in the different protein subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
After extraction of soluble and total protein fraction, samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. Phosphopeptide enriched fraction had phosphorylation at S|T|Y as an additional search parameter. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein phosphorylation is an important mechanism for regulating (dis)assembly of biomolecular condensates. However, condensate-specific phosphosites remain largely unknown, thereby limiting our understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Here, we combine solubility proteome profiling with phosphoproteomics to quantitatively map several hundred phosphosites enriched in either soluble or condensate-bound protein subpopulations, including a subset of phosphosites modulating protein-RNA interactions. We show that multi-phosphorylation of the C-terminal disordered segment of heteronuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (HNRNPA1), a key RNA-splicing factor, reduces its ability to locate to nuclear clusters. For nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), an essential nucleolar protein, we show that phosphorylation of S254 and S260 is crucial for lowering its partitioning to the nucleolus and additional phosphorylation of distal sites enhances its retention in the nucleoplasm. These phosphorylation events decrease RNA and protein interactions of NPM1 to regulate its condensation. Our dataset is a rich resource for systematically uncovering the phosphoregulation of biomolecular condensates.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Biomolecular condensate, Protein solubility

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Sindhuja Sridharan

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


