### Accession
PXD023954

### Title
Chicken MHC class II presented Marek's disease virus (MDV) and infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) antigenic peptides

### Description
Viral diseases pose major threats to humans and other animals, including the billions of chickens that are an important food source as well as a public health concern due to zoonotic pathogens. Unlike humans and other typical mammals, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) of chickens can confer decisive resistance or susceptibility to many viruses. Examples are Marek's disease virus (MDV) and Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV). We used a new in vitro infection system and immunopeptidomics to identify peptides presented to T lymphocytes via classical MHC class II molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cells were thawed into 10 mM CHAPS (AppliChem, St. Louis, MO) in PBS (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) with complete protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), and class II molecules were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification using purified monoclonal antibody F21-2 produced in-house and covalently linked to CNBr-activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). MHC–peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ). Peptides were purified by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Amicon; Millipore, Billerica, MA), desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore) and eluted in 35 μl 80% acetonitrile (Merck), 0.2% TFA, then vacuum-centrifuged and resuspended in 25 μl 1% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA and stored at −20°C.  Peptides were separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography and analyzed from 2-3 technical replicates, with sample shares of 33% or 50% trapped on a 75 μm × 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher) at 4 μl/min for 5.75 min. Peptide separation was performed at 50°C and a flow rate of 175 nl/min on a 50 μm × 25 cm separation column (nano-UHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Samples were analyzed as previously described using an online-coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA), implementing a top-speed CID method with survey scans at 120k resolution and fragment detection in the Orbitrap (OTMS2) at 60k resolution. The mass range was limited to 300–1500 m/z with precursors of charge states ≥2 eligible for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS results were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v.1.3 and 1.4; Thermo Fisher) to perform database search using the Sequest search engine (Thermo Fisher) with the chicken and appropriate MDV proteomes as reference database annotated by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (www.uniprot.org), status April 2018. The search was not restricted by enzymatic specificity, and oxidation of methionine residues was allowed as dynamic modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the Percolator node and was limited to 5%. Length of peptides was limited to 12–25 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Viral diseases pose major threats to humans and other animals, including the billions of chickens that are an important food source as well as a public health concern due to zoonotic pathogens. Unlike humans and other typical mammals, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) of chickens can confer decisive resistance or susceptibility to many viral diseases. An iconic example is Marek's disease, caused by an oncogenic herpesvirus with over 100 genes. Classical MHC class I and class II molecules present antigenic peptides to T lymphocytes, and it has been hard to understand how such MHC molecules could be involved in susceptibility to Marek's disease, given the potential number of peptides from over 100 genes. We used a new in vitro infection system and immunopeptidomics to determine peptide motifs for the 2 class II molecules expressed by the MHC haplotype B2, which is known to confer resistance to Marek's disease. Surprisingly, we found that the vast majority of viral peptide epitopes presented by chicken class II molecules arise from only 4 viral genes, nearly all having the peptide motif for BL2*02, the dominantly expressed class II molecule in chickens. We expressed BL2*02 linked to several Marek's disease virus (MDV) peptides and determined one X-ray crystal structure, showing how a single small amino acid in the binding site causes a crinkle in the peptide, leading to a core binding peptide of 10 amino acids, compared to the 9 amino acids in all other reported class II molecules. The limited number of potential T cell epitopes from such a complex virus can explain the differential MHC-determined resistance to MDV, but raises questions of mechanism and opportunities for vaccine targets in this important food species, as well as providing a basis for understanding class II molecules in other species including humans.

### Keywords
Mhc class ii, Immunopeptidomics, Chicken mhc, Mhc class i, Ibdv, Mdv

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Tübingen
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Stevanovic
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany


