### Accession
PXD022164

### Title
Indisulam targets RNA splicing and metabolism to serve as a novel therapeutic strategy for high-risk neuroblastoma

### Description
Neuroblastoma is the most common solid tumour in childhood and prognosis remains poor for high-risk cases despite the use of multimodal treatment. Analysis of public drug sensitivity data showed neuroblastoma lines to be particularlysensitive to indisulam, a molecular glue that selectively targets the RNA splicing factor RBM39 for proteosomal degradation via DCAF15-E3-ubiquitin ligase. In neuroblastoma models indisulam induced rapid loss of RBM39, accumulation of splicing errors and growth inhibition in a DCAF15-dependent manner. Integrative analysis of RNAseq and proteomics data highlighted a particular disruption to cell cycle and metabolism. Metabolic profiling demonstrated metabolome perturbations and mitochondrial dysfunction resulting from indisulam. Complete tumour without relapse was observed in both xenografts and the Th-MYCN transgenic model of neuroblastoma after indisulam treatment, with RBM39 loss confirmed in vivo. Our data imply that dual targeting of metabolism and RNA splicing with anti-cancer sulfonamides such as indisulam is promising therapeutic approach for high-risk neuroblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Protein samples (50µg/replicate) were processed using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, samples were loaded onto 30 kDa centrifugal concentrators (Millipore, MRCF0R030) and bufferexchange was carried out by centrifugation on a bench top centrifuge (15min, 12,000g). Multiple buffer exchanges were performed sequentially with UA buffer (8M urea in 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 3x200ul), reduction with 10mM DTT in UA buffer(30min, 40°C) and alkylation with 50mM chloroacetamide in UA buffer (20min, 25°C). This was followed by buffer exchange into UA buffer (3x100ul) and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (3x100ul). Digestion was carried out with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, V5280) using 1ug protease per digest (16h, 37°C). Tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation into a fresh collection tube (10min, 12,000g) and washing of the concentrator with 0.5M sodium chloride (50ul, 10min, 12,000g) for maximal recovery. Following acidification with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2%, collected protein digests were desalted using Glygen C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96) and peptides eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluents were then dried using vacuum centrifugation.   Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: Dried tryptic digests were redissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1200rpm) for 30min and sonication on an ultrasonic water bath for 10min, followed by centrifugation (20,000g, 5°C) for 10min. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in technical duplicates and separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis protein digest solutions were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were theneluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 75cm) at a flow rate of 200nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 50ms and 50ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400 – 1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27%, charge exclusion enabled with unassigned and +1 charge states rejected and a minimal AGC target of 1e3.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.1.0), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot H.sapiens database (version 20180104, number of entries: 161,521). A reverse decoy search approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide spectrum matches and protein groups. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine, tyrosine phosphorylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 1 and 20 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Drug treatment, Cancer cells

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery & Cancer
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Hector Keun
Imperial College London, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery & Cancer


