### Accession
PXD005031

### Title
A quantitative map of proteome dynamics during neuronal differentiation

### Description
Neuronal differentiation is a multistep process that shapes and re-shapes neurons by progressing through several typical stages, including axon outgrowth, dendritogenesis and synapse formation. To systematically profile protein expression during neuronal differentiation we have used cultured hippocampal neurons at different developmental stages in combination with triplex stable isotope dimethyl labeling technique coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total >1,500 proteins show more than two-fold expression changes during the different developmental steps, indicating extensive remodeling of the neuron proteome during differentiation. To demonstrate the strength of our resource, we focused on neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) as a regulator for dendritic outgrowth during neuronal development. The transmembrane isoform of NCAM1, NCAM180, is strongly upregulated during dendrite outgrowth, highly enriched in dendritic growth cones and interacts with a large variety of actin binding proteins. Inducing actin polymerization rescues the NCAM1 knockdown phenotype, suggesting that NCAM180 stimulates dendritic arbor development by promoting actin filament growth at the dendritic growth cone. Thus, our quantitative map of neuronal proteome dynamics will serve as a rich resource for further analyses of neurodevelopmental regulated processes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for protein expression profiling At three time points (DIV1, DIV5, DIV14) neurons were washed 4x with 500 µL pre-warmed PBS. For lysis 500 µL lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 1 tablet Complete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) in 10 mL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma)) was added to each well. Following sonication, samples were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min. Proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT, 55˚C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min in the dark) and sequentially digested by LysC (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, 4 h) and trypsin (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, 16 h) according to the standard filter-aided sample preparation protocol {Wisniewski, 2009 #5}. Resulting peptides from each time point were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and subjected to stable isotope triplex dimethyl labeling on column {Boersema, 2009 #6}. Labels were swapped between biological replicates. Differentially labeled peptides were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio based on LC-MS base peak intensity of the separate channels, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10% formic acid for subsequent fractionation. Peptides were fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX), as previously described {Frese, 2012 #7}. Briefly, peptides were loaded onto a Zorbax BioSCX-Series II column (0.8 mm × 50 mm, 3.5 μm) in 100% solvent A (0.05% formic acid in 20% acetonitrile). Solvent B consisted of 0.05% formic acid and 0.5 M NaCl in 20% acetonitrile. Fractionation was conducted using the following gradient: 0−0.01 min (0−2% B); 0.01−8.01 min (2−3% B); 8.01−14.01 min (3−8% B); 14.01−28 min (8−20% B); 28−38 min (20−40% B); 38−48 min (40−90% B); 48−54 min (90% B); 54−60 min (0% B). Collected fractions were dried in vacuo, reconstituted in 10% formic acid/5% DMSO and stored at -80°C prior MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry All samples were analyzed on an ETD enabled LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) that was coupled to Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm; Dr. Maisch) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 µm, 50 cm × 75 µm; Agilent) using a 60 min, 90 min or 150 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z the 10 or 20 most abundant peptides were subjected to either HCD or decision tree-guided CID/ETD fragmentation (ddDT) {Frese, 2011 #9}, respectively. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap (HCD methods; Resolution 7,500) and linear ion trap (ddDT methods), respectively. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% and 32% for CID and HCD, respectively. Charge state dependent ETD reaction time and supplemental activation were enabled. Charge state screening was enabled and ions with charge states <2+ were excluded from analysis. Samples from in-gel digestion were analyzed using a 90 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), as described {Frese, 2012 #7}. Peak lists were generated using a standard workflow. The non-fragment filter was used to simplify ETD spectra. HCD spectra were deisotoped and charge deconvoluted. The TopN filter node was used to filter CID and ETD spectra and to retain the 10 most abundant peaks per 100 Da window. Peptide identification was performed by searching individual peak lists of HCD, ETD-IT and CID-IT against the Uniprot rat database (version 2013_01) concatenated with a list of common contaminants using Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science, UK). Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm. Product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da (Orbitrap detection) and 0.5 Da (ion trap detection), respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C) was used as fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and dimethylation (light, intermediate or heavy) of lysine residues and the peptide N-termini, respectively, were set as variable modification. The percolator algorithm was used to filter the data to <1% false-discovery-rate on peptide level. Additionally, only peptides that pass the following filters were retained: mascot ion score ≥20, minimum peptide length 6, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and search engine rank 1. Only unique peptides were used for quantification and the obtained ratios were normalized to the median. IP-MS data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer and the aforementioned settings. Common contaminant proteins including immunoglobulins were removed from the list.  Bioinformatic analysis Gene ontology (GO) classification was obtained via PANTHER {Mi, 2005 #10} and Perseus (version 1.3.0.4, within MaxQuant {Cox, 2009 #11}. Enrichment analysis in terms of relative proteins abundance was performed using a Fisher’s exact test (GO cellular component, min. enrichment factor 3.5, Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value <0.002). KEGG pathway analysis and tissue enrichment testing were performed using DAVID {Cox, 2009 #11, Huang da, 2009 #21}. Hierarchical clustering was performed within Perseus using Euclidian distance. Network analysis was performed using the GeneMania plugin {{Montojo, 2010 #12} within Cytoscape {Shannon, 2003 #13}. Significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) {Roxas, 2008 #14} was used to assess significance of obtained protein ratios, as described {Munoz, 2011 #15}. Briefly, log2-transformed ratios of proteins that were quantified in all time points and in both replicates were subjected to a one-class test using 1000 permutations and an S0 value based on the method by Tusher et al. {Tusher, 2001 #16}. Proteins with a SAM q-value ≤0.15 (corresponding to a median log2 fold-change of >1.5 between DIV14 and DIV1) were subjected to unsupervised fuzzy clustering using GProX 1.1.9 {Rigbolt, 2011 #17}. Briefly, the relative abundance of all proteins from each time point was log10 transformed, Z-scored and clustered using a fuzzification value of 2, 100 iterations and a minimum membership value of 0.35. Gene ontology enrichment for each cluster was performed using a Fisher’s exact test within GProX (min. occurrences 5 for GOMF, GOBP and protein class, and 1 for GOCC; Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value <0.05). Significance of expression profile similarities within groups of interest was determined using the proteinProfiles package (Julian Gehring [2011], https://bioconductor.org/packages/ devel/bioc/html/proteinProfiles.html) within R/bioconductor {Gentleman, 2004 #18}, as reported elsewhere {Hansson, 2012 #19}. The heatmap in figure 5 (IP data overview) was generated by subjecting log10-transformed and z-scored relative abundances of all proteins from each time point (DIV 1,5,14) to hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distance. Statistical assessment of the IP-MS data was performed based on spectral counts using the SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractions, version 2.3.2) algorithm {Choi, 2011 #20}. The SAINT parameters were set as follows: nburn=4000, niter=20000, lowmode=0, minfold=1, and norm=1. Bait proteins with a SAINT probability score >0.75 were considered putative protein interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal differentiation is a multistep process that shapes and re-shapes neurons by progressing through several typical stages, including axon outgrowth, dendritogenesis, and synapse formation. To systematically profile proteome dynamics throughout neuronal differentiation, we took cultured rat hippocampal neurons at different developmental stages and monitored changes in protein abundance using a combination of stable isotope labeling and high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Almost one third of all 4,500 proteins quantified underwent a more than 2-fold expression change during neuronal differentiation, indicating extensive remodeling of the neuron proteome. To highlight the strength of our resource, we studied the neural-cell-adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) and found that it stimulates dendritic arbor development by promoting actin filament growth at the dendritic growth cone. We anticipate that our quantitative map of neuronal proteome dynamics is a rich resource for further analyses of the many identified proteins in various neurodevelopmental processes.

### Keywords
Stable isotope dimethyl labeling, Dendrite outgrowth, Quantitative proteomics, Neuronal development, Neuronal differentiation, Adhesion molecules, Ncam1, Proteome, Adhesion molecule, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr AF Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


