### Accession
PXD043789

### Title
BioID-proximity labeling of GATAD1 variants

### Description
To gain insights into the interactome of wild-type (WT) and S102P mutant GATAD1, we utilized the BioID method, which enables the study of protein-protein interactions. Specifically, we performed BioID proximity labeling experiments in stable Flp-In cells expressing different GATAD1 variants fused to BirA*_FLAG. These variants included BirA*_FLAG_GATAD1-WT, BirA*_FLAG_GATAD1-S102P, BirA*_FLAG_GATAD1-S102D, and BirA*_FLAG_GATAD1-S102A. By employing this approach, we aimed to characterize the protein interactors associated with these GATAD1 variants and gain insights into the functional consequences of the S102P mutation.

### Sample Protocol
After streptavidin pull-down on bead digest followed by adding 1 μg of trypsin overnight. The next day, samples were reduced using DTT and IAA followed by StageTipping.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant, version 2.0.3.0. With “match between run” and “requantify” options checked. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminal residues were set as variable and carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The data was analyzed in SILAC mode, with Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy labels, as well as in label-free quantification mode (LFQ). Peptide and protein FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Gatad1, Interactome, Point mutations

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Trendelina Rrustemi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


