### Accession
PXD034100

### Title
CIP2A-TOPBP1 Interaction in Human Mitotic Cells

### Description
We investigate the implications of DNA double strand breaks in the human genome, regarding the progression and treatment of various cancer types. During mitosis, the canonical DNA repair mechanisms are suspended while broken chromosomes get temporarily stabilized through so-called adapter proteins. We already knew that TOPBP1 is involved in that process and recently, we identified another Protein which recruits TOPBP1 to sites of damage. After mapping the interaction site on TOPBP1 we attempted to pull down CIP2A using a fragment of the binding domain, followed by chromatography-tandem-mass spectrometry analysis, the results of which we share in this upload.

### Sample Protocol
Upon washing, the sample were digested in situ, on the beads used for the pull-down, in a microwave assisted trypsinization. The supernatants were then collected, tried and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for injection on a nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-EXactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The acquired MS data were converted to a Mascot Generic File format (.mgf files) and were processed for identification using the Mascot search engine (Matrixscience).

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched against the Swissprot (human) protein database with a variable oxidation (M) modification.

### Publication Abstract
V/A-ATPase is a motor protein that shares a common rotary catalytic mechanism with F<sub>o</sub>F<sub>1</sub> ATP synthase. When powered by ATP hydrolysis, the V<sub>1</sub> domain rotates the central rotor against the A<sub>3</sub>B<sub>3</sub> hexamer, composed of three catalytic AB dimers adopting different conformations (AB<sub>open</sub>, AB<sub>semi</sub>, and AB<sub>closed</sub>). Here, we report the atomic models of 18 catalytic intermediates of the V<sub>1</sub> domain of V/A-ATPase under different reaction conditions, determined by single particle cryo-EM. The models reveal that the rotor does not rotate immediately after binding of ATP to the V<sub>1</sub>. Instead, three events proceed simultaneously with the 120&#x2da; rotation of the shaft: hydrolysis of ATP in AB<sub>semi</sub>, zipper movement in AB<sub>open</sub> by the binding ATP, and unzipper movement in AB<sub>closed</sub> with release of both ADP and Pi. This indicates the unidirectional rotation of V/A-ATPase by a ratchet-like mechanism owing to ATP hydrolysis in AB<sub>semi</sub>, rather than the power stroke model proposed previously for F<sub>1</sub>-ATPase.

### Keywords
Human, Uzh, Q-exactive, Mitosis, Topbp1, Pull-down, Nanoacquity, Lc-ms/ms, Cip2a, Fgcz, Uplc, Usz, Cancer, 293t

### Affiliations
University of Zürich / University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland, Clinic of Gynecology
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Alain Jeanrenaud

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Guido Stucki
University of Zürich / University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland, Clinic of Gynecology


