### Accession
PXD024609

### Title
LC-MS/MS of the reaction center-light harvesting 1 complex from Gemmatimonas phototrophica

### Description
Gemmatimonas phototrophica is the only phototrophic member of the recently discovered bacterial phylum Gemmatimonadetes. It was isolated from a freshwater lake in the Gobi desert and first described in 2014. So far, Gemmatimonas phototrophica is the only bacterium to have received a complete set of photosynthesis-related genes by horizontal gene transfer from an ancient phototrophic species from the phylum Proteobacteria. This organism illustrates the possibility for engineering phototrophic capability in a non-phototrophic organism and is therefore of great interest to the field of synthetic biology. The structure of the photosynthetic reaction center-light harvesting 1 complex is under investigation by cryo-EM. Proteomic analysis verified the identities of the expected protein components of this complex and, additionally revealed polypeptides that were previously undiscovered and could be mapped to the cryo-EM images.

### Sample Protocol
Gemmatimonas phototrophica cells were grown on agar plates and lysed by passage (3X) through an Emulsiflex-CS cell disrupter. Membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation and solubilized in 2 % n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), 0.2% Triton X-100 for 60 min with stirring at RT in the dark. Reaction center-light harvesting 1 complexes were purified from the membranes by ion-exchange chromatography using a UnoQ-6 column (Bio-Rad) and gradient elution with NaCl. Fractions were monitored according to A817/A260 ratio and relevant fractions pooled/concentrated before gel filtration using a Yarra SEC-3000 column (Phenomenex). Further purified used a Superdex 200 SEC column. For proteomic analysis, complexes were solubilized in 2% sodium dodecylsulfate, 40 mM Tris base, 60 mM DTT at 60°C for 5 min. Samples were divided into 2 x 15 µg portions and the proteins extracted by precipitation using a 2-D clean up kit (Cytiva) followed by re-solubilization in (1) 10 µl 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and (2) 10 µl 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. Reduction was carried out with 5 mM TCEP-HCl at 37°C for 30 min, followed by S-sulfenylation with 10 mM MMTS (added as a 100mM solution in isopropanol) at RT for 10 min. For digestion, 0.6 µg (1) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) and (2) pepsin (Promega) were added separately to each portion followed by incubation at 37°C. After 2 h, (1) was diluted by the addition of 75 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 and both digestions continued for 16 h. The resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For analysis by LC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 500 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with PepSwift PS-DVB monolithic column (200 µm x 25 cm, 60°C, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 60-min gradient from 97% (v/v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 35% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at 2.5 µl/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with centroid full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the Gemmatimonas phototrophica (strain AP64) reference proteome database (3388 proteins, downloaded from www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000076404 on 08-03-2021) using Byonic (v2.9.38, Protein Metrics). For trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C digestion, default parameters were selected with methylthiocysteine and methionine oxidation specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. For pepsin digestion, semi-specific cleavage at both N- and C-sides of F, W, Y and L were selected with modifications as above.

### Publication Abstract
Phototrophic Gemmatimonadetes evolved the ability to use solar energy following horizontal transfer of photosynthesis-related genes from an ancient phototrophic proteobacterium. The electron cryo-microscopy structure of the <i>Gemmatimonas phototrophica</i> photosystem at 2.4 &#xc5; reveals a unique, double-ring complex. Two unique membrane-extrinsic polypeptides, RC-S and RC-U, hold the central type 2 reaction center (RC) within an inner 16-subunit light-harvesting 1 (LH1) ring, which is encircled by an outer 24-subunit antenna ring (LHh) that adds light-gathering capacity. Femtosecond kinetics reveal the flow of energy within the RC-dLH complex, from the outer LHh ring to LH1 and then to the RC. This structural and functional study shows that <i>G. phototrophica</i> has independently evolved its own compact, robust, and highly effective architecture for harvesting and trapping solar energy.

### Keywords
Reaction center light-harvesting-1 complex, Gemmatimonas phototrophica, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Gemmatimonadetes

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Pu Qian
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK


