### Accession
PXD016394

### Title
The GTPase Rab39a matures phagosomes into MHC-I antigen-presenting compartments.

### Description
We have found Rab39a to be important in dendritic cells to promote antigen crosspresentation. As Rab39a is a Rab GTPase, we sought to determine how it influenced the contents of phagosomes. Thus we used SILAC using Rab39a CRISPR KO or reconstituted cells to determine phagosomal protein differences using a proteomics based approach.

### Sample Protocol
To perform SILAC, DC3.2-Rab39a cells (Rab39a KO with dox-inducible Rab39a) were grown in Light (R0K0) or Heavy (R10K8) DMEM with 10% dialyzed FCS (DC Biosciences). The cells were grown in the respective media for two weeks to achieve complete isotope incorporation. Cells grown in heavy media were induced with 1 µg/ml doxycycline overnight to induce Rab39a expression. 4x10^7 each of KO and induced cells were fed with 4 beads per cell of 6µm biotinylated magnetic beads. After 4 hours of phagocytosis, intact phagosomes were obtained using dounce homogenization and streptavidin-fluor staining as listed above. Pure intact phagosomes were separated from debris and unbroken cells via flow sorting. The phagosomes were then washed and lysed in Nupage LDS Sample buffer with dithiothreitol (Invitrogen). Equal amounts of lysate were mixed (normalized to yield in flow sorting) and run in a short protein gel. The gel was Coomasie Blue stained and the accumulated protein band was cut and sent to the UMASS Medical School Mass Spectrometry Facility for mass spec. Three independent experiments were performed (biological replicates) and within each experiment samples were analyzed in triplicate  (technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was done using Scaffold (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dendritic cell, Phagosomes, Rab39a

### Affiliations
UMASS Medical School
UMASS Medical School, Department of Pathology

### Submitter
Freidrich Cruz

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Rock
UMASS Medical School, Department of Pathology


