### Accession
PXD001507

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Anopheles gambiae phagocytic hemocyte populations reveals an anticipatory innate immune response in the absence of pathogen challenge

### Description
The innate immune response to a broad class of pathogens is highly conserved across all eukaryotes and has been studied in great detail at the cellular and transcriptomic level in several insect species. However, the commensurate cellular proteomic response, especially of hemocytes, the primary immune cell population in insects, has remained poorly understood. We report on the comprehensive proteogenomic analysis of a phagocyte subpopulation from Anopheles gambiae, the primary malaria mosquito vector in Sub-Saharan Africa. We leveraged the innate phagocytic response of mosquito granulocytes to achieve targeted enrichment for these cells to facilitate the examination of their proteomic response profiles following sugar feeding, as well as non-infectious and infectious blood feeding with Plasmodium falciparum. A comparative integrative-OMICs analysis of existing transcriptomic profiles combined with these proteomic data permitted the delineation of the functional genome of anopheline granulocytes.  We observed that phagocytosis, blood feeding, and P. falciparum infection induced dramatic shifts in granulocyte protein expression indicative of broad changes in cellular proliferation and innate immune response priming. Importantly, we identified a large number of hemocyte immune proteins that respond to blood feeding alone, suggesting that granulocytes may play an integral role in an anticipatory immune response prior to immune challenge.

### Sample Protocol
Multi-Lane Combined In-gel Digestion (MLCID) For PAGE, each lane was loaded with 30 µL of sample. After resolving on a 4-20% precast gradient gel (BioRad, Hercules, CA), the proteins were stained with Coomassie (Gel-Code Blue). Clean and sterile razors were then used to separate individual sample lanes and cut them into 8 identical slices. These slices were further cut into 1×1 mm pieces prior to de-staining, reduction and alkylation, tryptic digestion and peptide extraction . The extracted peptides were lyophilized by speed-vac and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 97.9% water and 0.1% formic acid buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis. Following in-gel digestion, tryptic peptides from each biological replicate were individually analyzed. Half of each sample was injected onto an Agilent LC-MS system consisting of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 Q-TOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. The samples were trapped and analyzed using an Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 µm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column).  Peptides were loaded onto the enrichment column by autosampler using 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 3% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a gradient starting at 97% A at 300 nL/min.  The mobile phase was 3-10% B for 4 min, 10-35% B for 56 min, 35-99% for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of the column with 3% B for 10 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) mode was used for MS acquisition by Agilent 6520 Q-TOF at 2 GHz.  Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700 and the top 4 peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis.  Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5/second.  A medium isolation width (∼4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.9 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied, with precursors excluded of 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum was acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic Format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. Mascot version 2.4.1, OMSSA version 2.1.9 and X!Tandem version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1 were used to search the Anopheles gambiae 3.7 (14,667 sequences)  protein FASTA sequence database for peptide sequence assignments using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues. All the searched results were exported and then imported into the Scaffold software (Version 4.3.4, Proteome Software) for curation, label-free quantification analysis, and visualization. Scaffold’s normalized spectral counting was employed to compare relative protein abundance between non-selected hemocytes (sugar-fed) and magnetic-bead enriched granulocytes (sugar-fed, blood-fed, and Plasmodium-infected) cell samples in each experiment as the basis for normalization of the spectral counts for all other LC-MS/MS data in that experiment. Scaffold calculates the spectrum count quantitative value by normalizing spectral counts across an experiment. The process of calculating normalized spectral counts is as follows: (a) Scaffold takes the sum of all the Total Spectrum Counts for each MS sample; (b)The sums are then scaled to the same level; and (c) Scaffold then applies the scaling factor for each sample to each protein group to produce an output with a normalized quantitative value. Overall, protein false discovery rates of less than 1% and peptide false discovery rates of less than 0.1% were obtained with Scaffold filters, and each protein has ≥ 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The innate immune response is highly conserved across all eukaryotes and has been studied in great detail in several model organisms. Hemocytes, the primary immune cell population in mosquitoes, are important components of the mosquito innate immune response, yet critical aspects of their biology have remained uncharacterized. Using a novel method of enrichment, we isolated phagocytic granulocytes and quantified their proteomes by mass spectrometry. The data demonstrate that phagocytosis, blood-feeding, and Plasmodium falciparum infection promote dramatic shifts in the proteomic profiles of An. gambiae granulocyte populations. Of interest, large numbers of immune proteins were induced in response to blood feeding alone, suggesting that granulocytes have an integral role in priming the mosquito immune system for pathogen challenge. In addition, we identify several granulocyte proteins with putative roles as membrane receptors, cell signaling, or immune components that when silenced, have either positive or negative effects on malaria parasite survival. Integrating existing hemocyte transcriptional profiles, we also compare differences in hemocyte transcript and protein expression to provide new insight into hemocyte gene regulation and discuss the potential that post-transcriptional regulation may be an important component of hemocyte gene expression. These data represent a significant advancement in mosquito hemocyte biology, providing the first comprehensive proteomic profiling of mosquito phagocytic granulocytes during homeostasis blood-feeding, and pathogen challenge. Together, these findings extend current knowledge to further illustrate the importance of hemocytes in shaping mosquito innate immunity and their principal role in defining malaria parasite survival in the mosquito host.

### Keywords
Hemocyte, Malaria, Mosquito, Innate immunity, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel R. Dinglasan
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health


