### Accession
PXD027241

### Title
A new mass spectral library for high-coverage and reproducible analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cell proteome

### Description
Background: Plasmodium falciparum causes the majority of malaria mortality worldwide, and the disease occurs during the asexual red blood cell (RBC) stage of infection. In the absence of an effective and available vaccine, and with increasing drug resistance, asexual RBC stage parasites are an important research focus. In recent years, mass spectrometry-based proteomics using Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) has been extensively used to understand the biochemical processes within the parasite. However, DDA is problematic for the detection of low abundance proteins, protein coverage, and has poor run-to-run reproducibility.  Results: Here, we present a comprehensive P. falciparum-infected RBC (iRBC) spectral library to measure the abundance of 44,449 peptides from 3,113 P. falciparum and 1,617 RBC proteins using a Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) approach. The spectral library includes proteins expressed in the three morphologically distinct RBC stages (ring, trophozoite, schizont), the RBC compartment of trophozoite-iRBCs, and the cytosolic fractions from uninfected RBCs (uRBC). This spectral library contains 87% of P. falciparum proteins with previously blood-stage protein-level evidence as well as 692 previously unidentified proteins. The P. falciparum spectral library was successfully applied to generate semi-quantitative proteomics datasets that characterise the three distinct asexual parasite stages in RBCs, and compare artemisinin resistant (Cam3.IIR539T) and sensitive (Cam3.IIrev) parasites. Conclusion: A reproducible, high-coverage proteomics spectral library and analysis method has been generated for investigating sets of proteins expressed in the iRBC stage of P. falciparum malaria. This will provide a foundation for an improved understanding of parasite biology, pathogenesis, drug mechanisms and vaccine candidate discovery for malaria.

### Sample Protocol
P. falciparum spectral library generation using parasite pellets  Asexual P. falciparum (3D7 reference strain, Cam3.IIR539T, Cam3.IIC580Y, and Cam3.IIrev) were cultured tightly synchronised for library generation. For generating stage-specific samples, iRBCs were pelleted by centrifugation (650 × g, 5 min) and parasites were isolated from RBCs by resuspending in saponin lysis buffer (0.1% w/v in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PPI); 1 × complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 20 mM sodium fluoride and 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and incubated for 10 mins on ice. Isolated parasites were pelleted (4,000 × g, 7 min) and washed (15,850 × g, 3 min, supernatant discarded after each wash) a total of three times in 1 mL 1 × PBS with PPI. Saponin pellets and supernatants only for trophozoite-stage parasites were solubilized with SDC lysis buffer (100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), pH 8.1) supplemented with PPI and probe sonicated with × 3 pulses at 30 secs each. Following sonication, samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 mins, allowed to return to room temperature (RT), before reducing and alkylating with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) (10mM final) and iodoacetamide (40 mM final) at 95°C for 5 mins. After returning to RT, proteins were precipitated using ice cold TCA and pellets were resuspended in SDC lysis buffer without PPI and sonicated to aid protein solubilisation. Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay and samples adjusted to 3-5 mg of protein per sample. Trypsin (1:50; Promega) was added and samples were incubated 16 h at 37°C with constant agitation at 1500 rpm in a Multi-Therm™ (Benchmark Scientific). On the following day, trypsin activity was quenched using 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA), before adding 100% (v/v) ethyl acetate to remove detergent.  The samples were centrifuged at 4000 × g for 5 mins and the top layer of supernatant was removed. Samples were dried using CentriVap Benchtop Centrifugal Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) at 100 mbar and 37 °C for 10 mins to remove excess ethyl acetate. The samples were then diluted five-fold and loaded onto a SCX Bond Elut Plexa (Agilent) and eluted into 12 fractions as described previously. Peptides were then eluted from SCX cartridges using 500 μl of elution buffers at a rate of one drop/sec. Elution buffers consisted of increasing concentrations of ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) (75 mM, 100 mM, 125 mM, 150 mM, 175 mM, 225 mM, 250 mM, 275 mM, 300 mM, 325 mM, and 350 mM) with 20% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% (v/v) FA. The final elution buffer consisted of 80% ACN and 5% ammonium hydroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) to remove any remaining bound peptides. Eluates (fractions) were semi-dried to remove most of the ACN and then subjected to desalting using in-house generated StageTips as described previously. The desalted fractions were dried to completion as above and reconstituted in 20 μl of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA, sonicated for 15 mins and subject to automatic vortexing for a further 15 mins to allow complete resuspension of peptides. To facilitate retention-time alignments among samples, a retention-time kit (iRT kit, Biognosys, GmbH) was spiked at a concentration of 1:20 (v/v) for all fractions. Samples were stored at -80°C and the particle free supernatant was transferred to LC-MS vials immediately prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometric instrumentation and data acquisition  For DDA acquisition, NanoLC-MS/MS was carried out as described previously, with minor modifications. Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 15 μl/min onto a reverse-phase trap column (100 μm × 2 cm), Acclaim PepMap media (Dionex) and maintained at a temperature of 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min through a reverse-phase capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm) (LC Packings, Dionex). For acquisition by HPLC, a 158 min gradient was set using an incremental gradient that reached 30% ACN after 123 min, 34% ACN after 126 min, 79.2% ACN after 131 min and 2% ACN after 138 min for a further 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with 2 microscans FTMS scan event at 70,000 resolution over the m/z range of 375-1575 Da in positive ion mode. The 20 most intense precursors with charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation with normalised collision energy 27.0, activation time of 15 ms and enabled dynamic exclusion. For DIA, a 25-fixed-window setup of 24 m/z effective precursor isolation over the m/z range of 376-967 Da was applied.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun data searching and spectral library generation DDA files were searched against P. falciparum (UP000001450, release version 2016_04) and Homo sapiens (UP000005640, release version 2017_05) UniProt FASTA databases and the Biognosys iRT peptides database. The number of entries in the database actually searched were 3,970,852 with trypsin as enzyme specificity and 2 missed cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Parent mass error tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. For both peptide and protein identification, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used. MaxQuant search results were imported as spectral libraries into Spectronaut using default settings. MaxQuant output files were obtained and imported into Spectranout and iRT values were computed using the linear iRT regression function embedded in Spectranout. A consensus library was generated for P. falciparum iRBCs and saved for downstream targeted analysis. The consensus library contained 44,449 peptides corresponding to 4,730 proteins. Spectronaut targeted data extraction Raw files were processed using SpectronautTM (version 13.0) against the in-house generated P. falciparum spectral library. For processing, raw files were loaded in Spectronaut, the ideal mass tolerances for data extraction and scoring were calculated on its extensive mass calibration with a correction factor of 1. Both at precursor and fragment level, the highest data-point within the selected m/z tolerance was chosen. Identification of peptides against the library was based on default Spectronaut settings (Manual for Spectronaut 13.0, available on Biognosis website). Briefly, precursor Qvalue Cut-off and Protein Qvalue Cut-off were as per default at 1% and therefore only those that passed this cut-off were considered as identified and used for subsequent processing. Retention time (RT) prediction type was set to dynamic indexed RT. Interference correction was performed at the MS2 level. For quantification, interference correction was activated and cross run normalisation was performed using the total peak area at a significance threshold of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Spectral library, Malaria, Dia

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Darren Creek
Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia


