### Accession
PXD045443

### Title
METTL17 is an Fe-S cluster checkpoint for mitochondrial translation

### Description
Friedreich’s ataxia (FA) is the most common monogenic mitochondrial disease. FA is caused by a depletion of the mitochondrial protein frataxin (FXN), an iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis factor. To better understand the cellular consequences of FA, we performed quantitative proteome profiling of human cells depleted for FXN. Nearly every known Fe-S cluster-containing protein was depleted in the absence of FXN, indicating that as a rule, cluster binding confers stability to Fe-S proteins. Proteomic and genetic interaction mapping identified impaired mitochondrial translation downstream of FXN loss, and specifically highlighted the methyltransferase-like protein METTL17 as a candidate effector. Using comparative sequence analysis, mutagenesis, biochemistry and cryogenic electron microscopy we show that METTL17 binds to the mitoribosomal small subunit during late assembly and harbors a previously unrecognized [Fe4S4]2+ cluster required for its stability on the mitoribosome. Notably, METTL17 overexpression rescued the mitochondrial translation and bioenergetic defects, but not the cellular growth, of FXN depleted cells. Our data suggest that METTL17 serves as an Fe-S cluster checkpoint: promoting the translation and assembly of Fe-S cluster rich OXPHOS proteins only when Fe-S cluster levels are replete.

### Sample Protocol
sgCtrl and sgFXN K562 cells were grown in duplicate flasks for 10 days.  Samples were prepared essentially as previously described92,93.  Following lysis, protein precipitation, reduction/alkylation and digestion, peptides were quantified by micro-BCA assay and 100µg of peptide per sample were labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo-Fisher) for 2hrs at room temperature. Labeling reactions were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine and acidified with TFA. Acidified peptides were combined and desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters).  TMT labeled peptides were solubilized in 5% ACN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and separated by an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5µm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm in length). An Agilent 1260 binary pump coupled with a photodiode array (PDA) detector (Thermo Scientific) was used to separate the peptides. A 45 minute linear gradient from 10% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (flow rate of 0.6 mL/min) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions (36 seconds).  A total of 96 Fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard fashion, acidified with 20 µL of 10% formic acid and vacuum dried to completion. Each sample was desalted via Stage Tips and re-dissolved in 5% FA/ 5% ACN for LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Fractionated peptides were separated using a 180 min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house. MS1 data were collected in the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4 × 105). Top 10 precursors with charge states between 2 and 5 were required for MS2 analysis, and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with CID fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; Rapid; NCE 35%; maximum injection time 35 ms; AGC 1.5 × 104). An on-line real-time search algorithm (Orbiter) was used to trigger MS3 scans for quantification94. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 55%, maximum injection time of 150 ms, and AGC of 1.5 × 105. The close out was set at two peptides per protein per fraction(Schweppe et al., 2020).Raw files were converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle95. Searches were performed using SEQUEST96 against a human database downloaded from Uniprot in 2014. We used a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the ion. TMT on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification.  Each run was filtered separately to 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) on the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level. Then proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level across the entire combined data set.  For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Proteins were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) ≥ 100 across all TMT channels.  For each protein, the filtered peptide TMT SN values were summed to generate protein quantification values. To control for different total protein loading within a TMT experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal within the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Friedreich’s ataxia, Fe-s clusters, Mettl17, Fxn

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
1.Department of Molecular Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA,  2.Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA,  3.Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

### Submitter
Tslil Ast

### Lab Head
Dr Vamsi K. Mootha
1.Department of Molecular Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA,  2.Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA,  3.Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.


