### Accession
PXD005484

### Title
The non-canonical mitochondrial inner membrane presequence translocase of trypanosomatids contains two essential rhomboid-like proteins

### Description
Mitochondrial protein import is essential for all eukaryotes. Here we show that the early diverging eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei has a non-canonical inner membrane (IM) protein translocation machinery. Besides TbTim17, the single member of the Tim17/22/23 family in trypanosomes, the presequence translocase contains nine subunits that co-purify in reciprocal immunoprecipitations and with a presequence-containing substrate that is trapped in the translocation channel. Two of the newly discovered subunits are rhomboid-like proteins, which are essential for growth and mitochondrial protein import. Rhomboid-like proteins were proposed to form the protein translocation pore of the ER-associated degradation system, suggesting that they may contribute to pore formation in the presequence translocase of T. brucei. Pulldown of import-arrested mitochondrial carrier protein shows that the carrier translocase shares eight subunits with the presequence translocase. This indicates that T. brucei may have a single IM translocase that with compositional variations mediates import of presequence-containing and carrier proteins.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Cells allowing inducible RNAi or inducible expression of tagged proteins were grown in modified SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 10-15% dialyzed FCS, and either light (12C6/14Nx) or heavy (13C6/15Nx) arginine (1.1 mM) and lysine (0.4 mM). For the TbTim17 RNAi cell line, tetracycline induction was performed for 3 days. For SILAC immunoprecipitations (IPs), expression of tagged proteins was induced for 1 day. Differentially labeled tetracycline-treated and untreated cells were mixed in equal amounts before cell lysis. For TbTim17-SILAC RNAi experiments, digitonin-extracted crude mitochondrial fractions of the resulting mixed pellets were prepared and analyzed by MS. All SILAC RNAi and IP experiments were performed in three biological replicates including a label-switch. For the SILAC-IPs of TbTim17-myc, TbTim42-HA, and TbTim13-HA, digitonin-extracted crude mitochondrial fractions of 1-2∙108 uninduced and induced cells each were solubilized for 15 min at 4°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)/0.1 mM EDTA/100 mM NaCl/10% glycerol containing 1% (w/v) digitonin and protease inhibitors. Following a clearing spin (20,000 g, 15 min, 4°C), the lysate was transferred to affinity purification resin (30-60 µl EZview red anti-c-myc affinity gel from Sigma or 50-100 µl anti-HA affinity matrix from Roche) equilibrated in wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4/0.1 mM EDTA/100 mM NaCl/10% glycerol/0.2% (w/v) digitonin). After 1 h of incubation at 4°C, the supernatant was removed and the resin was washed with wash buffer. To elute proteins, the resin was boiled for 5 min in 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 containing 0.1% SDS. The resulting eluate was analyzed by MS. SILAC-IP of the stalled carrier intermediate was essentially performed as described above. Instead of induced and uninduced cells, induced cells expressing either full length MCP12 or the truncated version were differentially labelled and subjected to SILAC-IP. Elution was performed with 2% SDS in 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8. SILAC-IP of the stalled import intermediate was performed as described above, except that 24 h before the IP, the SILAC-labelled cultures were supplemented with 1 mM sulfanylamide and 500 µM aminopterine. Control cells remained untreated. All cultures were induced for LDH-DHFR-HA expression 3 h before performing the IP. Elution was performed with 2% SDS in 60 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8). Crude mitochondrial fractions prepared from TbTim17-SILAC RNAi cells were resuspended in urea buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl/7 M urea/2 M thiourea, pH 8.5). Proteins (4 µg protein per LC/MS analysis) were reduced, alkylated and tryptically digested in-solution as described before (Lytovchenko et al, EMBO J. 33, 2014). Sample preparation of proteins obtained in SILAC-IPs of tagged TbTim17, TbTim42, and TbTim13 including acetone precipitation, reduction, alkylation and tryptic in-solution digestion was performed as described (Lytovchenko et al, EMBO J. 33, 2014). For the MS analysis of proteins associated with the presequence import intermediate LDH-DHFR-HA or the carrier import intermediate MCP12-Δ1, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% NuPAGE BisTris gradient gels. Proteins were stained by colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue and gel lanes cut into 12 or 10 slices, resp. Reduction, alkylation, and tryptic in-gel digestion of proteins were performed as described before (Cristodero et al., Mol. Miocrobiol. 90, 2013). Peptide mixtures were dried, reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and analyzed by LC/MS.  LC/MS analysis: LC/MS analyses were performed using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system directly connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL or an Orbitrap Elite instrument. Peptides of the TbTim17-SILAC RNAi samples (Orbitrap Elite; two technical replicates each) were separated applying a linear 265-min gradient ranging from 7.5% methanol (MeOH) and 4.5% acetonitrile (ACN) to 33.5% MeOH and 20% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Simultaneous with the acquisition of MS survey scans (m/z 370-1,700) in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400), up to 25 of the most intense multiply charged precursor ions were further fragmented by collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap (TOP25 method). The dynamic exclusion time preventing repeated fragmentation of precursor ions was set to 45 s. For the separation of peptide mixtures of the TbTim17, TbTim42, and TbTim13 IPs (LTQ-Orbitrap XL), LC parameters were as follows: 2.4% MeOH/1.5% ACN - 33.6% MeOH/21% ACN in 0.1% FA/4% DMSO in 130-min; flow rate, 250 nl/min. MS measurements were performed as described above applying a TOP5 method. For LC/MS analyses of the LDH-DHFR and MCP12 IPs (Orbitrap Elite), the following parameters were applied: 50-min gradient ranging from 0.5% MeOH/0.3% ACN to 31.2% MeOH/19.5% ACN in 0.1% FA/4% DMSO at a flow rate of 250 nl/min; acquisition of MS survey scans at resolution 120,000 (m/z 400); TOP15 method; dynamic exclusion, 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed for protein identification and SILAC-based relative quantification using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.3.0.5 for TbTim17 RNAi samples, v. 1.4.1.2 for TbTim42 and TbTim17 IPs, v. 1.5.1.0 for TbTim13 IPs, v. 1.5.3.12 for LDH-DHFR IPs, and v. 1.5.4.0 for MCP12 IPs). MS data derived from the analysis of mitochondria-enriched fractions of TbTim17 RNAi samples were processed together with data obtained from the LC/MS analyses of whole cells of Tim17 RNAi cells; however, these data were not of relevance to this project and are not reported.  MS/MS data were searched against all entries in the TriTryp database (version 4.2 for TbTim17 RNAi data; version 7.0 for TbTim42 IP data; version 8.1 for the remaining datasets) using MaxQuant default parameters including Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide and the protein level. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides and at least one SILAC peptide pair. The mean of log10-transformed protein abundance ratios was calculated and a Student's t-test (two-sided for TbTim17 RNAi and MCP12 IP data; one-sided for all other datasets) was performed to determine p-values for all proteins quantified in at least two biological replicates. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05, a sequence coverage of at least 4% and a more than 1.5-fold downregulation (TbTim17 RNAi data) or a 2-fold enrichment (SILAC-IP data), respectively, were considered as candidate proteins in the respective experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial protein import is essential for all eukaryotes. Here we show that the early diverging eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei has a non-canonical inner membrane (IM) protein translocation machinery. Besides TbTim17, the single member of the Tim17/22/23 family in trypanosomes, the presequence translocase contains nine subunits that co-purify in reciprocal immunoprecipitations and with a presequence-containing substrate that is trapped in the translocation channel. Two of the newly discovered subunits are rhomboid-like proteins, which are essential for growth and mitochondrial protein import. Rhomboid-like proteins were proposed to form the protein translocation pore of the ER-associated degradation system, suggesting that they may contribute to pore formation in the presequence translocase of T. brucei. Pulldown of import-arrested mitochondrial carrier protein shows that the carrier translocase shares eight subunits with the presequence translocase. This indicates that T. brucei may have a single IM translocase that with compositional variations mediates import of presequence-containing and carrier proteins.

### Keywords
Rhomboid-like proteins, Proteomics, Mitochondrial protein import, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac, Tbtim17, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettiina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, Germany


