### Accession
PXD017619

### Title
Real-time dynamics of Plasmodium Ndc80 reveals unusual modes of chromosome segregation during parasite proliferative stages

### Description
Eukaryotic cell proliferation requires chromosome replication and precise segregation to ensure daughter cells have identical genomic copies. The genus Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, has developed remarkable characteristic of nuclear division throughout its lifecycle to meet some peculiar and unique challenges of DNA replication and chromosome segregation. The parasite undergoes atypical endomitosis and endoreduplication with an intact nuclear membrane and intranuclear mitotic spindle. To understand diverse modes of cell division in Plasmodium we have studied the behaviour and composition of a key part of the mitotic apparatus, the outer kinetochore Ndc80 complex that attaches the centromere of chromosomes to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle. Using Ndc80 live-cell imaging in Plasmodium berghei we observe dynamic changes throughout proliferative life-stages including highly unusual kinetochore arrangements in sexual stages of the parasite. Furthermore, we identify a divergent Spc24 component of Ndc80 complex, previously thought to be missing, and completing a canonical, albeit unusual, Ndc80 complex structure. Altogether our studies reveal the kinetochore as an ideal starting point towards understanding non-canonical modes of chromosome segregation and cell division in Plasmodium.

### Sample Protocol
Schizonts, following 8 hours in vitro culture, and male gametocytes 1 min post activation of NDC80-GFP parasites were used to prepare cell lysates. Purified parasite pellets were crosslinked using formaldehyde (10 min incubation with 1% formaldehyde, followed by 5 min incubation in 0.125M glycine solution and 3 washes with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH7.5). Immunoprecipitation was performed using crosslinked protein lysate and a GFP-Trap®_A Kit (Chromotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins bound to the GFP-Trap®_A beads were digested using trypsin and the peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43, http://www.maxquant.org) and X!Tandem (version ALANINE 2017.02.01, https://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/) were used to search the mass spectrometry data against the PlasmoDB Berhei ANKA database (version 39, https://plasmodb.org/). Results were imported into Scaffold (version 4.10.0, Proteome Software) for further analysis where peptides and protein were filtered to 95% probability.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cell proliferation requires chromosome replication and precise segregation to ensure daughter cells have identical genomic copies. Species of the genus <i>Plasmodium</i>, the causative agents of malaria, display remarkable aspects of nuclear division throughout their life cycle to meet some peculiar and unique challenges to DNA replication and chromosome segregation. The parasite undergoes atypical endomitosis and endoreduplication with an intact nuclear membrane and intranuclear mitotic spindle. To understand these diverse modes of <i>Plasmodium</i> cell division, we have studied the behaviour and composition of the outer kinetochore NDC80 complex, a key part of the mitotic apparatus that attaches the centromere of chromosomes to microtubules of the mitotic spindle. Using NDC80-GFP live-cell imaging in <i>Plasmodium berghei</i>, we observe dynamic spatiotemporal changes during proliferation, including highly unusual kinetochore arrangements during sexual stages. We identify a very divergent candidate for the SPC24 subunit of the NDC80 complex, previously thought to be missing in <i>Plasmodium</i>, which completes a canonical, albeit unusual, NDC80 complex structure. Altogether, our studies reveal the kinetochore to be an ideal tool to investigate the non-canonical modes of chromosome segregation and cell division in <i>Plasmodium</i>.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Parasite, Warwick-rtp, Proliferation, Chromosome segregation, Ndc80

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rita Tewari
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH


