### Accession
PXD040430

### Title
A HUWE1 defect causes PARP inhibitor resistance by modulating the BRCA1-∆11q splice variant

### Description
Although PARP inhibitors (PARPi) now form part of the standard-of-care for the treatment of homologous recombination defective cancers, de novo and acquired resistance limits their overall effectiveness. Previously, overexpression of the BRCA1-∆11q splice variant has been shown to cause PARPi resistance. How cancer cells achieve increased BRCA1-∆11q expression has remained unclear. Using isogenic cells with different BRCA1 mutations, we show that reduction in HUWE1 leads to increased levels of BRCA1-∆11q and PARPi resistance. This effect is specific to cells able to express BRCA1-∆11q (e.g. BRCA1 exon 11 mutant cells) and is not seen in BRCA1 mutants that cannot express BRCA1-∆11q, nor in BRCA2 mutant cells. As well as increasing levels of BRCA1-∆11q protein in exon 11 mutant cells, HUWE1 silencing also restores RAD51 nuclear foci and platinum salt resistance. HUWE1 catalytic domain mutations were also seen in a case of PARPi resistant, BRCA1 exon 11 mutant, high grade serous ovarian cancer. These results suggest how elevated levels of BRCA1-∆11q and PARPi resistance can be achieved, identify HUWE1 as a candidate biomarker of PARPi resistance for assessment in future clinical trials and illustrate how some PARPi resistance mechanisms may only operate in patients with particular BRCA1 mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL lysis buffer of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec followed by boiling at 90 °C for 5 min and re-sonication for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomassie Plus Bradford Protein Assay (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min. Proteins were finally digested with trypsin (Pierce) at 75 ng/μL overnight. The peptides were labelled with the TMTpro reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions.   Peptides were fractionated with the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system at high-pH. Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide. The TMTpro labelled peptide mixture was fractionated using a multi-step gradient elution at 0.2 mL/min. The separation method was: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec and vacuum dried.  LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide fractions were reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and 10 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The samples were then analysed with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) C18 capillary column at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method at flow rate 300 nL/min was: for 90 min gradient from 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B. Precursor ions within 375-1,500 m/z were selected at mass resolution of 120K in top speed mode (3 sec cycle) and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th, collision energy 35% and max IT 50 ms. MS3 spectra were obtained with further HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Collision energy was applied at 55% with 105 ms IT and 50K resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT for database search in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using reviewed UniProt human protein entries. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for fully tryptic peptides. TMTpro at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered for q-value<0.01 based on target-decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT16plex quantification method with an integration window of 15 ppm at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brca1, Parp, Huwe1, Ovarian cancer, Parpi

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics Institute of Cancer Research


