### Accession
PXD041271

### Title
Automated Enrichment of Phosphotyrosine Peptides for High-Throughput Proteomics

### Description
Phosphotyrosine (pY) enrichment is critical for expanding fundamental and clinical understanding of cellular signaling by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. However, current pY enrichment methods exhibit a high cost per sample and limited reproducibility due to expensive affinity reagents and manual processing. We present rapid-robotic phosphotyrosine proteomics (R2-pY), which uses a magnetic particle processor and pY superbinders or antibodies. R2-pY can handle up to 96 samples in parallel, requires 2 days to go from cell lysate to mass spectrometry injections, and results in global proteomic, phosphoproteomic and tyrosine-specific phosphoproteomic samples. We benchmark the method on HeLa cells stimulated with pervanadate and serum and report over 4000 unique pY sites from 1 mg of peptide input, strong reproducibility between replicates, and phosphopeptide enrichment efficiencies above 99%. R2-pY extends our previously reported R2-P2 proteomic and global phosphoproteomic sample preparation framework, opening the door to large-scale studies of pY signaling in concert with global proteome and phosphoproteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were starved for 6 hours prior to treatment with 1 mM pervanadate (15 min) or left untreated followed by 15 min serum treatment. Cells were immediately washed and flash frozen. Cells were lysed by sonication in a denaturing buffer. No protease or phosphatase inhibitors were used during harvest or lysis. Clarified lysate was quantified by BCA then reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide prior to freezing. Reduced and alkylated lysate was processed by R2-P1(Leutert et al. 2019) or by in-solution-digestion and solid-phase extraction desalting. Desalted peptides were dried and resuspended in an affinity purification (AP) buffer for phosphotyrosine enrichment by R2-pY using either pY superbinder or antibodies conjugated to magnetic beads. The R2-pY protocol starts by incubating pY-capture beads with peptides. The bead-peptide complexes are then passed through three plates of AP buffer to wash off peptides with no pY modifications. A fourth wash with water removes the AP buffer prior to pY-peptide elution. pY-peptides are eluted from beads  with 0.5% to 1%  trifluoroacetic acid and 60% acetonitrile (Fig 1B). Eluates are then processed by R2-P2 using Fe3+-IMAC magnetic beads for stringent removal of non-phosphorylated peptides and any residual AP reagents. Overall the R2-pY to R2-P2 workflow takes 4 hours and results in peptides that can be dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. pY-peptide samples separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography prior to measurement over 90 min with data-dependent acquisition on Orbitrap Eclipse or Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometers (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
DDA-MS/MS spectra were searched with Comet (2019.01.rev.2) (Eng et al. 2013) against the human proteome.  The precursor m/z mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.02146372118 Da) and variable modification of n-term acetylation (42.01056468472 Da), methionine oxidation (15.9949146202 Da), and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.96633089136 Da) were used for all searches. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM level using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007). Phosphorylation sites were localized using an in-house implementation of the Ascore algorithm (Beausoleil et al. 2006). Phosphorylation sites with an Ascore > 13 (P < 0.05) were considered confidently localized. Peptides were quantified using in-house software measuring MS1 chromatographic peak maximum intensities. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R (https://r-project.org/).  Quantitative values obtained from DDA analyses were derived from maximum intensity PSMs for the most prevalent charge states per peptide and were sample median normalized before correlation and variation analyses. All correlation calculations utilize Pearson’s method. Analysis of sequence preference of pY affinity reagents was performed with IceLogo (Colaert et al. 2009) with a p-value cutoff of 0.05. Representation of pY sites detected across the human kinome was visualized with Coral using the web interface: phanstiel-lab.med.unc.edu/Coral (Metz et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Phosphotyrosine (pY) enrichment is critical for expanding the fundamental and clinical understanding of cellular signaling by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. However, current pY enrichment methods exhibit a high cost per sample and limited reproducibility due to expensive affinity reagents and manual processing. We present rapid-robotic phosphotyrosine proteomics (R2-pY), which uses a magnetic particle processor and pY superbinders or antibodies. R2-pY can handle up to 96 samples in parallel, requires 2 days to go from cell lysate to mass spectrometry injections, and results in global proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and tyrosine-specific phosphoproteomic samples. We benchmark the method on HeLa cells stimulated with pervanadate and serum and report over 4000 unique pY sites from 1 mg of peptide input, strong reproducibility between replicates, and phosphopeptide enrichment efficiencies above 99%. R2-pY extends our previously reported R2-P2 proteomic and global phosphoproteomic sample preparation framework, opening the door to large-scale studies of pY signaling in concert with global proteome and phosphoproteome profiling.

### Keywords
Hela, Orbitrap exploris 480, Lc-msms, Phosphotyrosine enrichment, Kingfisher, Orbitrap eclipse

### Affiliations
Villen Lab, Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington. Seattle, WA, USA.
University of Washington

### Submitter
Alexis Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Villen Lab, Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington. Seattle, WA, USA.


