### Accession
PXD005040

### Title
Lipids reprogram cellular metabolism to become a major carbon source for histone acetylation.

### Description
From McDonnell et. al. Cell Reports 2016:  Cells integrate nutrient sensing and metabolism to coordinate proper cellular responses to a particular nutrient source. For example, glucose drives a gene expression program characterized by activating genes involved in its metabolism, in part, by increasing glucose-derived histone acetylation. Here, we find that lipid-derived acetyl-CoA is a major source of carbon for histone acetylation. Using 13C-carbon tracing combined with acetyl-proteomics, we show that up to 90% of acetylation on certain histone lysines can be derived from fatty acid carbon, even in the presence of excess glucose. By repressing both glucose and glutamine metabolism, fatty acid oxidation reprograms cellular metabolism leading to increased lipid-derived acetyl-CoA. Gene expression profiling of octanoate-treated hepatocytes shows a pattern of upregulated lipid metabolic genes, demonstrating a specific transcriptional response to lipid. These studies expand the landscape of nutrient sensing and uncover how lipids and metabolism are integrated by epigenetic events that control gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for TMT proteomic experiment:  AML12 cells were treated with or without 2 mM sodium octanoate for 24 hours. Cell pellets were re-suspended in 500 µL of ice-cold 8M Urea Lysis Buffer supplemented with protease, deacetylase, and phosphatase inhibitors. The cells were disrupted, the lysates were centrifuged, and the supernatant retained. Protein was determined by BCA, and 500 µg, from each sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Each sample was digested with LysC (100:1 w/w, protein to enzyme) at 37°C for 4 hours. Following dilution to 1.5 M urea, samples were digested with trypsin (50:1 w/w, protein:enzyme) overnight at 37°C. Peptides was desalted, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. Each sample was re-suspended in 100 µL of 200 mM TEAB, mixed with a unique 6-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagent (0.8 mg re-suspended in 50 µL100% acetonitrile), and shaken for 4 hours at room temperature. After samples were quenched with 0.8 µL 50% hydroxylamine and shaken for 15 additional minutes at room temperature, all six samples were combined, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. The mixture was re-suspended in 1 mL 0.5% TFA and subjected to SPE again. The eluate was vortexed and split into one aliquot containing ~ 5% of the total peptide mixture (150 µg) and a second aliquot containing ~ 95% (2.85 mg). Both aliquots were frozen and dried in a speed vac. The 150 µg aliquot of the “input” material was saved at -80°C for quantification of unmodified peptides. The 2.85 mg aliquot was resuspended in 1.4 mL 1X IAP Buffer and subjected to IP with PTMScan Acetyl Lysine Motif IAP Beads per the manufacturer’s instructions. The flow-through and wash fractions were saved and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment via immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) using Ni-NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads as described previously (Cell Metab. 2012 Nov 7;16(5):672-83.), with slight modifications. The input material described above (5% of the large-scale mixture, ~ 150 µg of TMT-labeled peptides) was subjected to 5-step Stage-Tip High-pH reversed-phase fractionation.  Nano-LC-MS/MS for TMT proteomic experiment: All samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Each of the PTM enriched samples were analyzed with technical replicate runs. The 5 input material fractions were analyzed in singlicate. For each injection, the sample was first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20 mm × 180 µm trapping column (5 μl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed over a 90 minute gradient (flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute) of 3 to 30% acetonitrile using a 1.7 µm Acquity BEH130 C18 75 µm × 250 mm column (Waters Corp.), with a column temperature of 55ºC. MS1 (precursor ions) was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS2 spectra (product ions) were collected by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of the top 20 most abundant precursor ions with a charge greater than 1 per MS1 scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  Sample preparation for histone 13C acetylation experiment: Cells were treated for 24h with complete DMEM + 10% FBS in the presence or absence of 2 mM [U-13C]octanoate. Histones were extracted by following the Abcam histone extraction protocol for western blots. Acid-extracted histones (~750 uL in 0.2N HCl) were supplemented with 75 uL M Tris pH8 to neutralize the pH, then spiked with enough 8M Urea Lysis Buffer (197.5 uL) to achieve a final concentration of 1.5 M urea. Samples were sonicated, reduced, alkylated, as described above. Trypsin was added at 50:1 (protein:enzyme) and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C and desalted by SPE, and dried down in 95% and 5% aliquots as described above.  nanoLC-MS/MS data analysis of histone 13C acetylation experiment:  For each sample, the larger aliquot (95%) was subjected to acetyl IP and the eluate analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above, but with 2 μL (of 12 μL) run in duplicate over a 60 minute gradient of 5-40%, and a DDA top10 method with an MS2 AGC target of 5x104, an NCE of 27, and dynamic exclusion enabled for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing for TMT proteomic experiment: Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome discoverer v2.1 with service pack 1 (PD2.1 SP1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using both the Sequest HT and MS Amanda search engines. Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 50,189 sequences on the date of download (2/3/2016). Default search parameters included oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMTplex (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K). Phospho runs added phosphorylation (79.966 Da on S,T,Y) as a variable modification. Acetyl runs added acetylation (42.011 Da on K) and changed TMT to a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to a default value of 2 (but changed to 4 for acetyl runs) and enzyme specificity was trypsin (full). Considering each data type (acetyl, phospho, input) separately, PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDRusing the Percolator node of PD2.1. For acetyl and phospho data, site localization probabilities were determined for all modifications using the ptmRS algorithm. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 95% site localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides from all samples (phosho, acetyl, input) were grouped to proteins together using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.1. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs having co-isolation interference below 0.3 (30% of the ion current in the isolation window) and average reporter S/N>10 were summed together at the peptide group and protein level, but keeping quantification for each data type (phosho, acetyl, input) separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations. Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.1 results were exported as tab delimited .txt. files, opened in Microsoft EXCEL, and analyzed as described previously (Cell Metab. 2012 Nov 7;16(5):672-83.).   Data Processing for histone 13C acetylation experiment: Raw data was searched in PD2.1 with oxidation (M), acetylation (K), methylation (R), dimethylation (R), and trimethylation (R) as variable modifications, full tryptic cleavage and 7 missed cleavages (which was optimized by several rounds of searching). PTM localization, peptide and protein FDR were conducted as described above. The PD2.1.msf search results file and the FASTA database used for the search were uploaded to Skyline to analyze by MS1 filtering. To extract the M+0 through M+8 isotopologues for each peptide identified, the results were analyzed as if they were SILAC labeled, considering the M+0 through M+4 isotopologues as the isotope envelope for the “light” peptide (peptide identified by the PD2.1 search) and the M+4 through M+8 isotopologues as the “heavy” peptide (+4.01342 Da was added under the “Isotope Modifications” in the “Peptide Settings” menu to represent the addition of four 13C isotopes). Extracted ion chromatograms were produced for all matching scans containing precursors (“p” ion types) of charge states 2 through 7. Data was exported as MSstats Input and was analyzed in Excel.  As a quality control, the overlapping M+4 peaks (from treating each peptide as if were SILAC labeled) were compared and were determined to have negligible differences. For histone acetylpeptide isoforms overlapping with the TMT experiment, peak areas were further analyzed in MATLAB for the ten acetylpeptides that increased to the greatest extent with octanoate treatment in the TMT dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Cells integrate nutrient sensing and metabolism to&#xa0;coordinate proper cellular responses to a particular nutrient source. For example, glucose drives a&#xa0;gene expression program characterized by activating genes involved in its metabolism, in part by&#xa0;increasing glucose-derived histone acetylation.&#xa0;Here, we find that lipid-derived acetyl-CoA is a&#xa0;major source of carbon for histone acetylation. Using&#xa0;<sup>13</sup>C-carbon tracing combined with acetyl-proteomics, we show that up to 90% of acetylation on certain histone lysines can be derived from fatty acid carbon,&#xa0;even in the presence of excess glucose. By repressing both glucose and glutamine metabolism, fatty acid oxidation reprograms cellular metabolism,&#xa0;leading to increased lipid-derived acetyl-CoA. Gene expression profiling of octanoate-treated hepatocytes shows a pattern of upregulated lipid metabolic genes, demonstrating a specific transcriptional response to lipid. These studies expand the landscape of nutrient sensing and uncover how lipids and metabolism are integrated by epigenetic events that control gene expression.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Histone acetylation, Lipid

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Hirschey
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


