### Accession
PXD002860

### Title
MCF7 SILAC Comparison of Protein Expression for Acidosis Biomarkers

### Description
MCF7 cells were grown in culture under low pH and physiological pH conditions in order to generate candidate biomarkers for tumor acidosis.  SILAC was used to enable comparison of protein expression levels using relative quantification.  Two biological replicates were prepared using "label flipping," and each fraction was analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS.  Sample nomenclature includes N for "normal" or physiological pH versus L for low pH as the first letter with H for "heavy" and L for "light" as the second letter.  Therefore, one experiment is described as NH-LL, while the other is NL-LH.  Fifteen IEF fractions were generated and analyzed  with LC-MS/MS (RSLC and Orbitrap, Thermo) for each SILAC pair .

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed into denaturing buffer containing 50% trifluoroethanol; total protein was quantified using Bradford Assays.  Equal amounts of protein from the two cell lysates was mixed together for each SILAC experiment (using Lys+6 and Arg +10), reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin (Worthington).  Peptides were extracted for buffer exchange prior to isoelectric focusing.  Fifteen fractions were then analyzed with LC-MS/MS (RSLC and Orbitrap, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot (www.matrixscience.com).  Search parameters included assigning peptides with methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, stable isotope incorporation (13C6 Lys and 13C6 15N4 Arg) and up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages with ESI-TRAP selected as the instrument type.  Mass tolerance was set to 1.08 for intact peptides (to include assignments for peptides with the [M+1] peak selected) and 0.8 for fragment ions (due to low accuracy linear ion trap data).  Sequence identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann).  Results were filtered to require a PEP score < 0.05 and summed intensity > 0. Candidates were selected among proteins that consistently showed at least a 1.5-fold increase under low pH conditions across both biological experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Early cancers are avascular and hence, profoundly acidic. Pre-malignant cells must adapt to acidosis to thrive in this hostile microenvironment. Here, we investigate MCF-7 cells that are adapted to grow in acidic conditions using SILAC proteomics and we reveal a significant upregulation of lysosomal proteins. Prominent among these is LAMP2 that functions to protect lysosomal membranes from acid proteolysis. LAMP2 upregulation by acidosis is confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we show that the depletion of LAMP2 is sufficient to increase acidosis-mediated toxicity. In breast cancer patient samples, there is a high correlation of LAMP2 mRNA and protein expression with progression. We also observe that LAMP2 is located at the plasma membrane in clinical samples and this redistribution is acid-induced in vitro. Our findings suggest a potential adaptive mechanism, wherein cells chronically exposed to an acidic environment translocate lysosomal proteins to their surface, thus protecting the plasmalemma from acid-induced hydrolysis.

### Keywords
Mcf7 cells, Breast cancer, Silac, Acidosis

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Cancer Imaging and Metabolism Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Gillies
Cancer Imaging and Metabolism Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL USA


