### Accession
PXD007946

### Title
PIM1 kinase promotes gallbladder cancer cell proliferation via inhibition of proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa (PRAS40)

### Description
Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is associated with poor disease prognosis with a survival of less than 5 years in 90% the cases. This has been attributed to late presentation of the disease, lack of early diagnostic markers and limited efficiency of therapeutic interventions. Elucidation of the molecular events in GBC carcinogenesis can contribute in better management of the disease by aiding in identification of therapeutic targets. To identify the aberrantly activated signaling events in GBC, tandem mass tag-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of five GBC cell lines based on the invasive property was carried out. Using a panel of five GBC cell lines, a total of 2,623 phosphosites from 1,343 proteins were identified. Of these, 55 phosphosites were hyperphosphorylated and 39 phosphosites were hypophosphorylated in both replicates and all the 4 invasive GBC cell lines. Proline-rich Akt substrate 40 kDa (PRAS40) was one of the proteins found to be hyperphosphorylated in all the invasive GBC cell lines. Tissue microarray-based immunohistochemical labeling of phospho-PRAS40 (T246) revealed moderate to strong staining in 77% of the primary gallbladder adenocarcinoma cases. Inhibition of PRAS40 phosphorylation using inhibitors of its upstream kinases, PIM1 and AKT resulted in a significant decrease in cell proliferation, colony forming and invasive ability of the GBC cells. Our findings support the role of PRAS40 phosphorylation in tumor cell survival and aggressiveness in GBC and suggest its potential as a therapeutic target for GBC.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling  Each cell line was grown to 80% confluence, rinsed thrice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) devoid of Ca2+ and Mg2+ to remove traces of serum and other growth factors. The cells were then starved in serum-free medium containing 1% penicillin-streptomycin for 8h. After 8h, the cell lines were rinsed with PBS and lysed using a SDS-containing lysis buffer ((2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)). The cell lysates were then sonicated, heated at 95oC for 5 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assays (BCA) method. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) was employed to remove SDS. Briefly, equal amounts of protein from each cell line were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 20 min. SDS micelles and protein detergent complexes were disrupted using 8M urea. The detergent and excess reagents were filtered out through ultrafiltration using 30 kDa cut-off filters (Merck Millipore, MA). The peptides were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 10 min at room temperature and the excess reagents were filtered out by centrifugation. A second buffer exchange was carried out with 8M urea to further reduce the SDS concentration. The concentration of 8M urea was reduced through buffer exchange with 50 mM TEABC. Proteins were then digested using TPCK-treated trypsin (Worthington, NJ) at a 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio for 12 h at 37°C. The samples were then completely dried and reconstituted in 50mM TEABC buffer. Peptides from each sample were differentially labeled using TMT labeling reagents as per manufacturer’s instructions (catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were labeled with TMT channels are follows: TGBC24TKB with 126, SNU-308 with 127C, OCUG-1 with 128C, GB-d1 with 129C and G-415 with 130C.   Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)  The TMT-labeled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation. The 96 fractions obtained were concatenated into 12 fractions. From these pooled fractions, 100 µg equivalent peptides were taken for total proteome analysis. The remaining fractions were lyophilized and subjected to TiO2-based enrichment.. The phosphopeptide-enriched TiO2 beads were washed two times with 80% ACN in 3% TFA, eluted using 4% ammonia solution and neutralized with 3% TFA. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried, desalted using C18 Stage Tips and stored at -20oC till further analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis  The total proteome and enriched phosphopeptide fractions were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy NanoLC system. The peptide samples were enriched on a trap column (75μm x 2 cm) at a flow rate of 3μL/min and resolved on an analytical column (75μm x 15 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted in a linear gradient of 10-30% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 100 mins. Data dependent acquisition with full scans in 400-1600 m/z range. The parameters used for the LC-MS/MS analysis are as follows: MS and MS/MS scans were acquired at a mass resolution of 60,000 and 15,000 at 400 m/z, respectively. Full MS scans were acquired in m/z range of 350 – 1800. Twenty most abundant precursor ions with charge state ≥2 were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collision dissociation as the activation method with 42 % normalized collision energy. Isolation width was set to 1.9 m/z. The phosphopeptide fractions were analyzed twice on the mass spectrometer (two technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry-derived raw data obtained were searched using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithms against human protein database NCBI RefSeq (Release 65 containing 36,211 protein entries and known contaminants) using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters used include trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with a maximum two missed cleavages, oxidation at methionine and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as dynamic modifications, alkylation (carbamidomethyl) at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine as static modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. PhosphoRS (version 3.1) was used to calculate the confident mapping of the phosphosite within the identified peptide (PhosphoRS score ≥75). The data was also search against a decoy database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) at 1% FDR were used for identification of proteins. TMT quantitation was done using reporter ion intensities. The ratios, invasive neoplastic/non-invasive neoplastic, were obtained as follows – 127C (SNU-308)/126 (TGBC24TKB), 128C (OCUG-1)/126 (TGBC24TKB), 129C (GB-d1)/126 (TGBC24TKB) and 130C (G-415)/126 (TGBC24TKB).

### Publication Abstract
Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a rare malignancy, associated with poor disease prognosis with a 5-year survival of only 20%. This has been attributed to late presentation of the disease, lack of early diagnostic markers and limited efficacy of therapeutic interventions. Elucidation of molecular events in GBC can contribute to better management of the disease by aiding in the identification of therapeutic targets. To identify aberrantly activated signaling events in GBC, tandem mass tag-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of five GBC cell lines was carried out. Proline-rich Akt substrate 40&#xa0;kDa (PRAS40) was one of the proteins found to be hyperphosphorylated in all the invasive GBC cell lines. Tissue microarray-based immunohistochemical labeling of phospho-PRAS40 (T246) revealed moderate to strong staining in 77% of the primary gallbladder adenocarcinoma cases. Regulation of PRAS40 activity by inhibiting its upstream kinase PIM1 resulted in a significant decrease in cell proliferation, colony forming and invasive ability of GBC cells. Our results support the role of PRAS40 phosphorylation in GBC cell survival and aggressiveness. This study also elucidates phospho-PRAS40 as a clinical marker in GBC and the role of PIM1 as a therapeutic target in GBC.

### Keywords
Cell survival, Phosphoproteomics, Pi3k/akt/mtor, Targeted therapy, Gastrointestinal cancer, Sgi-1776

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066, India


