### Accession
PXD008553

### Title
Serum proteomic pattern in female stress urinary incontinence

### Description
The pathophysiology of Stress Urinary Incontinence (SUI) is poorly understood. The aim of this study was to identify the serum proteomic profile in patients with SUI and to replicate findings from a preceding study in which a significant difference in the urinary proteome was identified.  Serum samples were collected from 38 patients (19 SUI; 19 matched, continent controls). Sample preparation included serum albumin depletion, in-solution enzymatic digestion of proteins applying a combination of Gluc-C and trypsin and peptide separation using nano High Performance Liquid Chromatography. Label-free quantitation of peptides and proteins was performed after triplicate measurements using quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Peptide identification was achieved by searching the Human SwissProt Database using Mascot and X!Tandem. Main outcome measure was the relative abundance of each detected protein in serum.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were immediately centrifuged to separate serum from blood cells. Serum samples were then frozen in separate vials at -20°C until further processing. All HPLC separations were performed using biocompatible separation systems. To deplete the HSA-rich samples the CIMac-µHSA column of ca. 100 µL volume and ca. 1.20 µg/µL dynamic binding capacity for HSA was used (BIA Separations, Ajdovščina, Slovenia). Albumin depletion was performed on an ICS-5000 HPLC System (ThermoFisher, Vienna, Austria).  For depletion of albumin, the phosphate buffered saline buffer (pH 7.4) consisting of 0.01 M phosphate buffer, 0.0027 M KCl, and 0.14 M NaCl was used as buffer A. The Agilent elution buffer (pH 2.25) (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) was used as buffer B.  For sample injection, 50µl of serum was diluted four times with buffer A and 50µl were injected. The CIMac-αHSA column was coupled to ICS-5000 HPLC system (Dionex-Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) and operated at the column flow rate of 0.3 mL/min as follows: (1) flushing with buffer A from 0 to 5 min after sample injection, and collecting the FT fraction of 350 µL that corresponds to the whole absorbance peak; (2) eluting the albumin containing fraction from 5 to 10 min with buffer B, and collecting the elution (called here E) fraction of 350 µL; (3) washing the column with buffer A for 4 min followed by 3-min washing with buffer B and equilibrating with buffer A for 13 min. The depletion protocol took 30 min in total at the flow rate of 0.3 mL/min including the wash and complete reequilibration before the next depletion run.  In-solution enzymatic digestion of proteins applying a combination of Glu-C and trypsin (Promega, Vienna, Austria) for improved sequence coverage of proteins. The sample preparation was performed using published protocols. Briefly, upon protein precipitation, for salt removal, using modified Wessel-Fluegge precipitation method (using dichloromethane instead of chloroform), proteins were dissolved in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Vienna, Austria) which was prepared in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8.5) sulfide bridges of cysteines were reduce using dithiotreitol and alkylated with iodoacetic acid (all reagents were purchased from SigmaAldrich, Vienna, Austria). Glu-C was added in a ration of 1/50 (enzyme/protein) and proteins were digested for 4 hours at 37°C in an incubator prior to addition of trypsin, again in ration 1/50. The digestion with trypsin was performed over night for 16 hours and it was stopped by acidifying with 10µl of 0.01% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid.  Peptide separation was achieved using nano High Performance Liquid Chromatography on a nano RSLC Ultimate3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) using the PepMap C18 column (75µm ID x 50 cm length, 3µm ID, 100Å pore size, ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Separation column was mounted in a column oven and operated at 60°C. Prior to the separation on the nano separation column, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (300µm ID x 5mm length, PepMap 300Å pore size, ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Samples were injected using the user defined injection program (UDP) in order to minimize sample loss during the injection procedure and to enable improved sample loop and injection needle and injection valve wash and preventing or, at least, minimizing the carry over. Samples were loaded on the trap column using the loading pump’s flow at 30µl/min. Both the loading solvent used for sample injection and the loading mobile phase for sample transfer to the trap column were 0.1%TFA. The loading mobile phase was cooled to 3°C in order to enable better peptide trapping on the trap column, which was operated at 60°C in the column oven. Separation gradient for the nano HPLC was generated by mixing A: 95%water, 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and B: 60% acetonitrile, 30% methanol, 10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol, 10% water and 0.08% formic acid. Separation gradient was performed over a time of 360 minutes enabling the separation of peptides generated upon enzymatic digestion of the complex sample. Mass spectrometric detection of digested peptides was performed using the maXis Impact time-of-flight (qToF) MS (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) equipped with the Captive Spray nano electrospray source and operated at 1600 V, source temperature was set to 180°C, masses were scanned in the range of m/z 300 – m/z 2000. The twenty most intense signals were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using Collision Induced Dissociation. Single charged peptides were excluded from MS/MS fragmentation, peptides carrying charges of +2 - +4 were fragmented. Fragmented masses were excluded from further fragmentation for 60 seconds but were allowed if the following MS/MS intensity was three times higher as compared to the previous MS/MS peak intensity.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search was performed using the Human SwissProt Database in its actual version at the time of analysis. Data search was performed using Mascot v. 2.51 (http://www.matrixscience.com/). For the database search trypsin and Glu-C were selected as enzymes with carbamidomethyl on Cys as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr,  and Tyr as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm, MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da, and the search was performed in a decoy database with a false discovery rate set to 1%. The ion-score cut-off in Mascot was set to 15 and two peptides per protein were required for automatic detection.  The main outcome measure was the relative concentration of identified proteins in serum. Protein abundance was estimated by using peptide counts normalized to counts per million (cpm). Log2-fold change was estimated based on variance stabilized average log2 cpm values using the package edgeR. Resulting p values were corrected for multiple testing according to Storey et al. A q value of <0.25 was considered statistically significant. Proteins were defined as “not detected” if they were present in <20% of samples per group. Proteins were defined as “detected” if they were present in >80% of the samples. If proteins were detected in SUI but not detected in controls, they were declared as “induced”. If proteins were detected in controls, but not in SUI samples, they were declared as “depleted”. This manuscript was structured according to the guidelines STROBE (for observational studies) and MIAPE (for proteomic research).

### Publication Abstract
The pathophysiology of Stress Urinary Incontinence (SUI) is poorly understood. The aim of this study was to identify the serum proteomic profile in patients with SUI and to replicate findings from a preceding study in which a significant difference in the urinary proteome was identified. Serum samples were collected from 38&#xa0;patients (19 SUI; 19 matched, continent controls). Sample preparation included serum albumin depletion, in-solution enzymatic digestion of proteins applying a combination of Gluc-C and trypsin and peptide separation using nano High Performance Liquid Chromatography. Label-free quantitation of peptides and proteins was performed after triplicate measurements using quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Peptide identification was achieved by searching the Human SwissProt Database using Mascot and X!Tandem. Main outcome measure was the relative abundance of each detected protein in serum. Of 7012 identified proteins, 33 proteins were induced (detected in SUI, not in controls) and five proteins were depleted (detected in controls, not in SUI). All depleted proteins play a role in immune/DNA damage response. Induced proteins are involved in inflammatory response, response to cellular stress, coagulation and cytoskeleton stability/ motility. Plasma serine protease inhibitor (SERPINA5) was found induced and previously also showed a higher abundance in urine samples of SUI patients. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008553.

### Keywords
Urinary incotinence, Proteomics, Female, Serum, Stress

### Affiliations
Medizinische Universität Wien
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria


