### Accession
PXD027588

### Title
Deciphering the major metabolic pathways associated with aluminum tolerance in popcorn roots using label-free quantitative proteomics

### Description
Aluminum toxicity is one of the most important abiotic stresses that affects crop production worldwide. The soluble form (Al3+) inhibits root growth, altering water and nutrients uptake reducing the plant growth and development. Under a long term of Al3+ exposure, plants can activate several tolerance mechanisms and, to date, there are no reports of large-scale proteomic data of maize in response to this ion. To investigate the post-transcriptional regulation in response to Al toxicity, we performed a label-free quantitative proteomics for comparative analysis of two Al-contrasting popcorn inbred lines and an Al-tolerant commercial hybrid during 72 h under Al-stress. A total of 489 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified in the Al-sensitive inbred line, 491 in the Al-tolerant inbred line, and 277 in the commercial hybrid. Among then, 120 DAPs were co-expressed in both Al tolerant genotypes. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that starch and sucrose metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and carbohydrate metabolism were significant biochemical process regulated in response to Al toxicity. The up-accumulation of sucrose synthase and the increased of sucrose content and starch degradation suggest that these components may be enhance popcorn tolerance to Al stress. The up-accumulation of citrate synthase suggests a key role of this enzyme in the detoxification process in the Al-tolerant inbred line. The integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data indicated that Al tolerance response presents a complex regulatory network into the transcription and translation dynamics of popcorn roots development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Analysis Total Protein Extraction  Samples (300 mg fresh material each, in three biological replicates) from each genotype (Al-tolerant inbred line, Al-sensitive inbred line, and commercial hybrid) under control and Al-stress conditions, were first macerated to a fine powder with liquid nitrogen, resuspended in 1 mL of extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA; Sigma-Aldrich; St. Louis, USA) in acetone (Merck; Darmstadt, Germany) with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; GE Healthcare; Piscataway, USA), vortexed for 5 min at 4 °C, and kept at – 20 °C for 1 h and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone containing 20 mM DTT and subsequently air dried. The pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea (GE Healthcare), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 1% DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonide (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich), complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and 2% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), vortexed for 30 min, and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations were determined using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare; Piscataway, USA).  Protein Digestion  Before the trypsin digestion step, protein samples were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform methodology to remove any interferent from samples (Nanjo et al. 2012). After protein precipitation, samples were resuspended in urea 7 M/thiourea 2 M solution for proper resuspension. Protein digestion was performed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology as described by Wiśniewski et al. (2009), with modifications. Before starting the digestion procedure, an integrity test was made to check for damaged filter units (Hernandez-Valladares et al. 2016), thus only the working units were used. After that, protein aliquots were added to the Microcon-30 kDa filter units (Millipore) (Lipecka et al. 2016), washed with 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (solution A), and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 min at 25 °C (unless otherwise stated, all centrifugation steps were performed at this condition). This step was repeated once for complete removal of urea before reduction of proteins. Next, 100 µL of 50 mM DTT (GE Healthcare) freshly made in solution A were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 20 min at 60 °C (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 4 min resting). Then, 200 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (solution B) were added, and centrifuged for 15 min. For protein alkylation, 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) freshly prepared in solution B were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 20 min at 25 °C in the dark (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 19 min resting). Next, 200 µL of solution B were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated once. Then, 200 µL of solution A were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated twice. In the last washing, it should remain approximately 50 µL of sample. For protein digestion, 25 µL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest (Waters, Milford, CT, USA) and 25 µL of trypsin solution (1:100 enzyme:protein, V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 4 min resting). For peptide elution, the filter units were transferred for new microtubes and centrifuged for 10 min. Then, 50 µL of solution A were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated once. For RapiGest precipitation and trypsin inhibition, 5 µL of 15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Then, samples were centrifuged for 15 min, the supernatants collected, and vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µL solution of 95% 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were quantified by the A205 nm protein and peptide methodology using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis   Mass spectrometry was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK). Runs consisted of three biological replicates of 1 µg of digested proteins. During separation, samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 5 μm trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μL/min during 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity M-Class HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL/min, with a column temperature of 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia, Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution started at 5% B, then ramped from 5% B to 40% B up to 91.12 min, and from 40% B to 99% B until 95.12 min, being maintained at 99% until 99.12 min, then decreasing to 5% B until 101.12 min, and kept 5% B until the end of experiment at 117.00 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility (HDMSE), and in DIA mode; ion mobility separation used an IMS wave velocity ramp starting with 800 m/s and ending with 500 m/s; the transfer collision energy ramped from 25 V to 55 V in high-energy mode; cone and capillary voltages of 30 V and 3000 V, respectively; nano flow gas of 0.5 Bar and purge gas of 150 L/h; and a source temperature of 100 °C. In TOF parameters, the scan time was set to 0.6 s in continuum mode with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. The human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol/μL was used as an external calibrant and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra acquisition was performed by MassLynx v4.0 software.  Proteomic data analysis   Spectra processing and database search conditions were performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) software v.3.02 (Waters). After optimization using the free software PLGS Threshold Inspector v2.4, the analysis utilized the following parameters: Apex3D of 150 counts for low-energy threshold, 25 counts for elevated-energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; one missed cleavage; minimum fragment ions per peptide equal to three; minimum fragment ions per protein equal to seven; minimum peptides per protein equal to two; fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY); default false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%; automatic peptide and fragment tolerance. For protein identification, we used the sugarcane protein databank (Zhang et al. 2018), using a concatenated target-decoy approach for FDR estimation by reversing the database. Label-free quantification analyses were performed using ISOQuant software v.1.7 (Distler et al. 2014). Briefly, we used the following parameters: peptide and protein FDR 1%, sequence length of at least six amino acid residues, and minimum peptide score equal to six. Samples were normalized by a multidimensional normalization process, which corrects peak intensities based on the intensity and retention time domains. The software performed the relative protein quantification according to the TOP3 method. Based on relative abundances of uniquely assigned peptides, the abundances of shared peptides were redistributed to the respective source proteins, followed by the TOP3-based quantification (Distler et al. 2014). The output table contains the detailed settings used by ISOQuant for data analysis. To ensure the quality of the results after data processing, only proteins present in all three runs were accepted for differential abundance analysis. Proteins were deemed up-accumulated if the log2 value of the fold change (FC) was greater than 0.60 and down-accumulated if the log2 value of the FC was less than − 0.60, according to Student’s t test (two-tailed, P < 0.05) and after P value correction with the Benjamini-Hochberg test. Functional annotations were performed using Blast2Go software v.5.0 (Conesa et al. 2005) and UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org). The functional enrichment analysis was performed using OmicsBox software 1.2.4 (https://www.biobam.com/omicsbox) and Metascape (Zhou et al. 2019) (http://metascape.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Popcorn root, Metabolic pathways, Label-free proteomics, Aluminum stress

### Affiliations
General Biology Department, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Tecidual, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF)

### Submitter
Vitor Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr José Marcelo Soriano Viana
General Biology Department, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil


