### Accession
PXD026063

### Title
Arabidopsis Wdr8 interactors identification

### Description
To identify Arabidopsis Wdr8 interactors, immunoprecipitation associated LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out. Crude proteins extracted from Wdr8-GFP expressing transgenic plants was subjected to the immuno-precipitation assay using GFP antibody magnetic beads (µMACS GFP isolation kit, Miltenyi Biotec). Co-purified proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with SYPRO Ruby (BioRad laboratories). The stained protein bands were excised into several fraction pieces according to protein sizes, and in-gel protein digestion by trypsin was carried out. Purified protein peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (LTQ-Orbitrap XL-HTC-PAL system). Collected MS/MS peak spectra was analyzed by the MASCOT server to identify peptide sequence.

### Sample Protocol
Crude proteins extracted from Wdr8-GFP expressing transgenic plants was subjected to the immuno-precipitation assay using GFP antibody magnetic beads (µMACS GFP isolation kit, Miltenyi Biotec). Co-purified proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with SYPRO Ruby (BioRad laboratories). The stained protein bands were excised into several fraction pieces according to protein sizes, and in-gel protein digestion by trypsin was carried out. Purified protein peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (LTQ-Orbitrap XL-HTC-PAL system). Collected MS/MS peak spectra was analyzed by the MASCOT server to identify peptide sequence.

### Data Protocol
Collected MS/MS peak spectra was analyzed by the MASCOT server against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) data to identify peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubules are severed by katanin at distinct cellular locations to facilitate reorientation or amplification of dynamic microtubule arrays, but katanin targeting mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we show that a centrosomal microtubule-anchoring complex is used to recruit katanin in acentrosomal plant cells. The conserved protein complex of Msd1 (also known as SSX2IP) and Wdr8 is localized at microtubule nucleation sites along the microtubule lattice in interphase Arabidopsis cells. Katanin is recruited to these sites for efficient release of newly formed daughter microtubules. Our cell biological and genetic studies demonstrate that Msd1-Wdr8 acts as a specific katanin recruitment factor to cortical nucleation sites (but not to microtubule crossover sites) and stabilizes the association of daughter microtubule minus ends to their nucleation sites until they become severed by katanin. Molecular coupling of sequential anchoring and severing events by the evolutionarily conserved complex renders microtubule release under tight control of katanin activity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Gfp antibody coupled immunoprecipitation, Arabidopsis seedlings

### Affiliations
Division of Biological Science Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules, Nagoya university

### Submitter
Noriyoshi Yagi

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Hashimoto
Division of Biological Science Nara Institute of Science and Technology


