### Accession
PXD041552

### Title
Hepatic palmitoyl-proteomes and acyl-protein thioesterase protein proximity networks link lipid modification and mitochondria

### Description
Elevated fatty acids are associated with insulin resistance. Fatty acids can reversibly modify proteins through a process known as S-palmitoylation. To test the hypothesis that depalmitoylation by acyl-protein thioesterases 1 and 2 (APT1 and APT2) in the liver regulates glucose metabolism, we generated liver-specific APT1 and/or APT2 knockout mice, fed them a high-fat diet (HFD), and then used acyl resin-assisted capture to isolate palmitoylated proteins from APT KO livers. We found that APT1 predominates over APT2 in the liver, primarily depalmitoylating mitochondrial proteins, including several proteins linked to glutamine metabolism. To corroborate these APT1 and APT2 substrates and identify other APT regulators, we determined the protein-protein proximity network of APT1 and APT2 by fusing each enzyme to the biotin ligase miniTurbo (mT). Expression of these APT-mT constructs in HepG2 cells, followed by purification of biotin-labeled proteins and mass spectrometry, revealed APT proximity networks encompassing mitochondrial proteins including the major translocases Tomm20 and Timm44. APT1 also interacted with Slc1a5 (ASCT2), the only glutamine transporter known to localize to mitochondria. HFD-fed male mice with dual but not single deletion of APT1 and APT2 from the liver had insulin resistance and fasting hyperglycemia. Elevated fasting glucose was also associated with increased glutamine-driven gluconeogenesis and decreased liver mass. These data suggest that APT1 and APT2 regulate hepatic glucose metabolism and insulin signaling in a functionally redundant manner. The identification of hepatic depalmitoylation substrates and protein-protein proximity networks for APT1 and APT2 establishes a framework for defining mechanisms underlying metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample protocol 1 (Palmitoyl-proteomics):   Acyl-resin assisted capture was used to isolate palmitoylated proteins for analysis by mass spectrometry. Liver was mechanically homogenized and diluted with lysis buffer with 2.5% SDS and 0.1% S-methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS), then precipitated in acetone. Samples were treated with hydroxylamine (HA+), or a negative control not treated by HA (HA-). Thiopropyl sepharose bead slurry (Cytiva) was added to each sample for affinity purification. Palmitoylated proteins were eluted from the beads with DTT then analyzed by TMT-labeled mass spectrometry.   Sample protocol 2 (miniTurbo):    APT-miniTurbo constructs were stably expressed in HepG2 cells then treated with 50 uM biotin for 2h. Unique passage numbers were used for biological replicates. Washed cell pellets were frozen then later lyses. 180 uL of washed streptavidin agarose 50% bead slurry was added to 20 mg of protein from each sample and rotated overnight for affinity purification. Beads were washed followed by on-bead digestion. Residual detergent was removed by ethyl acetate extraction. Peptides were analyzed using a nano-Elute chromatograph coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen Germany) with a modified nano-electrospray source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). The MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded from m/z 100 to 1700.

### Data Protocol
Data protocol 1 (Palmitoylation-proteomics):   Mass spectrometric (MS) data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The tandem MS spectra (MS/MS) with charges +2, +3 and +4 were analyzed using Mascot software63 (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.7.0). The searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. MS/MS spectra were set up to search against a Uniprot (ver Oct. 2019) database of mouse proteins (17,148 entries) and common contaminant proteins (cRAP, v1.0 Jan. 2012; 116 entries), assuming the digestion enzyme was trypsin/P with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation, N-terminal glutamine-to-pyroglutamic acid conversion and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) by searching against a reversed database and the ascribed peptide and protein identities were accepted.    Data protocol 2 (miniTurbo):   Suitable precursor ions for PASEF-MS/MS were selected in real time from TIMS-MS survey scans by a PASEF scheduling algorithm. A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700, and the collision energy was ramped stepwise as a function of increasing ion mobility: 52 eV for 0–19% of the ramp time; 47 eV from 19–38%; 42 eV from 38–57%; 37 eV from 57–76%; and 32 eV for the remainder. The TIMS elution voltage was calibrated linearly using the Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix (m/z 622, 922, 1222).

### Publication Abstract
Acyl-protein thioesterases 1 and 2 (APT1 and APT2) reverse S-acylation, a potential regulator of systemic glucose metabolism in mammals. Palmitoylation proteomics in liver-specific knockout mice shows that APT1 predominates over APT2, primarily depalmitoylating mitochondrial proteins, including proteins linked to glutamine metabolism. miniTurbo-facilitated determination of the protein-protein proximity network of APT1 and APT2 in HepG2 cells reveals APT proximity networks encompassing mitochondrial proteins including the major translocases Tomm20 and Timm44. APT1 also interacts with Slc1a5 (ASCT2), the only glutamine transporter known to localize to mitochondria. High-fat-diet-fed male mice with dual (but not single) hepatic deletion of APT1 and APT2 have insulin resistance, fasting hyperglycemia, increased glutamine-driven gluconeogenesis, and decreased liver mass. These data suggest that APT1 and APT2 regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism and insulin signaling is functionally redundant. Identification of substrates and protein-protein proximity networks for APT1 and APT2 establishes a framework for defining mechanisms underlying metabolic disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proximity networks, Palmitoylation, Proteomics, Lipid

### Affiliations
Washington University School of Medicine
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Qiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Clay Semenkovich
Washington University School of Medicine


