### Accession
PXD015833

### Title
An Exported Kinase Family Mediates Species-Specific Erythrocyte Remodelling and Virulence in Human Malaria

### Description
The most severe form of human malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum. Its virulence is closely linked to the increase in rigidity and cytoadhesion of infected erythrocytes, which obstruct blood flow to vital organs. Unlike other human-infecting Plasmodium species, P. falciparum exports a family of 18 ‘FIKK’ serine/threonine kinases into the host cell. We reveal substantial species-specific phosphorylation of erythrocyte proteins by P. falciparum, but not by Plasmodium knowlesi, which does not export FIKK kinases. By systematic deletion of all FIKK kinases combined with large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics we identify unique phosphorylation fingerprints for each kinase, including phosphosites on parasite virulence factors and host cell proteins. Despite their non-overlapping target sites, a network analysis reveals that some FIKKs may act in the same pathways. Only deletion of the non-exported kinase FIKK8 resulted in reduced parasite growth, suggesting the exported FIKKs may support functions important for survival within the host. We show that one kinase, FIKK4.1, mediates both cytoskeletal rigidification and trafficking of the adhesin and key virulence factor PfEMP1 to the host cell surface. This establishes the FIKK family as important drivers of parasite evolution and malaria pathology.

### Sample Protocol
The phosphoproteomics data presented are from 6 isobaric labelling experiments. The first included red blood cells (RBCs) infected with either Plasmodium falciparum (PF) or Plasmodium knowlesi (PK) and uninfected RBCs. The second included RBCs from three different patients with different blood types, either infected with PF or uninfected. The third included 4 FIKK kinase conditional knockout lines in a 1G5 line (FIKK4.1, FIKK7.1, FIKK10.1 and FIKK11), as well as the parental 1G5 line, treated with either DMSO (vehicle-only control) or rapamycin (to induce gene deletion). Experiment 4 and 5 both included 4 FIKK kinase conditional knockout lines in a NF54 line (Exp4: FIKK5, FIKK10.2, FIKK4.2, FIKK9s; Exp5: FIKK1, FIKK3, FIKK13, FIKK11), each treated with DMSO or rapamycin, as well as the parental line infected with PF or PK. Experiment 6 included 5 FIKK kinase conditional knockout lines in NF54 (FIKK1, FIKK4.1, FIKK4.2, FIKK10.2, FIKK12), treated with DMSO or rapamycin. For all conditional knockout lines and the 1G5 control, tightly synchronised ring-stage parasites were treated with 100 nM rapamycin or DMSO for 4 hours, and schizonts were enriched by magnet approximately 72 hours later. Across all experiments, infected RBCs were enriched by magnet purification at 40-46hpi for PF infected RBCs and ~24hpi for PK infected RBCs, to a purity of between 95-99% parasitemia. Flowthrough uninfected RBC samples for experiment 1 and 2 contained <1% infected cells. Samples were immediately lysed in ice cold 8M urea in 50mM HEPES pH8.5, supplemented with protease (Complete mini, Roche) and phosphatase (Phos Stop, Roche) inhibitors, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80°C. Once thawed, samples were further solubilized by sonication (3 x 30 seconds bursts) on ice, followed by a 30-minute centrifugation (14000 rpm, 4°C). Protein content was estimated by a BCA protein assay (Pierce) and a 1 mg aliquot of each sample was taken. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (30 minutes at 56°C) and then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (30 minutes, room temperature in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol and then each sample was diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to <2M prior to digestion with LysC (Promega) for 3 hours at 37°C followed by trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. After acidification the samples were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 2.4 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After verifying labelling efficiency, the samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, vacuum dried and desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. At this point an aliquot of the mixed samples was taken for proteome analysis. For experiments 1, 2 and 3 Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) fractionation was performed prior to phosphopeptide enrichment with sequential Titansphere beads (GL Sciences Japan) and Fe-NTA enrichment kit (Thermo Scientific). For experiments 4, 5 and 6 combined TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide eluates were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The dried TMT labelled phosphopeptide fractions (12 for experiments 1, 2 and 3; and 8 for experiments 4, 5 and 6), as well as the proteome samples, were desalted on stage tip and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or QExactive (both Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50 cm, 75μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a 3-hour gradient. The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Two replicate injections were made for each phospho-enriched fraction (all experiments except 2) with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies (Jiang et al. 2017). For experiment 2 the MSA SPS MS3 strategy was used whereas for proteome analysis the MS2 HCD.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data was processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) (version 1.5.2.8) and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Plasmodium falciparum (PlasmoDB, 2018), Plasmodium knowlesi (PlasmoDB, 2018) and Homo sapiens (UniProt, 2018) proteomes using Andromeda (Cox  et al. 2011) search engine. TMT based experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the ‘reporter ion MS2 or MS3’ built-in quantification algorithm with reporter mass tolerance set to 0.003 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus, deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 or 3 missed cleavages depending on the experiment. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. ‘Match between runs’ option was enabled (time window 0.7 min) for fractionated samples. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level.

### Publication Abstract
The most severe form of human malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum. Its virulence is closely linked to the increase in rigidity of infected erythrocytes and their adhesion to endothelial receptors, obstructing blood flow to vital organs. Unlike other human-infecting Plasmodium species, P. falciparum exports a family of 18 FIKK serine/threonine kinases into the host cell, suggesting that phosphorylation may modulate erythrocyte modifications. We reveal substantial species-specific phosphorylation of erythrocyte proteins by P. falciparum but not by Plasmodium knowlesi, which does not export FIKK kinases. By conditionally deleting all FIKK kinases combined with large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics we identified unique phosphorylation fingerprints for each kinase, including phosphosites on parasite virulence factors and host erythrocyte proteins. Despite their non-overlapping target sites, a network analysis revealed that some FIKKs may act in the same pathways. Only the deletion of the non-exported kinase FIKK8 resulted in reduced parasite growth, suggesting the exported FIKKs may instead support functions important for survival in the host. We show that one kinase, FIKK4.1, mediates both rigidification of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton and trafficking of the adhesin and key virulence factor PfEMP1 to the host cell surface. This establishes the FIKK family as important drivers of parasite evolution and malaria pathology.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Phosphorylation, Malaria, Fikk kinases, Red blood cell

### Affiliations
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Malgorzata Broncel

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK


