### Accession
PXD005655

### Title
Plasma Glycopeptide Enrichment

### Description
We have compared three different glycopeptide enrichment techniques (SAX-ERLIC, HILIC, and lectin affinity) and a C18 control to a tryptic digest of proteins from depleted human plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma was depleted of the 14 most abundant proteins and digested into peptides. Three glycopeptide enrichment workflows were used in addition to a C18 control workflow. A SOLA C18 solid phase extraction cartridge was used for C18 cleanup. A multilectin column was used for affinity chromatography and the samples underwent subsequent C18 cleanup. HILIC was performed using Sepharose media. Strong anion exchange chromatography using ERLIC was performed using SOLA SAX SPE cartridges. All samples were analyzed by a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The C18 control and SAX-ERLIC samples were also analyzed by and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Data dependent acquisition was performed using HCD and ETD was triggered when oxonium ions were present.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Byonic (ProteinMetrics) against the human Swiss-Prot database. A focused database with decoys was also created for each search. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm was selected and HCD and ETD tolerance were set to 0.5 Da. The following modifications were selected: carbamidomethyl on cysteine (fixed modification), methionine oxidation (common modification), and asparagine deamidation (rare modification). The N-glycan human database provided in Byonic was used to search for N-glycan compositions.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is of increasing interest due to its important roles in protein function and aberrant expression with disease. Characterizing protein glycosylation remains analytically challenging due to its low abundance, ion suppression issues, and microheterogeneity at glycosylation sites, especially in complex samples such as human plasma. In this study, the utility of three common N-linked glycopeptide enrichment techniques is compared using human plasma. By analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, electrostatic repulsion hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography using strong anion exchange solid-phase extraction (SAX-ERLIC) provided the most extensive N-linked glycopeptide enrichment when compared with multilectin affinity chromatography (M-LAC) and Sepharose-HILIC enrichments. SAX-ERLIC enrichment yielded 191 unique glycoforms across 72 glycosylation sites from 48 glycoproteins, which is more than double that detected using other enrichment techniques. The greatest glycoform diversity was observed in SAX-ERLIC enrichment, with no apparent bias toward specific glycan types. SAX-ERLIC enrichments were additionally analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer to maximize glycopeptide identifications for a more comprehensive assessment of protein glycosylation. In these experiments, 829 unique glycoforms were identified across 208 glycosylation sites from 95 plasma glycoproteins, a significant improvement from the initial method comparison and one of the most extensive site-specific glycosylation analysis in immunodepleted human plasma to date. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005655.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Glycopeptide

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection


