### Accession
PXD020948

### Title
Comprehensive Proteomic Analysis of Exosomes Derived from Human Bone Marrow-, Adipose Tissue-, and Human Umbilical Cord- Mesenchymal Stem Cells

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)-derived exosomes (exo) have shown comprehensive application prospects over the years. Despite similar functions, exomes from different origins present heterogeneous characteristics and components; however, there are no relevant proteomic analyses. In this study, we isolated exosomes from MSCs, derived from different tissues, by ultracentrifugation. A total of 1014 proteins were detected using a label-free method and analyzed with bioinformatics tools. The results revealed their shared function in the extracellular matrix receptor. Bone marrow-MSCs-derived exosomes showed superior regeneration ability. Likewise, adipose tissue-MSCs-derived exosomes played a significant role in immune regulation. Whereas, umbilical cord-MSCs-derived exosomes were more prominent in tissue damage repair.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The samples were taken from -80 °C and treated with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor). After ultrasonic cracking and centrifugation, protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C. Iodoacetamide (11 mM) was used as a decontaminant at room temperature in darkness. Furthermore, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to reduce the areal concentration of dithiothreitol to 1 mM. Finally, the sample was digested with trypsin at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight. The digested peptide was desalted using a C18 column. LC–MS/MS analysis The peptides were dissolved by liquid chromatography in mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution) and separated using a NanoElute ultra-high-performance liquid phase system from a C18 trap column to a C18 analytical column at a speed of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B was an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (v1.6.6.0) was used to retrieve the secondary mass spectrometer data. The database is SwissProt_Human (20422 proteins). The sequences of the identified proteins were mapped to Gene Ontology (GO) to determine their biological and functional properties using InterProScan (v.5.14-53.0 http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). Protein-enriched pathways were generated via Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis and KAAS (v.2.0 http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main). The identified proteins were compared with the ExoCarta database (http://www.exocarta.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cells; exosomes; proteomics; extracellular vesicles; stem cell-based therapy.

### Affiliations
Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430030, PR China
Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Zhenggang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zheng-gang Wang
Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430030, PR China


