### Accession
PXD029955

### Title
Reactivity-dependent profiling of RNA 5-methylcytidine dioxygenases

### Description
Epitranscriptomic RNA modifications can regulate fundamental biological processes, but we lack approaches to map modification sites and probe writer enzymes. Here we present a chemoproteomic strategy to characterize RNA 5-methylcytidine (m5C) dioxygenase enzymes in their native context based upon metabolic labeling and activity-based crosslinking with 5-ethynylcytidine (5-EC), RNA-protein enrichment, and quantitative proteomics. We profile m5C dioxygenases in human cells including ALKBH1 and TET2 and use quantitative nucleoside LC-MS to show that ALKBH1 is the major hm5C and f5C-forming enzyme in RNA, including upon polyadenylated RNA. Further, we map ALKBH1 modification sites transcriptome-wide using 5-EC-based iCLIP analysis to show that ALKBH1 oxidizes m5C in a variety of tRNA anticodon stem loops (ASL), as well as on mRNA and lncRNA, and analyze its substrate specificity using in vitro enzymatic assays. Finally, we apply pyridine borane-mediated sequencing to identify f5C sites in tRNA ASLs. Our work provides powerful chemical approaches for studying RNA m5C dioxygenases and mapping oxidative m5C modifications and reveals the existence of novel epitranscriptomic pathways for regulating RNA function.

### Sample Protocol
WT HEK 293T cells (5-10 x 10 cm plates) were grown to 50% confluency, induced with tetracycline (1 µg/mL), and cultured for 24 hours to ~80% confluency before overnight treatment with 1 mM 5-EC (500 mM stock in DMSO) or vehicle. Cells were harvested and poly(A) pulldown was performed following published protocols with minor modifications (DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.021; DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.031). 1mL of oligo(dT) lysis buffer [20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% LDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT (supplemented freshly), and protease inhibitor tablet] and 75 µL of equilibrated oligo(dT) beads were used per plate. Lysis, enrichment, and washes were performed at ambient temperature, and washes were performed with lysis buffer, NP-40 washing buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT), and NP-40 free washing buffer (just for proteomics experiments). Bead-bound RNA was eluted with oligo(dT) elution buffer [(40 µL/plate), 20mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA] for 5 minutes at 80 C with shaking. The incubation-wash-elution procedure was repeated 2 more times, and the elutions combined and concentrated to ~75-50 µL. RNA in the elutions was digested with 25 unit/mL RNase A and 2000 unit/mL RNase T1 in 40 mM NaCl and 2 mM MgCl2 at 37 C for 1 hr. The remaining protein and the input were run on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel analyzed by western blot (anti-FLAG). Sample volume was adjusted to 200 µL with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8 and incubated with 5 mM TCEP at 60 C for 10 min and then with 15 mM chloroacetamide in the dark at RT for 30 min. Proteins were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, 2 µg) and incubated at 37 C for 16 hours. Samples were acidified 0.2% TFA and desalted using SDB stage-tips65. Samples were dried processed for mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) as described previously (DOI:10.1021/jacs.7b09213). Experiments were performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed as described previously (DOI: 10.1021/jacs.7b09213) using Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.9, Proteome Software Inc.) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Quantitation of protein abundance was done by spectral counting. Proteins were only selected for quantification if they were present in at least two replicates and not in the negative control.

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptomic RNA modifications can regulate fundamental biological processes, but we lack approaches to map modification sites and probe writer enzymes. Here we present a chemoproteomic strategy to characterize RNA 5-methylcytidine (m<sup>5</sup>C) dioxygenase enzymes in their native context based upon metabolic labeling and activity-based crosslinking with 5-ethynylcytidine (5-EC). We profile m<sup>5</sup>C dioxygenases in human cells including ALKBH1 and TET2 and show that ALKBH1 is the major hm<sup>5</sup>C- and f<sup>5</sup>C-forming enzyme in RNA. Further, we map ALKBH1 modification sites transcriptome-wide using 5-EC-iCLIP and ARP-based sequencing to identify ALKBH1-dependent m<sup>5</sup>C oxidation in a variety of tRNAs and mRNAs and analyze ALKBH1 substrate specificity in vitro. We also apply targeted pyridine borane-mediated sequencing to measure f<sup>5</sup>C sites on select tRNA. Finally, we show that f<sup>5</sup>C at the wobble position of tRNA-Leu-CAA plays a role in decoding Leu codons under stress. Our work provides powerful chemical approaches for studying RNA m<sup>5</sup>C dioxygenases and mapping oxidative m<sup>5</sup>C modifications and reveals the existence of novel epitranscriptomic pathways for regulating RNA function.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, M5c, Rna modification, Metabolic rna labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Princeton University Chemistry Department

### Submitter
Emilia Arguello

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph E. Kleiner
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA


