### Accession
PXD001059

### Title
Differences in oocyte composition anticipate differences in embryo quality: a proteomic study in inbred mice

### Description
Current models of early development assign major roles to stochastic processes and epigenetic regulation, whose influence is considered to outweigh the genetic differences that exist between individuals. However, epigenetic agents are ultimately encoded by genes. It follows that the variable endowment of oocytes in these genes’ products could influence, prime or even predetermine developmental trajectories and features of embryos. As model system we used inbred strains of mice (129/Sv, C57Bl/6, C3H/HeN, DBA/2J). We examined if and in how far the composition of oocytes is conserved after we observed large variability in developmental competence and embryo quality across the four strains. Using state-of-the-art proteomics (SILAC LC-MS/MS) combined with transcriptomics (RNA deep sequencing) we quantified 2012 protein groups and 15205 transcripts present simultaneously in oocytes of all four strains. Proteome and transcriptome expression levels had little correlation with each other, whereby the endowment of oocytes in proteins with known or putative function in embryo development could not be predicted from mRNA abundance. Our data show that depending on the oocyte donor strain, resultant embryos have different qualities that correlate with the abundance of catalytic proteins, highlighting the importance of proteomic quantifications in modern embryology. Thus, different strains of mice should not be used interchangeably when tackling questions about oogenesis and early development, and a variety of strains should be studied to yield results of sufficient general validity.

### Sample Protocol
F9 carcinoma cells stably labeled with heavy Lys-8 and Arg-10 were used as reference sample in a spike-in SILAC approach (Geiger et al., 2011). Proteins from zona-free oocytes were mixed 1:1 (protein amount) with heavy F9 carcinoma cell lysate, acetone precipated, reduced and alkylated and and then digested with Endoproteinase Lys-C (3hr) and Trypsin (over night). Following desalting on Empore 3M C18 discs, samples were offline fractionated by RP-HPLC at pH10.2 (Buffer A: 10mM ammoniumformiate pH 10.2; Buffer B: 10mM ammoniumformiate, 90% acetonitril; linear gradient from 0-35% B in 70min; 35 - 70% B in 15min; 70% B for 10min; Waters XBridge BEH C18 2.1 x 150mm). 15 pools from each sample were generated by concatenated fractionation, dried down in a SpeedVac and subsequently analysed individually by LC MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA 02454, USA), equipped with an Easy nano-LC system and a nano electrospray source (both from Proxeon, Odense, Denmark).

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (v 1.4.1.2).

### Publication Abstract
Current models of early mouse development assign roles to stochastic processes and epigenetic regulation, which are considered to be as influential as the genetic differences that exist between strains of the species Mus musculus. The aim of this study was to test whether mouse oocytes vary from each other in the abundance of gene products that could influence, prime, or even predetermine developmental trajectories and features of derivative embryos. Using the paradigm of inbred mouse strains, we quantified 2010 protein groups (SILAC LC-MS/MS) and 15205 transcripts (RNA deep sequencing) present simultaneously in oocytes of four strains tested (129/Sv, C57Bl/6J, C3H/HeN, DBA/2J). Oocytes differed according to donor strain in the abundance of catalytic and regulatory proteins, as confirmed for a subset (bromodomain adjacent to zinc finger domain, 1B [BAZ1B], heme oxygenase 1 [HMOX1], estrogen related receptor, beta [ESRRB]) via immunofluorescence in situ. Given a Pearson's r correlation coefficient of 0.18-0.20, the abundance of oocytic proteins could not be predicted from that of cognate mRNAs. Our results document that a prerequisite to generate embryo diversity, namely the different abundances of maternal proteins in oocytes, can be studied in the model of inbred mouse strains. Thus, we highlight the importance of proteomic quantifications in modern embryology. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001059 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001059).

### Keywords
Reprograming, Lc-msms, Mouse, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany


