### Accession
PXD026491

### Title
Proteome Profiling of Cerebrospinal Fluid reveals novel biomarker candidates for Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a growing burden worldwide, and despite ongoing efforts to find reliable biomarkers for early and differential diagnosis, prognosis and disease monitoring, there is no biofluid biomarker used in clinical routine to date. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is collected often and should closely reflect structural and functional alterations in PD patients' brains. Here we describe a scalable and sensitive mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow for CSF proteome profiling to find specific biomarkers and identify disease-related changes in CSF protein levels in PD. From two independent cohorts consisting of more than 200 individuals, our workflow reproducibly quantified over 1,700 proteins from minimal sample amounts. Combined with machine learning, this identified a group of several proteins, including OMD, CD44, VGF, PRL, and MAN2B1 that were altered in PD patients or significantly correlate with clinical scores, indicative of disease progression. Interestingly, we uncovered signatures of enhanced neuroinflammation in patients with familial PD (LRRK2 G2019S carriers) as indicated by increased levels of CTSS, PLD4, HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB1, and HLA-DPA1. A comparison with urinary proteome changes in PD patients revealed a large overlap in protein composition PD-associated changes in these body fluids, including lysosomal factors like CTSS. Our results validate MS-based proteomics of CSF as a valuable strategy for biomarker discovery and patient stratification in a neurodegenerative disease like PD. Consistent proteomic signatures across two independent CSF cohorts and previously acquired urinary proteome profiles open up new avenues to improve our understanding of PD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation 40 μl of CSF samples were aliquoted in 96‐well plates and processed with an automated set‐up on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform as previously described [18, 26]. CSF samples were mixed with the equal amount of PreOmics lysis buffer (PreOmics GmbH) for reduction of disulfide bridges, cysteine alkylation, and protein denaturation at 95°C for 10 min. Upon 10 min cooling, 0.2 μg of each protease trypsin and LysC was added to each sample (well) and digestion was performed at 37°C overnight. Peptides were then purified on two 14‐gauge StageTip plugs packed with styrenedivinylbenzene- reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) as described earlier [91]. The eluate was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus), resuspended in 10 μl buffer A* (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.2% v/v trifluoroacetic acid, and stored at −20°C. Upon thawing before mass spectrometric analysis, samples were shaken for 5 min at 2,000 rpm (thermomixer C, Eppendorf). Peptide concentrations were measured optically at 280nm (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Scientific) and subsequently equalized using buffer A*. 500ng peptide was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Cohort-specific libraries were generated by pooling of 24 randomly selected samples of each cohort and separating the peptides of this pooled sample into 24 fractions each by high pH (pH 10) reversed-phase chromatography as described earlier [92]. Fractions were concatenated automatically by shifting the collection tube every 120 seconds.  Upon collection, fractions were dried and resuspended in buffer A* for LC-MS/MS analysis. To increase the depth of each library, we isolated extracellular vesicles (EV) from pooled CSF samples of each cohort by ultra-centrifugation as described earlier [93]. Isolated EVs were resuspended in100 µl of a sodium deoxycholate-based lysis buffer containing chloroacetamide (PreOmics GmbH), heated to 95°C for 10 min for reduction and alkylation and then digestion using trypsin and LysC enzymes at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted with SDB-RPS StageTips as described earlier [91]. Peptides were eluted 80%/5% ACN/ammonium hydroxide and the eluate was completely dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for separation into 8 fractions by high pH reversed-phase chromatography [92].  LC-MS/MS analysis LC‐MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF‐X Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-electrospray ion source coupled to an EASY‐nLC 1,200 HPLC (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at 60 °C on 50cm columns with an inner diameter of 75µm packed in‐house with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9µm resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH). Mobile phases A and B were 99.9/0.1% water/formic acid (v/v) and 80/20/0.1% acetonitrile/water/formic acid (v/v/v).  MS data for single-shot CSF samples were acquired using the MaxQuant Live software and a data‐independent acquisition (DIA) mode with phase‐constrained spectrum deconvolution [94, 95]. Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6, followed by two BoxCar scans with 12 isolation windows each and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 were acquired [96]. Full MS events were followed by 58 MS/MS windows per cycle in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 3e6 or for a maximum of 22 ms. All fractionated samples including EV fractions were acquired using a top 12 data‐dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
The MS data of the fractionated pools and the single‐shot CSF samples were combined into two cohort‐specific hybrid libraries using Spectronaut version 14.8.201029.47784 (Biognosys AG). For all experiments except the machine learning with OmicLearn, the two cohorts were quantified separately. All searches were performed against the human SwissProt reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 42,431 entries downloaded in July 2019. Searches used carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N‐terminus and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. The Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used, permitting a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The Q‐value thresholds for library generation and DIA analyses were both set to 0.01. For individual protein correlations with clinical parameters and the machine learning, the Q‐value data filtering setting in Spectronaut was set to “Qvalue”. For all other analyses, the setting was set to “Qvalue percentile” with a cutoff of 25%, to use only those peptides for the protein quantification that passed the Q‐value threshold in at least 25% of all analyzed samples.

### Publication Abstract
Neurodegenerative diseases are a growing burden, and there is an urgent need for better biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment efficacy. Structural and functional brain alterations are reflected in the protein composition of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients have higher CSF levels of tau, but we lack knowledge of systems-wide changes of CSF protein levels that accompany AD. Here, we present a highly reproducible mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow for the in-depth analysis of CSF from minimal sample amounts. From three independent studies (197 individuals), we characterize differences in proteins by AD status (&gt;&#xa0;1,000 proteins, CV&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;20%). Proteins with previous links to neurodegeneration such as tau, SOD1, and PARK7 differed most strongly by AD status, providing strong positive controls for our approach. CSF proteome changes in Alzheimer's disease prove to be widespread and often correlated with tau concentrations. Our unbiased screen also reveals a consistent glycolytic signature across our cohorts and a recent study. Machine learning suggests clinical utility of this proteomic signature.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Parkinson's disease, Proteomics, Csf

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


