### Accession
PXD024067

### Title
Long non-coding RNA Neat1 is a key of translational regulator in hypoxia

### Description
Internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) drive translation initiation during stress. In response to hypoxia, (lymph)angiogenic factors responsible for tissue revascularization in ischemic diseases are induced by the IRES-dependent mechanism. Here we searched for IRES trans-acting factors (ITAFs) active in early hypoxia in mouse cardiomyocytes. Using knock-down and proteomics approaches, we show a link between a stressed-induced nuclear body, the paraspeckle, and IRES-dependent translation. Our data reveal that the long non-coding RNA Neat1, an essential paraspeckle component, is a key translational regulator, active on IRESs of (lymph)angiogenic and cardioprotective factor mRNAs. In addition, paraspeckle proteins p54nrb and PSPC1 as well as nucleolin and Rps2, two p54nrb-interacting proteins identified by mass spectrometry, are ITAFs for IRES subgroups. Paraspeckle thus appears as the site of IRESome assembly in the nucleus. Polysome PCR array showed that the Neat1_2 isoform widely affects translation of mRNAs containing IRESs, involved in stress response, angiogenesis or cardioprotection.

### Sample Protocol
HL-1 cells placed in normoxia or hypoxia and transduced by P54nrb-HA construct were trypsinized, rinsed with PBS and lysed in solution 1 (Hepes 50 mM/NaCl 150 mM pH7.3, digitonin (100 μg/mL), EDTA 1 mM, protease inhibitor coctkail) and incubated on ice. Then the lysate was centrifugated at 2000g 5 min and the supernatant (cytosolic fraction) was aliquoted. Then the pellet was rinsed in PBS, and incubated in solution 2 (Hepes 50 mM/NaCl 150 mM pH7.3, NP40 1%, EDTA 1 mM, protease inhibitor coctkail) during 30min at 4°C. After centrifugation at 7000g, the pellet was rinsed and resuspended in solution 3 (Tris/HCl 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, NP40 1%, sodium deoxycholate 0.5%, SDS 0.1% (RIPA), protease inhibitor coctkail) and incubated 10 min at 4°C. Finally the lysate was centrifuged 10 min at 8200g and the supernatant was aliquoted (nuclear fraction). Immunoprecipitation experiments were realized with 150 μg of total protein amounts from cytosolic and nuclear fraction in normoxia or hypoxia with a HA antibody (H9558/H3663, Sigma) using EZ view red protein G beads (Sigma). The beads-antibody-protein mix were incubated overnight at 4°C and bounds protein were eluted with 35 μg HA peptides diluted in PBS (Sigma) then Laemmli buffer was added and the eluate heated at 95°C 2 min.    For mass spectrometry analysis, immunoprecipitated samples, prepared in triple or quadruple biological replicates for each condition, were submitted to an additional protein reduction in 24.5mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C followed by an alkylation of cysteine residues in 74 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Each reduced/alkylated sample was loaded onto 1D SDS-PAGE gel (stacking 4% and separating 12% acrylamide).  For one-shot analysis of the entire mixture, no fractionation was performed, and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the separating gel. The gel was briefly stained using Quick Coomassie Blue (Generon). Each single slice containing the whole sample was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using modified porcine trypsin (Promega, France) at 10 ng/μl as previously described (Shevchenko A et al, 2001). The dried peptide extracts obtained were dissolved in 17 μl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by online nanoLC using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for data-dependent CID fragmentation experiments. 5μl of each peptide extracts were loaded in two or three injection replicates onto 300μm ID x 5mm PepMap C18 precolumn (ThermoFisher, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 minutes of desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch ; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark), equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software (version 2.0 SR2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap on the 350–1,800 m/z mass range with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z for subsequent data-dependent CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). The normalized collision energy was set to 30%. To prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide, the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. For internal calibration the ion at 445.120025 m/z was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS and MS/MS data as raw MS files were converted to the mzDB format (Bouyssié D. et al. (2015). Mol Cell Proteomics 14, 771–781) using the pwiz-mzdb converter (version 0.9.10, https://github.com/mzdb/pwiz-mzdb) executed with its default parameters. Generated mzDB files were processed with the mzdb-access library (version 0.7, https://github.com/mzdb/mzdb-access) to generate peaklists. Peak lists were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database with mus musculus taxonomy (16,979 sequences) in Mascot search engine (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science, London, UK). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Up to two missed trypsin/P cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.  Validation of identifications was performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline software version 1.6 (Bouyssié D. et al. (2020). Bioinformatics 36, 3148–3155). For label-free relative quantification across samples, raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed using Proline. The cross-assignment of MS/MS information between runs was enabled (it allows to assign peptide sequences to detected but non-identified features). Each protein intensity was based on the sum of unique peptide intensities and was normalized across all samples by the median intensity. Missing values were independently replaced for each run by its 5% quantile. After log2-transformation of the data, the values of the technical replicates were averaged for each analyzed samples. For each pairwise comparison, an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed and proteins were considered significantly enriched when their absolute log2-transformed fold change was higher than 1 and their p-value lower than 0.05. To eliminate false-positive hits from quantitation of low intensity signals, two additional criteria were applied: only the proteins identified with a total number of averaged peptide spectrum match (PSM) counts>4 and quantified in a minimum of two biological replicates, before missing value replacement, for at least one of the two compared conditions were selected. Volcano plots were drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between the two compared conditions. They represent -log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) drive translation initiation during stress. In response to hypoxia, (lymph)angiogenic factors responsible for tissue revascularization in ischemic diseases are induced by the IRES-dependent mechanism. Here, we searched for IRES <i>trans</i>-acting factors (ITAFs) active in early hypoxia in mouse cardiomyocytes. Using knock-down and proteomics approaches, we show a link between a stressed-induced nuclear body, the paraspeckle, and IRES-dependent translation. Furthermore, smiFISH experiments demonstrate the recruitment of IRES-containing mRNA into paraspeckle during hypoxia. Our data reveal that the long non-coding RNA <i>Neat1</i>, an essential paraspeckle component, is a key translational regulator, active on IRESs of (lymph)angiogenic and cardioprotective factor mRNAs. In addition, paraspeckle proteins p54<sup>nrb</sup> and PSPC1 as well as nucleolin and RPS2, two p54<sup>nrb</sup>-interacting proteins identified by mass spectrometry, are ITAFs for IRES subgroups. Paraspeckle thus appears as a platform to recruit IRES-containing mRNAs and possibly host IRESome assembly. Polysome PCR array shows that <i>Neat1</i> isoforms regulate IRES-dependent translation and, more widely, translation of mRNAs involved in stress response.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Nanolc-ms/ms, Cardiomyocyte, Hypoxia, Translational control

### Affiliations
IPBS-CNRS
UMR 1048-I2MC, Inserm, Université de Toulouse, UPS, Toulouse, France

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Catherine Prats
UMR 1048-I2MC, Inserm, Université de Toulouse, UPS, Toulouse, France


