### Accession
PXD009239

### Title
Two faces of an essential PknB substrate in mycobacteria

### Description
Tuberculosis claims nearly 2 million lives annually and its causative agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a highly successful pathogen which explores multiple signalling mechanisms to grow and survive in humans for decades. Well-studied protein kinase B (PknB), one of the 11 serine/threonine kinases present in M. tuberculosis, is critical for growth in vitro and in vivo. Here we demonstrate that PknB-depleted mycobacteria can normally replicate and synthesise peptidoglycan in osmoprotective medium. Comparative phosphoproteomics of PknB-producing and PknB-depleted mycobacteria identifies CwlM as a major PknB substrate. Complementation studies of cwlM mutant further support CwlM phosphorylation as the molecular basis for the PknB essentiality. We demonstrate that in growing mycobacteria CwlM is produced in two forms with distinct functions which are essential for growth: a non-phosphorylated membrane-associated CwlM and a PknB-phosphorylated cytoplasmic CwlM. Immunoprecipitation and mycobacterial two hybrid assays reveal partner proteins for phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated CwlM forms, as FhaA, a forkhead-associated domain protein, and MurJ (MviN), a predicted Lipid II flippase, respectively. We propose that PknB is not required for mycobacterial division but coordinates peptidoglycan polymerization and cross-linking by a novel CwlM-mediated mechanism

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of conditional pknB mutant grown in SMM with or without pristinamycin were centrifuged, washed twice in PBS and resuspended in buffer containing 20 mM TrisCl, pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl, 8 M urea, cocktail of proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors.  After bead beating (3 times X 1 min) lysates were cleared by centrifugation and filtering through 0.22 m filter and treated using the FASP protocol as described previously (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Desalted samples were enriched on TiO2 beads (Thingholm et al., 2006) and enriched samples were speed vacuumed to dryness then re-suspended in 1% FA. Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. On average 0.5µg of peptides was loaded in triplicate for each sample with a constant flow of 5 µl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner-diameter, 2cm; Themro Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 µm, 15 cm; ThermoScientific) with a linear gradient of 2–40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) over 65 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software. The acquired spectra (Thermo .raw files) were loaded to the Progenesis LC-MS software (version 2.4, Nonlinear) for label free quantification (Hauck et al., 2010). Three biological replicates for each sample were analysed. Profile data of the MS scans were transformed to peak lists with Progenesis LC-MS using a proprietary algorithm.

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed with MASCOT (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science, London, UK). For quantification, all peptides of an identified protein were included and the total cumulative abundance was calculated by summing the abundance of all peptides allocated to the respective protein. Calculation of the protein p-values (one-way ANOVA) was performed on the sum of the normalized abundance across all runs

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis claims &gt;1 million lives annually, and its&#xa0;causative agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis is&#xa0;a&#xa0;highly successful pathogen. Protein kinase B (PknB)&#xa0;is reported to be critical for mycobacterial growth.&#xa0;Here, we demonstrate that PknB-depleted M.&#xa0;tuberculosis can replicate normally and can synthesize peptidoglycan in an osmoprotective medium. Comparative phosphoproteomics of PknB-producing and PknB-depleted mycobacteria identify CwlM, an essential regulator of peptidoglycan synthesis, as a major PknB substrate. Our complementation studies of a cwlM mutant of M.&#xa0;tuberculosis support CwlM phosphorylation as a likely molecular basis for PknB being essential for mycobacterial growth. We demonstrate that growing mycobacteria produce two forms of CwlM: a non-phosphorylated membrane-associated form and a PknB-phosphorylated cytoplasmic form. Furthermore, we show that the partner proteins for the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms of CwlM are FhaA, a fork head-associated domain protein, and MurJ, a proposed lipid II flippase, respectively. From our results, we propose a model in which CwlM potentially regulates both the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan precursors and their transport across the cytoplasmic membrane.

### Keywords
Peptidoglycan, Serine/threonine protein kinase, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Murj, Phosphoproteomics, Cwlm, Pknb, Pasta domain

### Affiliations
Leicester Tuberculosis Research Group Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation University of Leicester Leicester LE1 9HN United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Galina Mukamolova
Leicester Tuberculosis Research Group Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation University of Leicester Leicester LE1 9HN United Kingdom


