### Accession
PXD011379

### Title
Neoseiulus barkeri LC-MSMS

### Description
To understand the molecular basis of heat acclimation, ‘omics’ analyses were performed to compare the diﬀerences between CS and HTAS female adults at proteomic levels.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation, iTRAQ labeling and SCX fractionation As in the transcriptome analysis, three replicates of 500-600 adult female mites for each strain (CS and HTAS) were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and extracted with lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA and 10mM DTT, pH 8.5). The mixtures were placed into a TissueLyser for 2 min at 50 HZ to release proteins. After centrifugation with 25,000 g at 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatant was transferred into another new tube. To reduce disulphide bonds, 10 mM DTT was added and incubated at 56 °C for 1 h. Then, the mixtures were alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Following centrifugation (25,000 g, 4 °C, 20 min), the supernatant containing proteins was quantified by Bradford assay. The protein solution (100 ug) with 8M urea was diluted 4 times with 100 mM TEAB and digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein: trypsin =40:1 at 37°C overnight. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted with a Strata X column (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Six samples (three replicates each for CS and HTAS) were labelled with iTRAQ reagent. The peptides were dissolved in 30ul 0.5M TEAB with vortexing. After the iTRAQ labeling reagents were recovered to ambient temperature, they were transferred and combined with proper samples. The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with the Strata X column (Phenomenex, UCA) and vacuum-dried. The peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH RP column. The peptides were reconstituted with buffer A (5% acetonitrile,95% H2O, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) to 2 mL and loaded onto a column containing 5 μm particles (Phenomenex, USA). The peptides are separated at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% acetonitrile, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 min, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min. The system is then maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and decreases to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. Then, elution is monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm, and the fractions are collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides are pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a C18 trap column 5 μL/min for 8min using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler. Then, the peptides were eluted from trap column and separated by an analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 8 to 35% of buffer B (2% H2O and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 35 min, then going up to 60% in 5 min, then maintenance at 80% B for 5 min, and finally return to 5% in 0.1 min and equilibrated for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis The peptides separated from nanoHPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization to achieve better coverage and reliable statistics. Mass spectrometry data were acquired in peptide recognition mode using the 20 most abundant precursor ions from a survey scan of 350-1600 at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap. The target value (full MS target and MS2 target: 3e6 and 1e5) was determined by predictive Automatic Gain Control with dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions 15 s, nd under fill ratio 0.1%. The under fill ratio is the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time.  iTRAQ protein identification and quantification The raw MS/MS data was converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF) format by thermo scientific tool Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). For protein identification, the peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. Only peptides with a score above the probability-based Mascot identity threshold at the 95% confidence interval were counted as identified. To identify a protein, the global FDR must be less than 1% and each protein involved at least one unique peptide. For protein quantization, a protein must contain at least two unique peptides. GO and pathway enrichment analysis Functional annotation of proteins identified in N. barkeri samples was carried out using Blast2GO which assigns gene ontology through BLAST searches against protein databases. The differentially expressed protein were defined to be significantly regulated if the p-value is less than 0.05. The hyper geometric test was used to get the target GO terms in the GO enrichment analysis. The formula is as follows: P=1-∑_(j=0)^(M-1)▒(M¦j)((N-M)¦(n-j))/((N¦n) ) Where N is the number of all identified proteins which matched to GO terms; n is the number of differentially expressed proteins; M is the number of proteins which matched a certain GO term and m is the number of differentially expressed proteins which matched a certain GO term. If the P-value is less than 0.05, the GO term is significant enrichment in differentially expressed proteins. All identified proteins were mapped to a pathway in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. Significantly enriched pathways containing diﬀerentially expressed proteins were identified using the same formula as in GO analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In our previous study, we reported a high temperature adapted strain (HTAS) of the predatory mite <i>Neoseiulus barkeri</i> was artificially selected via a long-term heat acclimation (35&#xb0;C) and frequent heat hardenings. To understand the molecular basis of heat acclimation, 'omics' analyses were performed to compare the differences between HTAS female adults to conventional strain (CS) at transcriptional and translational levels. We obtained a total of 5,374 differentially expressed genes and 500 differentially expressed proteins. Among them, 119 transcripts had concurrent transcription and translation profiles. It's conserved that some processes, such as high expression of heat shock protein (HSP) genes, involved in heat tolerance of transcriptome analyses, while many protective enzymes including glutathione S-transferase, superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, and cytochrome P450 displayed down-regulated expression. KEGG analysis mapped 4,979 and 348 differentially expressed genes and proteins, to 299 and 253 pathways, respectively. The mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) signaling pathway may provide new insights for the investigation of the molecular mechanisms of heat tolerance. Correlation enriched pathways indicated that there were four pathways associated with heat acclimation involving in energy metabolism and immunity. In addition, the expression patterns of ten randomly selected genes including HSP were consistent with the transcriptome results obtained through quantitative real-time PCR. Comparisons between transcriptome and proteome results indicated the upregulation of HSPs and genes participated in ATP production, immunity and energy metabolism process. A majority of antioxidant-related genes and detoxication-related genes were down-regulated suggesting a fitness cost of heat acclimation. Our results demonstrated that heat tolerance during a long-time acclimation of <i>N. barkeri</i> is a fairly complicated process of physiological regulations. These findings also contribute to a better understanding of the mechanisms of thermal responses of phytoseiid mites which could provide useful information for biological control through natural enemies.

### Keywords
Heat acclimation, Lc-msms, Neoseiulus barkeri

### Affiliations
southwest university
Key Laboratory of Entomology and Pest Control Engineering, College of Plant Protection, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China

### Submitter
chuanbei tian

### Lab Head
Dr Chuanbei Tian
Key Laboratory of Entomology and Pest Control Engineering, College of Plant Protection, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China


