### Accession
PXD036072

### Title
Glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase 1 coordinates early endosomal anti-inflammatory AKT signaling

### Description
AKT signaling pathway plays critical roles in the resolution of inflammation. However, the underlying mechanisms of anti-inflammatory regulation and signal coordination remain unclear. Here, we report that anti-inflammatory AKT signaling is coordinated by glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase 1 (EPRS1). Upon inflammatory activation, AKT specifically phosphorylated Ser999 of EPRS1 in the cytoplasmic multi-tRNA synthetase complex, inducing release of EPRS1. The EPRS1 compartmentalized AKT to early endosomes via selective binding to the endosomal membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and assembled an AKT signaling complex specific for anti-inflammatory activity. These events promoted AKT activation-mediated GSK3β phosphorylation, which increased anti-inflammatory cytokine production. EPRS1-deficient macrophages could not assemble the early endosomal complex and consequently exacerbated inflammation, decreasing the survival of EPRS1-deficient mice undergoing septic shock and ulcerative colitis. Collectively, our findings show that the housekeeping protein EPRS1 acts as a mediator of inflammatory homeostasis by coordinating compartment-specific AKT signaling

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were transfected with pEXPR-IBA105 (empty vector) or Strep-EPRS1 plasmids and lysed in lysis buffer containing 1% NP-40, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. Cell lysates containing Strep-tagged EPRS1 were applied to a Strep-Tactin Superflow column (IBA) for affinity purification and washed with Strep wash buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA), and proteins were eluted with Strep elution buffer containing 2.5 mM desthiobiotin. Eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and excised into five gel pieces. Individual gel pieces were destained and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin, and digested peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an RSLCnano u3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an autosampler. Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 12ul of 0.1% formic acid / 2% acetonitrile, and an aliquot was injected onto a reversed-phase peptide trap EASY-Column (length = 2 cm, internal diameter = 75µm, 3 µm, acclaim pepmap 100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a reversed-phase analytical Column (length = 25 cm, internal diameter = 75 µm, 3 µm, BEH300, Waters). The duration of the LC gradient was 120 min. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 2-20% buffer B over 100min, 20-32% buffer B over 20min (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid in H2O, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Orbitrap exploris 240 mass analyzer was operated in positive ESI mode using HCD to fragment peptides following separation by HPLC. The temperature and voltage applied to the capillary were 275 ℃ and 1.9 kV, respectively. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. MS spectra were scanned from 350 to 1,200 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 3,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 50ms. A total of 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans were selected using an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, a standard AGC target, a maximum fill time of 200ms and a normalized collision energy of 30. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1, an exclusion duration of 20 s. The minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set at 100,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LCMSMS were analyzed with maxquant v1.6.17. maxquant parameters were as follow :　database = uniprot Homo Sapiens, enzyme = trypsin/P, variable modification = Oxidation(M), Acetyl(protein N-term), fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C) and match between runs.  Contact

### Publication Abstract
The AKT signaling pathway plays critical roles in the resolution of inflammation. However, the underlying mechanisms of anti-inflammatory regulation and signal coordination remain unclear. Here, we report that anti-inflammatory AKT signaling is coordinated by glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase 1 (EPRS1). Upon inflammatory activation, AKT specifically phosphorylates Ser999 of EPRS1 in the cytoplasmic multi-tRNA synthetase complex, inducing release of EPRS1. EPRS1 compartmentalizes AKT to early endosomes via selective binding to the endosomal membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and assembles an AKT signaling complex specific for anti-inflammatory activity. These events promote AKT activation-mediated GSK3&#x3b2; phosphorylation, which increase anti-inflammatory cytokine production. EPRS1-deficient macrophages do not assemble the early endosomal complex and consequently exacerbate inflammation, decreasing the survival of EPRS1-deficient mice undergoing septic shock and ulcerative colitis. Collectively, our findings show that the housekeeping protein EPRS1 acts as a mediator of inflammatory homeostasis by coordinating compartment-specific AKT signaling.

### Keywords
Glutamyl-prolyl-trna synthetase 1, Anti-inflammatory signaling complex, Early endosome, Pi3k/akt signaling pathway, Multi-trna synthetase complex, Inflammation, Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology (KRIBB)
Microbiome Convergence Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Korea

### Submitter
Ga Seul Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Myung Hee Kim
Microbiome Convergence Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Korea


