### Accession
PXD013657

### Title
Protein N-glycosylation is sex-related in Nilaparvata lugens adults

### Description
Nilaparvata lugens, or the brown planthopper, is one of the most notorious pest insects of cultured rice, and a model for hemimetabolous development. Recently, the N-glycome of N. lugens was explored throughout post-embryonic development and reproductive stages, which revealed differential protein N-glycosylation events between adult sexes. Identifying the proteins carrying these differential carbohydrate structures would point to the functionality of sex-dependent N-glycosylation. Furthermore, potential effects of the adult wing type on protein N-glycosylation are of interest. Here, a comprehensive investigation of the N-glycosylation sites from the adult stages of N. lugens was conducted, allowing a qualitative and quantitative comparison between sexes and wing forms at the glycopeptide level. N-glycopeptide enrichment using the N-glyco-FASP method with the high mannose/paucimannose-binding lectin Concanavalin A, or the Rhizoctonia solani agglutinin which interacts with complex N-glycans led to the identification of over 1,300 N-glycosylation sites derived from over 600 glycoproteins. Comparison of these N-glycopeptides revealed striking differences in protein N-glycosylation between sexes, while almost no differences were observed between wing types. Male- and female-specific N-glycosylation sites were identified, and some of these sex-specific N-glycosites were shown to be derived from proteins with a putative role in insect reproduction. Transcript expression experiments with complete insects and insect tissues confirmed the sex-related N-glycosylation of proteins, and expression of glycoproteins in reproductive tissues. In conclusion, this study provides original data on N-glycosylation sites of N. lugens adults, providing novel insights into planthopper’s biology and revealing that protein N-glycosylation is sex-related in this insect.

### Sample Protocol
2.2. Insect colonies and lectins All insects were collected from a continuous colony, kept on 4- to 8-week-old rice plants (Oryza sativa japonica, Nipponbare, USDA Agricultural Research Service) in a climate chamber under standard conditions of 27 ± 1°C, 80 ± 5% relative humidity and a 16:8 light/dark photoperiod, and stored at -80°C until further analysis. The plant lectin ConA was purified from Jack bean meal (Canavalia ensiformis) (17), and the fungal lectin RSA was isolated from sclerotia of the R. solani strain AG 1-1B (18). 2.3. Enrichment of N-glycopeptides Protein extracts were prepared from approximately 100 mg of adult insects (50-100 insects) as previously described in Scheys et al. (2018). In short, complete insects were crushed in liquid nitrogen and insect powder was dissolved in extraction buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.8). Extracts were processed using the FASP method, as previously described (19), with adjustments (8). Briefly, an extract containing approximately 3 mg protein was transferred to Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices (±500 µg/filter; 30 K; Millipore, Burlington, MA), washed with urea buffer and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and washed with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were digested overnight using trypsin in a ratio of 1:100 (w:w) at 37°C and collected in 100 µl of 40 mM ABC.  Subsequently, glycopeptides were enriched from the collected peptide mixture. In short, the peptide mixture (150 µg) was mixed with a single lectin (ConA or RSA, 300 µg) in 2x binding buffer (2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MnCl2, 1 M NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4), and the mixture was added on a Microcon Centrifugal device (30 K; Millipore). Unbound peptides were eluted by centrifugation followed by 4 washes with binding buffer, and 2 washes with 50 mM citrate-phosphate buffer, pH 5 (0.2 M dibasic sodium phosphate set to pH 5 with 0.1 M citric acid). Peptide-N-glycosidase A (PNGase A, 0.2 mU) from almonds (ProGlycAn, Vienna, Austria) in 100 µl of 50 mM citrate-phosphate buffer (pH 5) was added to the filter unit and the filter was incubated for 3 h at 37°C for deglycosylation. The deglycosylated peptides were collected in 50 µl of 40 mM ABC. 2.6. Dissection of adult tissues Adult insects (SM and SF) were collected and kept on ice. Insects were dissected in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) under a microscope (Leica) using forceps. Collected tissues (head, gut, ovaries, testes) were rinsed three times in PBS to minimize hemolymph contamination, and were subsequently collected in an Eppendorf tube containing 600 µl of lysis buffer with β-mercaptoethanol (for RNA extraction, Qiagen RNeasy mini kit) or in 600 µl PBS (for protein extraction) on ice. Tissues were collected from 50 male and 50 female insects.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from each LC run were searched with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) (20) against the unannotated N. lugens proteome (27,571 entries, BioProject: PRJNA177647) (21) with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme setting, allowing for two missed cleavages, and cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine was followed by proline. S-carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 40. Collected data were analyzed using a KNIME workflow (version 3.3.2) (22). First, former N-glycopeptides were identified as peptides containing one or more N-glycosylation site(s), either N-X!-S, N-X!-T, N-X!-V or N-X!-C, where the asparagine residue at position 1 in the N-glycosylation sequon is deamidated, and X! represents any amino acid apart from proline. Only N-glycopeptides that were detected in two biological replicates were withheld for further analysis. Glycopeptides were grouped by protein to assess the number of unique identified N-glycoproteins. Identified N-glycoproteins from N. lugens adults were annotated by means of the Drosophila melanogaster proteome (UniProt; 21,979 entries) using BLAST+ (version 2.2.3.1, E-value threshold = 0.00001) (23). Gene Ontology (GO) was studied for the ConA and RSA unique N-glycoproteins using the online database DAVID with the complete D. melanogaster proteome set as background (24). LFQ intensities of the identified glycopeptides were compared between groups (sex and wing form) using Two-way ANOVA to reveal proteins with a significantly different intensity (p<0.001) using the ‘peptides’ file from MaxQuant in Perseus software version 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation is a common modification of proteins and critical for a wide range of biological processes. Differences in protein glycosylation between sexes have already been observed in humans, nematodes and trematodes, and have recently also been reported in the rice pest insect <i>Nilaparvata lugens</i> Although protein N-glycosylation in insects is nowadays of high interest because of its potential for exploitation in pest control strategies, the functionality of differential N-glycosylation between sexes is yet unknown. In this study, therefore, the occurrence and role of sex-related protein N-glycosylation in insects were examined. A comprehensive investigation of the N-glycosylation sites from the adult stages of <i>N. lugens</i> was conducted, allowing a qualitative and quantitative comparison between sexes at the glycopeptide level. N-glycopeptide enrichment via lectin capturing using the high mannose/paucimannose-binding lectin Concanavalin A, or the <i>Rhizoctonia solani</i> agglutinin which interacts with complex N-glycans, resulted in the identification of over 1300 N-glycosylation sites derived from over 600 glycoproteins. Comparison of these N-glycopeptides revealed striking differences in protein N-glycosylation between sexes. Male- and female-specific N-glycosylation sites were identified, and some of these sex-specific N-glycosylation sites were shown to be derived from proteins with a putative role in insect reproduction. In addition, differential glycan composition between males and females was observed for proteins shared across sexes. Both lectin blotting experiments as well as transcript expression analyses with complete insects and insect tissues confirmed the observed differences in N-glycosylation of proteins between sexes. In conclusion, this study provides further evidence for protein N-glycosylation to be sex-related in insects. Furthermore, original data on N-glycosylation sites of <i>N. lugens</i> adults are presented, providing novel insights into planthopper's biology and information for future biological pest control strategies.

### Keywords
N-glycosylation sites, Nilaparvata lugens, N-linked glycosylation, Pest insect

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Guy Smagghe
Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


