### Accession
PXD021140

### Title
Targeting UBC9-mediated Protein Hyper-SUMOylation in Cystic Cholangiocytes Halts Polycystic Liver Disease in Experimental Models

### Description
Background & Aims: polycystic liver diseases (PLDs) are genetic disorders characterized by progressive development of multiple fluid-filled biliary cysts. Most PLD-causative genes participate in protein biogenesis and/or transport. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are implicated in protein stability, localization and activity, contributing to human pathobiology; however, their role in PLD is unknown. Here, we aimed to unveil the role of protein SUMOylation in PLD and its potential therapeutic targeting. Methods: levels and function of SUMOylation, along with response to S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe, inhibitor of the SUMOylation enzyme UBC9) and/or short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) against UBE2I (UBC9), were evaluated in vitro, in vivo and/or in patients with PLD. SUMOylated proteins were determined by immunoprecipitation and proteomic analyses by mass spectrometry.  Results: most SUMOylation-related genes were found overexpressed (mRNA) in polycystic human and rat liver tissue, as well as in cystic cholangiocytes in culture compared to controls. Increased SUMOylated protein levels were also observed in cystic human cholangiocytes in culture, which decreased after SAMe administration. Chronic treatment of polycystic (PCK: Pkdh1-mut) rats with SAMe halted hepatic cystogenesis and fibrosis, and reduced liver/body weight ratio and liver volume. In vitro, both SAMe and shRNA-mediated UBE2I knockdown increased apoptosis and reduced cell proliferation of cystic cholangiocytes. High-throughput proteomic analysis of SUMO1-immunoprecipitated proteins in cystic cholangiocytes identified candidates involved in protein biogenesis, ciliogenesis and proteasome degradation. Accordingly, SAMe hampered the proteasome hyperactivity in cystic cholangiocytes, leading to the activation the unfolded protein response (UPR) and stress-related apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al [Wisniewski 2009] with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Searches were carried out using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.) through Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo). Mgf files generated by DataAnalysis software (Bruker) were used for timsTOF searches. 50ppm and 0.05Da were used for TIMS TOF runs. A database consisting of human entries (Uniprot/Swissprot) was used for the searches. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% in at least two sample replicas and not present in the negative control were considered for further analysis.   Spectral counts for each protein (the number of identified spectra matching to peptides from that protein, also named SpC or PSMs) were used for the differential analysis. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform [Tyanova 2016] and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation). A t-test was applied in order to determine the statistical significance of the differences detected. In addition, heatmaps were generated using this program for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatic cystogenesis, Post-translational modifications, S-adenosylmethionine (same), Sumoylation, Therapy.

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomcs Service CIC bioGUNE Bizakia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 (Spain)

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomcs Service CIC bioGUNE Bizakia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 (Spain)


