### Accession
PXD035248

### Title
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles from cancer-associated fibroblast-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells and related cell types

### Description
Cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) promote immune suppression in the tumor microenvironment by polarizing monocytes to myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) that potently suppress T-cell function. Using a patient-derived coculture system, we found that extracellular vesicles (EV) released by CAF-induced MDSC directly suppress T-cell proliferation. In this study, we profiled the protein cargo of the EVs isolated from CAF-MDSC and compared to related cell types.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from a 3-day culture of differentiated cells (CAF-MDSC, iDC, M1 and M2 macrophage) using the PureExo exosome isoation kit (101Bio). Samples were processed using the SP3 workflow and labeled with TMT10plex reagent (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.14 and searched against the Uniprot human databse (2020-16-13) using the default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid cells are known to play a crucial role in creating a tumor-promoting and immune suppressive microenvironment. Our previous study demonstrated that primary human monocytes can be polarized into immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in a 3D co-culture system. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the immunosuppressive function of MDSCs, especially CAF-induced MDSCs, remain poorly understood. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we compared cell surface protein changes among monocytes, <i>in vitro</i> differentiated CAF-induced MDSCs, M1/M2 macrophages, and dendritic cells, and identified an extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated secretory phenotype of MDSCs. Functional assays using an MDSC/T-cell co-culture system revealed that blocking EV generation in CAF-induced MDSCs reversed their ability to suppress T-cell proliferation, while EVs isolated from CAF-induced MDSCs directly inhibited T-cell function. Furthermore, we identified fructose bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1) as a cargo protein that is highly enriched in EVs isolated from CAF-induced MDSCs, and pharmacological inhibition of FBP1 partially reversed the suppressive phenotype of MDSCs. Our findings provide valuable insights into the cell surface proteome of different monocyte-derived myeloid subsets and uncover a novel mechanism underlying the interplay between CAFs and myeloid cells in shaping a tumor-permissive microenvironment.

### Keywords
Coculture, Mdsc, Exosome, Stroma, Caf

### Affiliations
Merck Research Laboratories
Merck & Co., Inc.

### Submitter
Carlo Ramil

### Lab Head
Dr An Chi
Merck & Co., Inc.


