### Accession
PXD020795

### Title
Five microRNAs in serum are able to differentiate breast cancer patients from healthy individuals

### Description
Breast Cancer is the cancer with most incidence and mortality in women. microRNAs are emerging as novel prognosis/diagnostic tools. Our aim was to identify a serum microRNA signature useful to predict cancer development. We focused on studying the expression levels of 30 microRNAs in the serum of 96 breast cancer patients versus 92 control individuals. Bioinformatic studies provide a microRNA signature, designated as a predictor, based upon the expression levels of 5 microRNAs. Then, we tested the predictor in a group of 60 randomly chosen women. Lastly, a proteomic study unveiled the over-expression and down-regulation of proteins differently expressed in the serum of breast cancer patients versus that of control individuals. Twenty-six microRNAs differentiate cancer tissue from healthy tissue and 16 microRNAs differentiate the serum of cancer patients from that of the control group. The tissue expression of miR-99a-5p, mir-497-5p, miR-362, and miR-1274, and the serum levels of miR-141 correlated with patient survival. Moreover, the predictor consisting of mir-125b-5p, miR-29c-3p, mir-16-5p, miR-1260, and miR-451a was able to differentiate breast cancer patients from controls. The predictor was validated in 20 new cases of breast cancer patients and tested in 60 volunteer women, assigning 11 out of 60 women to the cancer group. An association of low levels of mir-16-5p with a high content of CD44 protein in serum was found. Circulating microRNAs in serum can represent biomarkers for cancer prediction. Their clinical relevance and use of the predictor here described might be of potential importance for breast cancer prediction.

### Sample Protocol
1. SAMPLE PREPARATION: DEPLECTION, QUANTIFICATION, PREPARATION OF POOLS, MARKING AND DESALTING  1.1 Starting material  One hundred and forty sera were received from the Universitary Hospital Vall de Hebron (HUVH), 70 from controls and 70 from patients. These sera were stored at -80ºC until processing.  Each of the depletion samples was individually prepared using the kit "Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns, Top 12, reference 13434319" following the manufacturer's instructions. This kit removes more than 95% of 12 very abundant proteins in serum or plasma allowing the identification and quantification of less abundant proteins in the samples. After depletion, an aliquot is extracted for protein quantification and the rest is stored at -80ºC until analysis.   1.2 Quantification of the samples and preparation of pools  After the quantification of all the samples, pools of 80 µg of protein were generated, composed of equivalent amounts of seven samples of each condition chosen at random. A total of 18 pooles were prepared, 9 pooles for each condition.  Then 10% SDS and 1M DTT were added to the samples to achieve a final concentration of 0.2% and 20 mM respectively. The samples were then diluted 1:1 in UA buffer (8M Urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and incubated for 10 minutes at 99°C in Thermo-mixer.    1.3.- Digestion  Samples (80 µg of each) were digested using the FASP method (Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis), for 16-18 hours at 37ºC (Wiśniewski J.R., Zougman A., Nagaraj N., Mann M., Nat Methods. 2009, 5, 359-62). In this method, 200 mM triethylamine bicarbonate buffer was used instead of ammonium bicarbonate to make the sample compatible with subsequent TMT labeling.   1.4. TMT, labeling and desalting.   The digested samples were evaporated in Speed-Vac to a volume of less than 60 µl. The volume of each pool was measured, completed to 60 µl with TEAB 200 mM and assigned a random TMT marker. Each of the digested samples (80 µg) was marked with a vial of the corresponding TMT reagent following the protocols indicated by the manufacturer (Thompson, A., et al. (2003). Anal. Chem. 75(8):1895-1904). Briefly, each vial of reagent was dissolved in 41 µL of acetonitrile and added to the corresponding sample. The samples were incubated at 20 ºC for 1 hour and then the samples to be compared were pooled and desalted using a C18 cartridge.   2. SEPARATION BY ION EXCHANGE CHROMATOGRAPHY (SCX)  In order to reduce the complexity of the samples, the resulting extract was fractionated by SCX. The desalted sample was evaporated to dryness, reconstituted in 200 µl of phase A of SCX and fractionated by means of a single injection using a Polysulfoehtyl A TM, 100 x 2.1mm, 5 µm, 200A (A: 70% H2O Milli-Q, 30% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; B: 70% H2O Milli-Q, 500 mM NH4Cl, 30% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) working at 200 µl/min. Fice fractions were collected, evaporated in Speed-Vac to dryness and desalted by reverse phase.  3.- PEPTIDES SEQUENTIATION THROUGH nanoLC-MS/MS   The samples were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 5 µl injection phase: H2O LC-MS, 5% MeOH, 1% Formic acid. A chromatographic system equipped with a C18 preconcentration column (300 µm id x 0.5 cm) and an analytical column (100 µm id x 15 cm) was used. The peptides were loaded onto the preconcentration column using 1% FA as the solvent. The peptides were eluted directly to the analytical column at a flow rate of 400 nl/min using a gradient of 0-40% ACN (0.1% FA) in 120 min. The chromatographic system was connected on-line to a high resolution LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher) mass spectrometer and the analysis was performed in dependent scan mode: a full scan using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 and 10 parallel MS/MS scans (5 in CID mode and 5 in HCD mode) on the 5 most abundant precursors.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides in the database was performed using Thermo-Instruments Proteome Discoverer v1.4 software using a 1% FDR and the Uniprot database restricted to Homo sapiens taxonomy. The quantification of the proteins has been done based on the intensity of the reporter ions derived from the TMT tagging and only the unique peptides (peptides belonging to only one protein) have been taken into account.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Micrornas, Quantitative proteomics, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Institut de Recerca Hospital Vall d'Hebron
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells Group. Pathology Department. Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR). Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Cristina Mir

### Lab Head
Dr Matilde E. Lleonart
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells Group. Pathology Department. Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR). Barcelona, Spain


