### Accession
PXD042903

### Title
Pulse-SILAC and interactomics reveal distinct DDB1-CUL4 associated factors (DCAFs), cellular functions, and protein substrates

### Description
Cullin-RING finger ligases (CRLs) represent the largest family of ubiquitin ligases. They are responsible for the ubiquitination of ~20% of cellular proteins degraded through the proteasome, by catalyzing the transfer of E2-loaded ubiquitin to a substrate. Seven Cullins are described in vertebrates. Among them, CUL4 associates with DDB1 to form the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex, which is involved in protein ubiquitination and in the regulation of many cellular processes. Substrate recognition adaptors named DDB1/CUL4 associated factors (DCAF) mediate the specificity of CUL4-DDB1 and have a short structural motif of approximately forty amino acids terminating in a tryptophan (W)-aspartic acid (D) dipeptide, called the WD40 domain. Using different approaches (bioinformatics/structural analyses), independent studies suggested that at least sixty WD40-containing proteins could act as adaptors for the DDB1/CUL4 complex. To better define this association and classification, the interaction of each DCAFs with DDB1 was determined, and new partners and potential substrates were identified. Using BioID and AP-MS approaches, we demonstrated that seven WD40 proteins can be considered DCAFs with a high confidence level. Identifying protein interactions does not always lead to identifying protein substrates for E3-ubiquitin ligases, so we measured changes in protein stability or degradation by pulse-SILAC to identify changes in protein degradation following the expression of each DCAF. In conclusion, these results provide new insights into the roles of DCAFs in regulating the activity of the DDB1-CUL4 complex, in protein targeting, and characterized the cellular processes involved

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown until 70% of confluency. They were then incubated with doxycycline (10 µg/mL) in a R0K0 medium to induce myc-BirA*-DCAF or myc-BirA* expression. After 8 hours, we replaced the R0K0 medium with a R10K8 medium containing doxycycline for 16 hours. We then harvested the samples in lysis buffer (8 M urea [Sigma Saint-Louis #U5128–5 kg], Hepes 50 mM), and 50 µg of proteins were incubated and boiled for two minutes with DTT 5 mM. We then diluted the samples four times in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, digested them by adding 1 μg Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and incubated them overnight at 37 °C with shaking.  Peptides were purified with ZipTip 100 μl micropipette tips containing a C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), as previously described in the Proximity labelling assay section, concentrated with a centrifugal evaporator at 65 °C until complete drying, then resuspended in 25 μL of 1% FA buffer. Peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. We then transferred the peptides to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and stored them at −20 °C until the mass spectrometry analysis.To validate potential substrates, cells were grown in 6well plates until 70% of confluency and were then incubated with doxycycline (10 µg/mL) during 24h to induce myc-BirA*-DCAF or myc-BirA* expression and were then treated with MLN4924 (10µM) during 24h. We then harvested samples in lysis buffer (8 M urea [Sigma Saint-Louis #U5128–5 kg], Hepes 50 mM), and 50 µg of proteins were processed for mass spectrometry analysis as described above. After trypsin digestion, we separated the peptides using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 1.5 μg of total peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μL/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the temperature of the column to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after 1,000,000 ions accumulated. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35% and resolution of 17,500) after 50,000 ions accumulated. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. We enabled the precursor ion charge state screening to reject all unassigned charge states, as well as singly, seven and eight charged species. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries at most, with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. We enabled the lock mass option survey scans to improve mass accuracy. We retrieved the data using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11). The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.7) and the Uniprot human database (2020/03/21, 75,777 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and carbamylation (K and N-terminal, only for pulse-SILAC experiments). We used a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions and the following parameters were used: multiplicity of 2 SILAC media (R0K0, and R10K8), identification values “PSM FDR”, “Protein FDR,” and “Site decoy fraction” of 0.05, minimum ratio count of 1 and the “Re-quantify” option was selected. Following the analysis, the results were filtered according to several parameters (see experimental design and statistical rationale section).

### Data Protocol
We conducted analyses of the interaction between DDB1 and DCAF by combining the proximity labelling assay and the co-immunoprecipitation approach coupled to SILAC (Stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture)-based quantitative mass spectrometry. We compared two conditions: the control cell lines in light medium (R0K0), and a cell line expressing DDB1 fused to GFP or BirA* grown in heavy medium (R10K8). We used two methods in biological triplicates to increase evidence of interactions between DCAF and DDB1. To increase the confidence in the results obtained, we performed a proximity labelling assay in biological duplicates on DCAF-expressing cells to identify DDB1 and CRL members as interactors, using probabilistic scoring of affinity purification (SAINT score). To be considered a DCAF interactor, proteins should have a SAINT score over 0.7. We conducted the experiments in biological duplicates. Results of pulse-chase SILAC experiments are presented as volcano plot with Prostar (see below) and the differential analysis of L intensities after myc-BirA*-DDB2 and ERCC8 expression was performed using four independent biological replicates for each condition (and 2 replicates for the rest of the DCAFbase). Proteins with a log2 fold change (FC) ≤ -1 (between DCAF-expressing cells and control cells) and which passed the FDR significancy threshold in Prostar (see below) were considered to be less abundant and to be potential substrates.  Statistical analysis were performed using Prostar software tools [30,31], with the following parameters: Filtering (contaminant, reverse, only identified by sites, minimum of 2 unique peptides; missing values (MV): a maximum of 1 MV for partially observed conditions (termed POV MVs) authorized as well as missing on the entire condition (MECs) when N=4; no POVs when N=2); median normalization; SLSA imputation on POVs and DetQuantile (1%) on MECs; Limma moderated t-test, no cut-off on the fold-change and FDR with the following procedure: (1) the correct calibration of the raw p-value was visually assessed using a calibration plot; (2) No adjustment on the proportion of null hypothesis (π_0); (3) Adjusted p-values were computed using Benjamini-Hochberg (original, i.e., π_0=1) procedure; (4) For all the proteins with a raw p-value ≤10^(-3) (i.e., log_10⁡〖(p.val)≥3〗), we verified that the adjusted p-values was ≤5%, as to guarantee an FDR control at risk 0.05 or lower; and we retained them as differentially abundant (i.e. the null hypothesis was rejected).

### Publication Abstract
Cullin-RING finger ligases represent the largest family of ubiquitin ligases. They are responsible for the ubiquitination of &#x223c;20% of cellular proteins degraded through the proteasome, by catalyzing the transfer of E2-loaded ubiquitin to a substrate. Seven cullins are described in vertebrates. Among them, cullin 4 (CUL4) associates with DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1) to form the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex, which is involved in protein ubiquitination and in the regulation of many cellular processes. Substrate recognition adaptors named DDB1/CUL4-associated factors (DCAFs) mediate the specificity of CUL4-DDB1 and have a short structural motif of approximately forty amino acids terminating in tryptophan (W)-aspartic acid (D) dipeptide, called the WD40 domain. Using different approaches (bioinformatics/structural analyses), independent studies suggested that at least sixty WD40-containing proteins could act as adaptors for the DDB1/CUL4 complex. To better define this association and classification, the interaction of each DCAFs with DDB1 was determined, and new partners and potential substrates were identified. Using BioID and affinity purification-mass spectrometry approaches, we demonstrated that seven WD40 proteins can be considered DCAFs with a high confidence level. Identifying protein interactions does not always lead to identifying protein substrates for E3-ubiquitin ligases, so we measured changes in protein stability or degradation by pulse-stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture to identify changes in protein degradation, following the expression of each DCAF. In conclusion, these results provide new insights into the roles of DCAFs in regulating the activity of the DDB1-CUL4 complex, in protein targeting, and characterized the cellular processes involved.

### Keywords
Bioid, Cullin4, Ubiquitination, Dcafs, Interactome, Pulse-silac, Ddb1

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Immonolgy and cell biology department, université de sherbrooke

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Francois Michel Boisvert
Immonolgy and cell biology department, université de sherbrooke


