### Accession
PXD012227

### Title
PhDHS is involved in chloroplast development in petunia

### Description
Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) is encoded by a nuclear gene and is the key enzyme involved in the post-translational activation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF5A. DHS plays important roles in plant growth and development. To gain a better understanding of DHS, the petunia (Petunia hybrida) PhDHS gene was isolated, and the role of PhDHS in plant growth was analysed. PhDHS protein was localized to the nucleus and cytoplasm. Virus-mediated PhDHS silencing caused a sectored chlorotic leaf phenotype. The chlorophyll levels was reducted and the development of chloroplasts was abnormal in PhDHS-silenced leaves These features were not observed in DHS-suppressed Arabidopsis thaliana and Solanum lycopersicum. These results indicated that PhDHS is required for development in petunia. A proteome assay showed that 308 proteins are up-regulated and 266 proteins are down-regulated in PhDHS-silenced plants compared with control. Among them, 20 proteins in photosystem I and photosystem II and 11 thylakoid proteins were down-regulated in PhDHS-silenced leaves, further supporting the involvement of PhDHS in photosynthesis in petunia.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Petunia ‘Ultra’ plants, which were bought from Guangzhou Sanli horticulture Co., Ltd. were grown under greenhouse conditions (22±2°C, 14-h light/10-h dark). When the plants were  10 cm in height, roots, stems and leaves were collected at the vegetative stage. At anthesis stages, seven to ten petunia flowers were harvested and placed in distilled water. Corollas were collected at 1 day after flower opening. Petunia flowers were treated with ethylene according to previously described protocols (Tan et al., 2014). All tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C until used for further experiments. All experiments were conducted at least three times. Protein Extraction, Trypsin Digestion, TMT Labelling, HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TMT labelling and HPLC fractionation were performed according to our previous study (Guo et al., 2016). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Wu et al., 2015). Three biological replicates were performed. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant (v.1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a database (40,341 sequences) created based on the RNA sequencing of petunias in our previous study (Guo et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis Bioinformatics analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Xie et al., 2015). Gene Ontology (GO) term association and enrichment analysis were performed using DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). The KEGG pathway database was used to identify enriched metabolic pathways (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html).  Protein quantitative ratio analysis Protein quantitative ratio was calculated as the median ratio of all unique peptides. Student's t test was performed to investigate the effects of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). To meet the conditions for Student's t test, logarithmic transformation was performed to obtain the ratio of all peptides. Then, Student's t test was employed to calculate the p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) is encoded by a nuclear gene and is the key enzyme involved in the post-translational activation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF5A. DHS plays important roles in plant growth and development. To gain a better understanding of DHS, the petunia (<i>Petunia hybrida</i>) <i>PhDHS</i> gene was isolated, and the role of PhDHS in plant growth was analyzed. PhDHS protein was localized to the nucleus and cytoplasm. Virus-mediated <i>PhDHS</i> silencing caused a sectored chlorotic leaf phenotype. Chlorophyll levels and photosystem II activity were reduced, and chloroplast development was abnormal in <i>PhDHS</i>-silenced leaves. In addition, <i>PhDHS</i> silencing resulted in extended leaf longevity and thick leaves. A proteome assay revealed that 308 proteins are upregulated and 266 proteins are downregulated in <i>PhDHS</i>-silenced plants compared with control, among the latter, 21 proteins of photosystem I and photosystem II and 12 thylakoid (thylakoid lumen and thylakoid membrane) proteins. In addition, the mRNA level of <i>PheIF5A-1</i> significantly decreased in <i>PhDHS</i>-silenced plants, while that of another three <i>PheIF5As</i> were not significantly affected in <i>PhDHS</i>-silenced plants. Thus, silencing of PhDHS affects photosynthesis presumably as an indirect effect due to reduced expression of <i>PheIF5A-1</i> in petunia. <b>Significance:</b> <i>PhDHS</i>-silenced plants develop yellow leaves and exhibit a reduced level of photosynthetic pigment in mesophyll cells. In addition, arrested development of chloroplasts is observed in the yellow leaves.

### Keywords
Chloroplast development, Petunia, Deoxyhypusine synthase, Photosynthesis, Sectored chlorotic leaf

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China


