### Accession
PXD036423

### Title
Proteomic Atlas of Obesity and Type 2 Diabetes in Cynomolgus Monkeys

### Description
Obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) remain major global healthcare challenges and developing therapeutics necessitate using nonhuman primate models. Here, we present proteomic analyses of all the major organs of cynomolgus monkeys with spontaneous obesity or T2D in comparison to healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated on an 1100 HPLC System (Agilent, USA) connected to an Agilent ZORBAX Extend-C18 column (80 Å, 150 mm × 2.1 mm, 5 μm, Cat. #773700-902) at a flow rate of 250 μL/min. MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The separated peptides were loaded onto a C18 column (50 cm × 75 μm) connected to an EASY-nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The 1.5-h gradient was determined as follows: 8-25% buffer B for 70 min, 25-45% buffer B for 19 min, 45-100% buffer B for 6 min, and then 100% buffer B for a 10-min hold.  For the spectra library generation, the instrument was operated in DDA mode. MS scan was performed in the 350-1,650 m/z range at a resolution of 1.2×104 with AGC target of 3×106, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms, followed by selection of the 20 most abundant precursor ions for collisional induced dissociation (collision energy 27%) using a resolution of 3×104 with an AGC target of 2×105, a maximum injection time of 80 ms, and isolation window of 1.4 m/z. The Q-Exactive HF dynamic exclusion was set for 40.0 s and run under positive mode.  All tissue samples were then analyzed by DIA mode. MS scan was acquired in the mass range of 350-1250 m/z using a resolution of 1.2×104 with AGC target of 3×106, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Subsequently, the 32 acquisition windows were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (collision energy 28%, each acquisition window of 26 m/z) using a resolution of 3 × 104 with an AGC target of 1×106, automatic maximum injection time, and run under positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries were generated using Spectronaut Pulsar software (Biognosys) by combining the output from DDA MS runs analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) and using the Mascot search engine against Macaca_fascicularis_5.0 of the NCBI annotation. Spectronaut software was subsequently used to match raw DIA MS data against the spectral library using the default settings with slight modifications. The FDRs for protein, peptide, and peptide spectrum matches were all set to 0.01.  Protein expression values were normalized based on quantiles across all the samples for each tissue separately using normalize.quantiles in R package “preprocessCore”. Imputation was used to assign missing values to represent lack of detection based on a normal distribution. A simple linear model implemented in the R/Bioconductor package limma v3.42.2 (Ritchie et al., 2015) was used to identify the DEPs between diseased and healthy monkeys for each tissue separately. Proteins with fold change > 1.5 and Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-values < 0.15 were considered to be differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cynomolgus monkeys, Type 2 diabetes, Obesity

### Affiliations
Amgen
Amgen Inc.

### Submitter
Xianglong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Hsiang Hsu
Amgen Inc.


