### Accession
PXD017007

### Title
Proteome specialization of anaerobic fungi during ruminal degradation of recalcitrant plant fiber

### Description
The rumen harbors a complex mixture of archaea, bacteria, protozoa and fungi that efficiently breakdown plant biomass and its complex dietary carbohydrates into soluble sugars that can be fermented and subsequently converted into metabolites and nutrients utilized by the host animal. While rumen bacteria populations have been well documented, only a fraction of the rumen eukarya are taxonomically and functionally characterized, despite the recognition that they contribute to the cellulolytic phenotype of the rumen fauna. To investigate how anaerobic fungi actively engage in digestion of recalcitrant fiber that is resistant to the initial stages of rumination, we resolved genome-centric metaproteome and metatranscriptome datasets generated from switchgrass samples incubated in nylon bags within the rumen of cannulated dairy cows for 48 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from bulk rumen fluid and different fractions of the solid biomass (switchgrass and cornstover. Paper focus only on switchgrass) incubated in nylon bags within the rumen for 48 hours. Solid biomass was ground and SIGMAFAST protease inhibitor was added to prevent protein degradation during sample preparation. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (ThermoFisher Pierce, Waltham, MA). Urea and dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to all samples to a final concentration of 8 M and 10 mM, respectively and incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes to denature and reduce proteins. Protein digestion was performed at 37°C (235 rpm) for 3 hours after CaCl2 trypsin was added to a 1 mM final concentration and in a 1:50 trypsin:protein (w/w) ratio, respectively. After sample clean-up and concentration, samples were analyzed by reversed phase LC-MS/MS using a Waters nanoACQUITYTM UPLC system (Millford, MA) coupled with an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS scans were subsequently analyzed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.13, and proteins quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant. Peptides were identified by searching the MS/MS datasets against two reference databases. To identify common contaminants introduced during sample preparation, the databases were complemented with common contaminants, such as human keratin and bovine serum albumin, in addition to the reversed sequences. Tolerance levels for peptide identifications were 6 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively, and two missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate of 1% using the target-decoy strategy. The software  Perseus version 1.6.0.7 was used for downstream interpretation and quality filtering, including removal of decoy database hits, hits only identified by site and contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
The rumen harbors a complex microbial mixture of archaea, bacteria, protozoa, and fungi that efficiently breakdown plant biomass and its complex dietary carbohydrates into soluble sugars that can be fermented and subsequently converted into metabolites and nutrients utilized by the host animal. While rumen bacterial populations have been well documented, only a fraction of the rumen eukarya are taxonomically and functionally characterized, despite the recognition that they contribute to the cellulolytic phenotype of the rumen microbiota. To investigate how anaerobic fungi actively engage in digestion of recalcitrant fiber that is resistant to degradation, we resolved genome-centric metaproteome and metatranscriptome datasets generated from switchgrass samples incubated for 48&#x2009;h in nylon bags within the rumen of cannulated dairy cows. Across a gene catalog covering anaerobic rumen bacteria, fungi and viruses, a significant portion of the detected proteins originated from fungal populations. Intriguingly, the carbohydrate-active enzyme (CAZyme) profile suggested a domain-specific functional specialization, with bacterial populations primarily engaged in the degradation of hemicelluloses, whereas fungi were inferred to target recalcitrant cellulose structures via the detection of a number of endo- and exo-acting enzymes belonging to the glycoside hydrolase (GH) family 5, 6, 8, and 48. Notably, members of the GH48 family were amongst the highest abundant CAZymes and detected representatives from this family also included dockerin domains that are associated with fungal cellulosomes. A eukaryote-selected metatranscriptome further reinforced the contribution of uncultured fungi in the ruminal degradation of recalcitrant fibers. These findings elucidate the intricate networks of in situ recalcitrant fiber deconstruction, and importantly, suggest that the anaerobic rumen fungi contribute a specific set of CAZymes that complement the enzyme repertoire provided by the specialized plant cell wall degrading rumen bacteria.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rumen microbiome, Metaproteome, Anerobic rumen fungi

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis, CA, USA
Faculty of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway

### Submitter
Live Hagen

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Hess
University of California, Davis, CA, USA


