### Accession
PXD025262

### Title
The nuclear RNA-interactome of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)

### Description
Here, we performed RNA-interactome capture (RIC) on nuclear fractions from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). The poly(A)+ RNA-bound proteome was determined by UV light-mediated cross-linking (CL) of RNAs to proteins in living cells, followed by nuclei isolation, oligo(dT) purification of poly(A)-RNA-protein complexes, and mass spectrometry analysis of captured proteins. As a control, we applied a similar strategy to non-cross-linked (non-CL) samples. RIC was performed in four independent biological replicates. This data accompanies the manuscript: "Uncovering the RNA-binding protein landscape in the pluripotency network of human embryonic stem cells". Abstract: "Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell-fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that directly bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during exit from pluripotency and early lineage specification. Moreover, we show that nearly 200 RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly bound by this factor. Intriguingly, over 20 percent of the proteins detected in our study are putative DNA- and RNA-binding proteins (DRBPs), among them key transcription factors (TFs). Using fluorescently labeled RNA and seCLIP (single-end enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation) experiments, we discover that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 TFs interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the direct binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Taken together, our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated, reinforcing the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in stem cell biology".

### Sample Protocol
Four eluates from CL and control samples each were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion followed by a desalting step. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a high resolution/high mass accuracy mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos). Each sample was analyzed on the instrument separately in random order in discovery mode. Parameters were set to achieve maximum coverage (MS1 measurement in the Orbitrap and MS2 in the ion trap).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human reference proteome (accessed 14 May 2016; www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Reversed sequences of all human proteins and a list of 245 laboratory contaminants were added to the sequence database. Trypsin/P was used as the digestive enzyme, allowing no more than two missed cleavages and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications to oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), and deamidation (Q or N). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using a target-decoy strategy, with a maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during early stem cell differentiation. Notably, many RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly targeted by this factor. Using cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), we find that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 transcription factors interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Hescs, Human embryonic stem cells, Rna-binding proteins, Rbpome, Nuclear rna interactome, Rbps, Rna-interactome capture, Ric, Mass spectrometry, Rna-binding proteome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel. 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel.

### Submitter
Shlomi Dvir

### Lab Head
Dr Yael Mandel-Gutfreund
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel. 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel.


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Orbitrap Fusion Lumos

