### Accession
PXD009914

### Title
METTL13 modulates mRNA translation through methylation of eEF1A at Lys55 and the N-terminus, part 2

### Description
The experiment aimed at characterizing the methylation status of eEF1A in cells (HeLa) stressed using a panel of drugs including anisomycin, cycloheximide, 4NQO and adenosine dialdehyde (AdOx).

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion with trypsin, desalting C18 StageTip

### Data Protocol
Data searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.9i) for KR methylation (mono, di and tri) as well as N-terminal methylation (mono, di and tri) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1A) delivers aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome and thereby plays a key role in protein synthesis. Human eEF1A is subject to extensive post-translational methylation, but several of the responsible enzymes remain unknown. Using a wide range of experimental approaches, we here show that human methyltransferase (MTase)-like protein 13 (METTL13) contains two distinct MTase domains targeting the N terminus and Lys55 of eEF1A, respectively. Our biochemical and structural analyses provide detailed mechanistic insights into recognition of the eEF1A N terminus by METTL13. Moreover, through ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that loss of METTL13 function alters translation dynamics and results in changed translation rates of specific codons. In summary, we here unravel the function of a human MTase, showing that it methylates eEF1A and modulates mRNA translation in a codon-specific manner.

### Keywords
Ptm, Methylation, Eef1a

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Magnus Jakobsson

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V Olsen
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Denmark


