### Accession
PXD013481

### Title
hiPSCs with different colony morphology

### Description
Here we characterize the the proteome of iPSCs classified into three morphology groups.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by FASP. Label free quatification on 20 samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were searched in MaxQuant (v1.5.8.3) using the default parametes with the following exceptions:Label-free quantification was set to LFQ, minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the match-between-runs option was enabled. The cellular protein levels were relatively quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm, and these intracellular levels are presented as the relative LFQ intensity defined as the normalized relative protein abundance compared across the MS runs. The perseus softeare (v.1.6.2.3) was used to analyze and visualize the protein groups obtained by max quant.

### Publication Abstract
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are of high interest because they can be differentiated into a vast range of different cell types. Ideally, reprogrammed cells should sustain long-term culturing in an undifferentiated state. However, some reprogrammed cell lines represent an unstable state by spontaneously differentiating and changing their cellular phenotype and colony morphology. This phenomenon is not fully understood, and no method is available to predict it reliably. In this study, we analyzed and compared the proteome landscape of 20 reprogrammed cell lines classified as stable and unstable based on long-term colony morphology. We identified distinct proteomic signatures associated with stable colony morphology and with unstable colony morphology, although the typical pluripotency markers (POU5F1, SOX2) were present with both morphologies. Notably, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) protein markers were associated with unstable colony morphology, and the transforming growth factor beta (TGFB) signalling pathway was predicted as one of the main regulator pathways involved in this process. Furthermore, we identified specific proteins that separated the stable from the unstable state. Finally, we assessed both spontaneous embryonic body (EB) formation and directed differentiation and showed that reprogrammed lines with an unstable colony morphology had reduced differentiation capacity. To conclude, we found that different defined patterns of colony morphology in reprogrammed cells were associated with distinct proteomic profiles and different outcomes in differentiation capacity.

### Keywords
Human, Ipscs lc-msms

### Affiliations
Universitetet i Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Ræder
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


