### Accession
PXD027408

### Title
Viral immune evasions differentially impact cell surface presentation of MHC I allomorphs already at the peptide-loading complex

### Description
The transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) translocates peptides from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where they are loaded onto major histocompatibility class I (MHC I) molecules. Stable peptide-MHC I complexes travel to the cell surface and present their antigenic cargo to cytotoxic T lymphocytes. As central part of the peptide-loading complex (PLC), TAP is targeted by several viral proteins, which inhibit peptide translocation and thereby impact MHC I-mediated immune responses. However, it is still poorly understood whether the MHC I allotypes are differently affected by TAP inhibition. Here, we show that conditional expression of herpes simplex virus (HSV) ICP47 suppresses surface presentation of the MHC I allotypes HLA-A and HLA-C, but not of HLA-B, while expression of cytomegalovirus (CMV) US6 reduces surface levels of all allotypes. This difference is directly reflected in a specific enrichment of HLA-B molecules at US6 arrested PLC. Since ICP47 and US6 inhibit TAP in different transport-incompetent conformations, our data imply that MHC I allomorphs are preferentially recruited or trapped at the PLC leading to selective downregulation of MHC I surface presentation. Our findings suggest that viral immune evasions not only inhibit peptide supply to the ER by TAP, but also modulate the assembly and chaperone activity of the PLC.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of PLC proteins were precipitated using 1/10 vol. 3 M sodium acetate, pH 5.3 and 3 vol. ice-cold ethanol and overnight incubation at -20 °C. The protein pellet was washed twice with 80% (v/v) ice-cold ethanol and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Tryptic digestion in the presence of RapiGest (Waters) was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For protein digestion, trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) followed by incubation at 37 °C overnight. Subsequently, the RapiGest was degraded by addition of 20 µl of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and incubation for 2 h at 37 °C. Degraded RapiGest was removed by centrifugation, and peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Extracted peptides dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid were separated and analyzed using nano-flow reversed-phase liquid chromatography (DionexUltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Scientific; mobile phase A, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA); mobile phase B, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% (v/v) FA) coupled with a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (μ-Precolumn C18PepMap 100, C18, 300 μm I.D., particle size 5 μm; Thermo Scientific), subsequently separated with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 on an analytical C18 capillary column (50 cm, HPLC column Acclaim® PepMap 100, C18, 75 μm I.D., particle size 3 μm; Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 4-90% (v/v) mobile phase B over 92 min and directly eluted into the mass spectrometer. Typical MS conditions were: data-dependent mode; positive ion mode; spray voltage, 2.8 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; MS scan range in the Orbitrap, m/z 350–1600; MS resolution, 70,000; automatic gain control (AGC) target, 3e6. The twenty most intense ions with charge states of 2+ to 7+ were selected for HCD fragmentation, and previously selected ions were specifically excluded for 30 s. MS/MS conditions were: MS/MS resolution, 17,500; fixed first mass, 105.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 30% and AGC target, 1e5. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap was performed using the lock mass option (lock mass m/z 445.120025) (Olsen 2005).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, raw data were searched against the database of the human PLC complex (20201029_PLC_ICP47.fasta and 20201029_PLC_US6.fasta) using MaxQuant v1.6.17 with the following database search settings: enzyme, trypsin; mass accuracy of precursor ions in main search, 4.5 ppm; mass accuracy of fragment ions in main search, 0.5 Da; number of allowed missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus; quantification, iBAQ; FDR, 1%. For the calculation of protein stoichiometries, relative iBAQ values of three biological replicates were used. For PLC-US6 one replicate was measured in three fractions, these were combined during the MaxQuant search using the fraction parameter. The obtained proteinGroups table was filtered for “potential contaminants”, “only identified by site”, and “reverse”. Relative iBAQ values were calculated as follows: iBAQ/ sum iBAQ.

### Publication Abstract
Major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC&#xa0;I) molecules present antigenic peptides to cytotoxic T cells to eliminate infected or cancerous cells. The transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) shuttles proteasomally generated peptides into the ER for MHC&#xa0;I loading. As central part of the peptide-loading complex (PLC), TAP is targeted by viral factors, which inhibit peptide supply and thereby impact MHC&#xa0;I-mediated immune responses. However, it is still poorly understood how antigen presentation via different MHC&#xa0;I allotypes is affected by TAP inhibition. Here, we show that conditional expression of herpes simplex viral ICP47 suppresses surface presentation of HLA-A and HLA-C, but not of HLA-B, while the human cytomegaloviral US6 reduces surface levels of all MHC&#xa0;I allotypes. This marked difference in HLA-B antigen presentation is echoed by an enrichment of HLA-B allomorphs at US6-arrested PLC in comparison to ICP47-PLC. Although both viral factors prevent TAP-mediated peptide supply, our data imply that MHC&#xa0;I allomorphs favor different conformationally arrested states of the PLC, leading to differential downregulation of MHC&#xa0;I surface presentation. These findings will help understand MHC&#xa0;I biology in general and will even advance the targeted treatment of infections depending on patients' allotypes.

### Keywords
Peptide-loading complex, Er quality control, Major histocompatibility complex class i, Mhc i biogenesis, Viral immune evasion, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Interdisciplinary research center HALOmem, Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
Interdisciplinary research center HALOmem, Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany


