### Accession
PXD007956

### Title
Linking microbial community structure and function during the anaerobic digestion of grass

### Description
In this study, microbial communities from triplicate leach-bed anaerobic bioreactors digesting grass were analysed. Each reactor comprised two microbial fractions, one immobilized on grass (biofilm) and the other in a planktonic state present in the leachate. Microbial communities from the two fractions were systematically investigated for community composition and function. This was carried out using DNA, RNA and protein co-extraction. The microbial structure of each fraction was examined using 16S rRNA deep sequencing, while the active members of the consortia were identified using the same approach on cDNA generated from co-extracted RNA samples. Microbial function was investigated using a metaproteomic workflow combining SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken on day 7 (last day) of the reactor run. From each reactor, duplicate samples of 250 ml leachate were drained. For the digestate fraction, 50g of grass was collected in duplicate and placed in 250ml sonication buffer. Biofilms attached to the grass were removed using the sonication bath. Samples were placed in 50 ml sterile sarstedt tubes and centrifuged and then underwent a series of washes prior to extraction using the Norgen Biotek RNA,DNA,Protein Purification kit. Protein samples were quantified using the Non Interferring Protein assay (Calbiochem) follwing manufacturers' instructions, prior to normalization and SDS-PAGE analysis. . Protein identification was carried out by liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) at the BSRC Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility in the University of St. Andrews. Firstly, in-gel digestion was carried out, whereby gel chunks were destained by washing with acetonitrile and subjected to reduction and alkylation before digestion with trypsin at 37°C. The peptides were then extracted with 10% formic acid as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). Next the peptides were concentrated using a SpeedVac (ThermoSavant) and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a nanoLC Ultra 2D plus loading pump and nanoLC as-2 autosampler (Eskigent). The peptides were then eluted with a gradient of increasing acetonitrile, containing 0.1% formic acid (5-40% acetonitrile in 5 minutes, 40-95% in a further 1 minute, followed by 95% acetonitrile to clean the column, before re-equilibration to a 5% acetonitrile). The eluent was sprayed into a TripleTOF 5600 electrospray tandem mass spectrometer (Sciex) and analysis was carried out in Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode, performing 250 milliseconds of MS followed by 100 milliseconds MSMS analysis on the most intense peaks seen by MS. The MS/MS data files were analysed using Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science) against the NCBInr database with no species restriction, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteines and methionine oxidation and deamination of glutamines and asparagines as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
The proteins results were first analysed using ProteinPilot software (Sciex, Forster City, CA) against the NCBInr database and only proteins with ≥2 peptides (and a competitor error margin (Prot Score) of ≥2.00) were considered. When proteins were assigned to multiple species, the lowest common ancestor was employed (Appendix 6). Clusters of orthologous groups (COGs) were investigated using MEGAN software (http://ab.inf.uni-tuebingen.de/software/megan5/), for which BLAST files were generated for each sample and uploaded into MEGAN. Further analysis was carried out in RStudio to investigate the assignment and statistical differences between protein samples. Pathways were constructed from proteins identified using the pipeline developed in collaboration with Dr. Ijaz (http://userweb.eng.gla.ac.uk/umer.ijaz/bioinformatics/Metaproteomics.html). In this pipeline, protein sequences are assigned enzyme commission (EC) numbers when possible and MinPath is used to construct parsimonious pathways, while iPath allows for pathway visualization.. Krona plots were constructed using the Krona template (Ondov et al. 2011) and Circos plots using the Circos online tool developed by Krzywinski et al., (2009)

### Publication Abstract
Harvesting valuable bioproducts from various renewable feedstocks is necessary for the critical development of a sustainable bioeconomy. Anaerobic digestion is a well-established technology for the conversion of wastewater and solid feedstocks to energy with the additional potential for production of process intermediates of high market values (e.g., carboxylates). In recent years, first-generation biofuels typically derived from food crops have been widely utilized as a renewable source of energy. The environmental and socioeconomic limitations of such strategy, however, have led to the development of second-generation biofuels utilizing, amongst other feedstocks, lignocellulosic biomass. In this context, the anaerobic digestion of perennial grass holds great promise for the conversion of sustainable renewable feedstock to energy and other process intermediates. The advancement of this technology however, and its implementation for industrial applications, relies on a greater understanding of the microbiome underpinning the process. To this end, microbial communities recovered from replicated anaerobic bioreactors digesting grass were analyzed. The bioreactors leachates were not buffered and acidic pH (between 5.5 and 6.3) prevailed at the time of sampling as a result of microbial activities. Community composition and transcriptionally active taxa were examined using 16S rRNA sequencing and microbial functions were investigated using metaproteomics. Bioreactor fraction, i.e., grass or leachate, was found to be the main discriminator of community analysis across the three molecular level of investigation (DNA, RNA, and proteins). Six taxa, namely Bacteroidia, Betaproteobacteria, Clostridia, Gammaproteobacteria, Methanomicrobia, and Negativicutes accounted for the large majority of the three datasets. The initial stages of grass hydrolysis were carried out by Bacteroidia, Gammaproteobacteria, and Negativicutes in the grass biofilms, in addition to Clostridia in the bioreactor leachates. Numerous glycolytic enzymes and carbohydrate transporters were detected throughout the bioreactors in addition to proteins involved in butanol and lactate production. Finally, evidence of the prevalence of stressful conditions within the bioreactors and particularly impacting Clostridia was observed in the metaproteomes. Taken together, this study highlights the functional importance of Clostridia during the anaerobic digestion of grass and thus research avenues allowing members of this taxon to thrive should be explored.

### Keywords
Anaerobic digestion; metaproteomics; grass

### Affiliations
Functional Environmental Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway
National University of Ireland, Galway

### Submitter
Aoife Joyce

### Lab Head
Dr Florence Abram
Functional Environmental Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway


