### Accession
PXD029878

### Title
Identification of Serratia phage JS26 structural proteome

### Description
Identification of Serratia phage JS26 structural proteins through LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
A Serratia sp. ATCC 39006 culture (25 ml) was mixed with 500 µl of high titre phage stock (~109 pfu/ml) and grown overnight at 30⁰C in shaking conditions (160 rpm). Cell debris were removed by centrifugation (2,000 g for 20 min) and the supernatant containing phages was concentrated and purified with a sucrose cushion. Briefly, phage samples were pipetted onto a 20% w/v sucrose solution underlay. The sample was separated by centrifugation (120,000 g for 4 h at 20⁰C) and the pellet was resuspended in 250 µl of no-gelatin phage buffer and dialysed overnight against 2 L of milliQ water at 4⁰C. The phage solution was pooled together and cleaned from cell debris by centrifugation (10,000 g for 20 min). Next, a CsCl gradient was prepared by adding 2 ml of 1.2 g/ml and 1.6 g/ml CsCl solutions into a centrifuge tube. The sample was separated by centrifugation (120,000 g for 4 h at 20⁰C), and the white phage interface that formed in the CsCl gradient was harvested using a Pasteur pipette. The concentrated phage stock was washed by adding no-gelatin phage buffer and pelleted by an ultracentrifuge step (120,000 g for 2 h at 20⁰C). The pellet was resuspended in 100 µl milliQ water and stored at 4⁰C. For the proteomic analysis, 75 µl of phage sample was mixed with 20 µl of 1/10 (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol 4x SDS-buffer and incubated for 5 min at 95⁰C. The sample was ran in a 12% w/v SDS-polyacrylamide gel for 1 h at 150 V. Page ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as a reference. The gel was fixed for 2 h in a 10% v/v acetic acid, 40% v/v ethanol. Finally, the gel was stained overnight in 4 parts of Colloidal Coomasie Blue stain (0.1% G250 w/v, 10% w/v ammonium sulphate and 2% v/v orto-phospholic acid) and 1 part methanol.

### Data Protocol
Th gel lane was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin and analysed by protein identification by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in the Centre for Protein Research (University of Otago). Peptide reconstruction was performed with an Ultimate 3000 nano-flow uHPLC-System (Dionex Co, Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) in-line coupled to the nanospray source of an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, USA). Raw spectra were processed through the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using default settings to generate peak lists. Peak lists were then searched against a combined amino acid sequence database containing all JS26 sequence entries (GenBank accession number MN505213.1, 84 entries) integrated into the full SwissProt/UniProt sequence database using the Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) and MS Amanda search engines.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phage structure, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago
University of Otago

### Submitter
Peter Fineran

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Fineran
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago


