### Accession
PXD007241

### Title
Uncovering the metabolic pleiotropy of FMR1-deficiency in Fragile X Syndrome

### Description
ene pleiotropy defines the capacity of a gene to impact multiple phenotypic characters. The Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 (FMR1) gene is a candidate for pleiotropy, as it controls protein synthesis through its product, the translational regulator FMRP. As FMR1 loss-of-function leads to neurodevelopmental defects and Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), intellectual disability and autism, FMR1 functions have been mostly studied in the brain. FMR1-deficiency could also have yet unexplored consequences in periphery and impact metabolism through translational repression in peripheral organs. We combined 1H NMR-based metabolic phenotyping and proteomics to reveal the pleiotropic metabolic effects associated with FMR1-deficiency in mouse and human. We demonstrate that Fmr1-deficiency in the mouse increases hepatic translation, improves glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity and reduces adiposity, while enhancing -adrenergic driven lipolysis and utilization of lipid energetic substrates. Last, we provide converging evidences in FXS patients that the levels of glucose, insulin and free fatty acids are modified, suggesting that FMR1-deficiency also drives metabolic readjustments in human. As part of a larger study investigating the involvement of fmr in metabolic alteration in fmr1-KO mice, fmr1-KO mouse livers were analysed by MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse livers were removed, homogenised in RIPA buffer and precipitated using acetone/methanol. After resuspension in urea buffer, proteins were reduced and alkylated using DTT and IAA, respectively, before sequential digestion using LysC and Trypsin.  All samples were analysed by nLC-easy 1200 couples to an orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer using 169 min elution gradients.

### Data Protocol
All data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using standard settings including LFQ and match between runs. The mouse database used will be uploaded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fxs, Fmr-1, Mouse, Liver, Gene pleiotropy

### Affiliations
Proteome centre Tubingen
Proteome Centre Tuebingen

### Submitter
Tariq Ganief

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Proteome Centre Tuebingen


