### Accession
PXD010959

### Title
VE-PTP inhibition stabilizes endothelial junctions by activating FGD5

### Description
Inhibition of VE-PTP, an endothelial receptor type tyrosine phosphatase, triggers phosphorylation of the tyrosine kinase receptor Tie-2, which leads to the suppression of inflammation-induced vascular permeability. Analyzing the underlying mechanism, we show here that inhibition of VE-PTP and activation of Tie-2 induce tyrosine phosphorylation of FGD5, a GTPase exchange factor (GEF) for Cdc42, and stimulate translocation of this GEF to cell contacts. Interfering with the expression of FGD5 blocked the junction stabilizing effect of VE-PTP inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Likewise, FGD5 was required for strengthening of cortical actin bundles and inhibiting radial stress fiber formation, which were each stimulated by VE-PTP inhibition. We identified Y820 of FGD5 as the direct substrate for VE-PTP. Inhibition of VE-PTP could no longer stabilize endothelial junctions or activate Cdc42 if endothelial cells expressed a Y820F point mutated version of FGD5. In contrast, FGD5-Y820F was still recruited to endothelial cell contacts. Thus, activation of FGD5 is a two-step process that comprises membrane recruitment and phosphorylation of Y820. These steps are necessary for the junction stabilizing effect that is stimulated by VE-PTP inhibition and Tie-2 activation.

### Sample Protocol
Investigation of changes in protein phosphorylation upon phosphatase inhibition on a global scale was performed with confluent mouse bEnd.5 endothelioma cells (5 x 15cm dishes, which where treated with AKB‐9778 (50 µM, 30min), lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatases inhibitors and then subjected to the filter-aided sample preparation procedure (FASP) as decribed using Amicon Ultra-15 ultrafiltration units (nominal molecular weight cutoff 30kDa). Following reduction of disulfide bridges and alkylation, the sample was first digested with Trypsin for 3 hrs at 37°C, after which additional Trypsin was added (100 µg / 10 mg protein) and the incubation continued over night. Peptides were harvested by centrifugation. Following the adjustment of the pH value of the filtrate to pH 2.5 by the addition of TFA, acetonitril (ACN) was then added to a final concentration of 30%. Acidified peptides were subjected to strong anion exchange chromatography on a Resource S column (GE Healthcare) and an Äkta Explorer chromatography system (Buffer A: 7 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN; Buffer B: 7 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl; gradient from 0-30%B in 30 min, 100%B for 10 min, flow rate 2 ml / min)  Fractions were pooled according to the elution profile (flow through fraction + 9 pools). Phosphopeptides from each pool were enriched using TiO2 microspheres (GL Sciences) in the presence of DHB. Each pool was extracted twice by the addition of TiO2 beads (3 mg / pool) that had been pre-equilibrated in loading buffer (6x stock: 30 mg / ml DHB, 80% ACN) for 20 min at RT on a rotary shaker. TiO2 suspensions were then transferred to double layer C8 Stage-Tips, which were washed with 30% ACN, 3% TFA and 80% ACN, 0.3% TFA. Phosphopeptides were finally eluted with 40% ACN, 60% NH4OH, concentrated to a volume of approx. 3µl in an vacuum concentrator and acidified by the addition 0.5% acetic acid prior to injection into the mass spectrometer. Each phosphopeptide pool was fractionated on in-house packed fused silica capillary column (length 15cm; ID 75µm; resin ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm) using a a Proxeon EasyLC high pressure liquid nanoflow chromatography system that was coupled via a Proxeon electrospray ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Bound peptides were eluted using a linear 120 min gradient from 5 – 35% B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) followed by a gradient from 35 – 98% B in 15 min. All phosphopeptide containing fractions were measured with the mass spectrometer operated in positive mode and 1) with multistage activation (pseudo MS3) enabled, triggering activation of the neutral loss species at 97.97, 48.99, or 32.66 m/z below the precursor ion of the 15 most intense ions for 10ms (survey scans fro m/z 300 – 1800 at R = 30000), and 2) in HCD mode (higher-energy collisional dissoziation; survey scans from m/z 300 – 1600 at R = 30000, fragmentation of 10 most intense peptide ions at a normalized collision energy of 40% and detection in the Orbitrap cell at R = 7500).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.8)(Cox and Mann, Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367-72. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1511. Epub 2008 Nov 30.) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse uniprotKB database (UP000000589_10090_mm.fasta; version from 12/2015) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for the search in the database, while oxidation at methionine, acetylation of the protein N-termini and phosphorylation at Ser, Thr and Tyr were allowed as variable modifications. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 7 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. Phosphosites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 and a score difference >5 (class I phosphosites)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transmigration, Ptprb, Phosphorylation, Ve-ptp, Inflammation, Shotgun proteomics, Phosphatase, Signalling, Adhesion, Endothelium, Fgd5, Lc-msms, Junctions, Tyrosine kinase receptor

### Affiliations
Head Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine; Röntgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Head Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine; Röntgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany


