### Accession
PXD023376

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of craniopharyngioma tissues

### Description
Craniopharyngiomas are rare epithelial tumors derived from pituitary gland embryonic tissue. This epithelial tumor entity can be divided into the adamantinomatuous (ACP) and papillary (PCP) subtypes with the histomorphological and genetic differences. Genomic and transcriptomic profiles of craniopharyngiomas have been investigated, however the proteomic contribution to these profiles has yet to be elucidated. Recent improvement in high-throughput quantitative proteomic approaches have introduced new opportunities for a better understanding of these disease and an efficient discovering of biomarkers. In this study, we report a systems-level proteomic study of sub-type associated proteome changes in six specimens of ACP and five specimens of PCP using an integrated approach that combines mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, statistical analysis, and bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The Frozen samples were used to perform label-free quantification proteomic analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q exactive plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed in a Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) environment (Tyanova et al., 2016) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the Uniprot Human protein sequence database (December_2014, 88,657 entries) and the Uniprot Bovine protein sequence database with common contaminants. Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide, protein, and site identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs and the spectral library were matched by enabling the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant. Contaminant, reverse, and only site identifications were removed from further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Craniopharyngiomas are rare epithelial tumors derived from pituitary gland embryonic tissue. This epithelial tumor can be categorized as an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP) or papillary craniopharyngioma (PCP) subtype with histopathological and genetic differences. Genomic and transcriptomic profiles of craniopharyngiomas have been investigated; however, the proteomic profile has yet to be elucidated and added to these profiles. Recent improvements in high-throughput quantitative proteomic approaches have introduced new opportunities for a better understanding of these diseases and the efficient discovery of biomarkers. We aimed to confirm subtype-associated proteomic changes between ACP and PCP specimens. We performed a system-level proteomic study using an integrated approach that combines mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic, statistical, and bioinformatics analyses. The bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially expressed proteins between ACP and PCP were significantly involved in mitochondrial organization, fatty acid metabolic processes, exocytosis, the inflammatory response, the cell cycle, RNA splicing, cell migration, and neuron development. Furthermore, using network analysis, we identified hub proteins that were positively correlated with ACP and PCP phenotypes. Our findings improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of craniopharyngiomas and provide novel insights that may ultimately translate to the development of craniopharyngioma subtype-specific therapeutics.

### Keywords
Human, Lfq, Craniopharyngioma

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


