### Accession
PXD014313

### Title
System-wide biochemical analysis reveals ozonide and artemisinin antimalarials initially act by disrupting malaria parasite haemoglobin digestion

### Description
Artemisinins are currently the first-line antimalarials, and rely on a peroxide pharmacophore for their potent activity. OZ277 (arterolane) and OZ439 (artefenomel) are newer synthetic peroxide-based antimalarials with potent activity against the deadliest malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. Here we used a “multi-omics” workflow, in combination with activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), to demonstrate that peroxide antimalarials initially target the haemoglobin (Hb) digestion pathway to kill malaria parasites.  Time-dependent metabolomic profiling of peroxide-treated P. falciparum infected red blood cells (iRBCs) revealed a rapid depletion of short Hb-derived peptides, while untargeted peptidomics showed accumulation of longer Hb peptides. Quantitative proteomics and ABPP assays demonstrated that Hb digesting proteases were significantly increased in abundance and activity following treatment, respectively. The association between peroxide activity and Hb catabolism was also confirmed in a K13-mutant artemisinin resistant parasite line. To demonstrate that compromised Hb catabolism may be a primary mechanism involved in peroxide antimalarial activity, we showed that parasites forced to rely solely on Hb digestion for amino acids became hypersensitive to short peroxide exposures.  Quantitative proteomics analysis also revealed parasite proteins involved in translation and the ubiquitin-proteasome system were enriched following drug treatment, suggestive of the parasite engaging a stress response to mitigate peroxide-induced damage. Taken together, these data point to a mechanism of action involving initial impairment of Hb catabolism, and indicate that the parasite regulates protein turnover to manage peroxide-induced damage.

### Sample Protocol
For peptidomics samples, intracellular parasites were harvested after 3 h of drug treatment followed by trichloroacetic acid protein precipitation and centrifugal filtration using a 10 kDa cut-off filter (Amicon Ultra). The flow-through containing endogenous peptides was collected and peptide concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Equal concentration of peptides (53-75 µg) were used for peptidomic analysis. Peptide samples were then subjected to desalting using in-house generated C18 StageTips. The elutes were then dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis. For proteomics samples, 1000 µg of solubilised protein (using 1% sodium deoxycholate), accurately determined using Pierce BCA assay, from each sample was incubated overnight with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (1:50) at 37℃. Quantitative triplex stable isotope dimethyl labelling was initiated on the following day using light, intermediate or heavy dimethyl labelling reagents. The samples were then subjected to ion-exchange fractionation using a disposable Strong Cationic Exchange Solid Phase Extraction cartridge (Agilent Bond Elut). The fractions were desalted using in-house generated StageTips, dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate U3000 Nano LC system (Dionex) and Q Exactive Orbitrap MS (ThermoFisher®).

### Data Protocol
For Peptidomics analysis, Peptide identification was performed using PEAKS DB software. Maximum mass deviation and false discovery rates were set at 0.5 Da and 0.01 respectively. No post translational modification or digestion were selected and identified peptide sequences were matched to Homo sapiens and P. falciparum databases. The mass to charge ratio and retention time of each identified peptide were imported into TraceFinderTM (ThermoFisher®) and the peak intensity for each peptide was obtained manually. Further statistical analyses (Student’s t test) were performed using Microsoft Excel for paired drug treated and DMSO control samples. For proteomics analysis, protein identification and quantification was performed using the MaxQuant proteomics software. The data analysis parameters in MaxQuant were set as previously described with minor modifications. Dimethylation settings were adjusted to triplets; DimetNterm0 with DimetLys0, DimetNterm4 with DimetLys4 and DimetNterm8 with DimetLys8 were selected as light, intermediate and heavy label respectively. To correct for differences in protein amount between groups, the protein ratios were normalised in MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the log2 ratio is zero. Known contaminants such as trypsin, keratin and reverse sequences were removed from the MaxQuant output. Fold-changes for the drug treated samples relative to the DMSO control samples were calculated in Microsoft Excel. One sample t-test was used to test the mean of combined experiment groups against the known mean (µ = 0).

### Publication Abstract
Ozonide antimalarials, OZ277 (arterolane) and OZ439 (artefenomel), are synthetic peroxide-based antimalarials with potent activity against the deadliest malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. Here we used a "multi-omics" workflow, in combination with activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), to demonstrate that peroxide antimalarials initially target the haemoglobin (Hb) digestion pathway to kill malaria parasites. Time-dependent metabolomic profiling of ozonide-treated P. falciparum infected red blood cells revealed a rapid depletion of short Hb-derived peptides followed by subsequent alterations in lipid and nucleotide metabolism, while untargeted peptidomics showed accumulation of longer Hb-derived peptides. Quantitative proteomics and ABPP assays demonstrated that Hb-digesting proteases were increased in abundance and activity following treatment, respectively. Ozonide-induced depletion of short Hb-derived peptides was less extensive in a drug-treated K13-mutant artemisinin resistant parasite line (Cam3.IIR539T) than in the drug-treated isogenic sensitive strain (Cam3.IIrev), further confirming the association between ozonide activity and Hb catabolism. To demonstrate that compromised Hb catabolism may be a primary mechanism involved in ozonide antimalarial activity, we showed that parasites forced to rely solely on Hb digestion for amino acids became hypersensitive to short ozonide exposures. Quantitative proteomics analysis also revealed parasite proteins involved in translation and the ubiquitin-proteasome system were enriched following drug treatment, suggestive of the parasite engaging a stress response to mitigate ozonide-induced damage. Taken together, these data point to a mechanism of action involving initial impairment of Hb catabolism, and indicate that the parasite regulates protein turnover to manage ozonide-induced damage.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Proteomics, Peroxide antimalarial, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville Campus, Parkville, Victoria Australia.
Monash University

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Darren Creek
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville Campus, Parkville, Victoria Australia.


