### Accession
PXD033549

### Title
Endothelial senescence mediates hypoxia-induced vascular remodeling by modulating PDGFB expression

### Description
Uncontrolled accumulation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMC) to the distal pulmonary arterioles (PAs) is one of the major characteristics of pulmonary hypertension (PH). Cellular senescence contributes to aging and lung diseases associated with PH and links to PH progression. However, the mechanism by which cellular senescence controls vascular remodeling in PH is not fully understood. The levels of senescence marker, p16INK4A and senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity are higher in PA endothelial cells (ECs) isolated from idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) patients compared to those from healthy individuals. Hypoxia-induced accumulation of α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA)-positive cells to the PAs is attenuated in p16fl/fl-Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 (p16iΔEC) mice after tamoxifen induction. We have reported that endothelial TWIST1 mediates hypoxia-induced vascular remodeling by increasing platelet-derived growth factor (PDGFB) expression. Transcriptomic analyses of IPAH patient or hypoxia-induced mouse lung ECs reveal the alteration of senescence-related gene expression and their interaction with TWIST1. Knockdown of p16INK4A attenuates the expression of PDGFB and TWIST1 in IPAH patient PAECs or hypoxia-treated mouse lungs and suppresses accumulation of αSMA–positive cells to the supplemented ECs in the gel implanted on the mouse lungs. Hypoxia-treated mouse lung EC-derived exosomes stimulate DNA synthesis and migration of PASMCs in vitro and in the gel implanted on the mouse lungs, while p16iΔEC mouse lung EC-derived exosomes inhibit the effects. These results suggest that endothelial senescence controls αSMA–positive cell proliferation and migration in PH through TWIST1-PDGFB signaling.

### Sample Protocol
ECs isolated from three normoxia- vs. three hypoxia-treated C57BL6 mouse lungs were plated (1x106 cells) and conditioned media was collected after 24 hours. Exosomes were isolated using Total Exosome Isolation Reagent from Cell Culture Media according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The exosome pellet was resuspended in 25 μl of 0.2 μm filtered PBS. Proteomics analysis was performed by the Northwestern University Proteomics Core Facility. Isolated exosomes (100 μg) were briefly tip sonicated (~10 sec) to break the exosome membrane, and proteins were purified by acetone/TCA precipitation. Then, the proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin according to the optimized protocol. Digested peptides were desalted on C18 columns then subject to mass spec analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against the Uniprot SP Mus musculus database. Proteomics data analysis on three control (normoxia) and three hypoxia (3 weeks) treated mouse lung EC exosome replicates was performed using Scaffold 5.1.0 software.

### Publication Abstract
Uncontrolled accumulation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) to the distal pulmonary arterioles (PAs) is one of the major characteristics of pulmonary hypertension (PH). Cellular senescence contributes to aging and lung diseases associated with PH and links to PH progression. However, the mechanism by which cellular senescence controls vascular remodeling in PH is not fully understood. The levels of senescence marker, p16<sup>INK4A</sup> and senescence-associated &#x3b2;-galactosidase (SA-&#x3b2;-gal) activity are higher in PA endothelial cells (ECs) isolated from idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) patients compared to those from healthy individuals. Hypoxia-induced accumulation of &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin (&#x3b1;SMA)-positive cells to the PAs is attenuated in <i>p16</i> <sup><i>fl</i>/<i>fl</i></sup> <i>-Cdh5(PAC)-Cre</i> <sup><i>ERT</i>2</sup> (<i>p16</i> <sup><i>i&#x394;EC</i></sup> ) mice after tamoxifen induction. We have reported that endothelial TWIST1 mediates hypoxia-induced vascular remodeling by increasing platelet-derived growth factor (PDGFB) expression. Transcriptomic analyses of IPAH patient lungs or hypoxia-induced mouse lung ECs reveal the alteration of senescence-related gene expression and their interaction with TWIST1. Knockdown of p16<sup>INK4A</sup> attenuates the expression of PDGFB and TWIST1 in IPAH patient PAECs or hypoxia-treated mouse lungs and suppresses accumulation of &#x3b1;SMA-positive cells to the supplemented ECs in the gel implanted on the mouse lungs. Hypoxia-treated mouse lung EC-derived exosomes stimulate DNA synthesis and migration of PASMCs <i>in vitro</i> and in the gel implanted on the mouse lungs, while <i>p16</i> <sup><i>i&#x394;EC</i></sup> mouse lung EC-derived exosomes inhibit the effects. These results suggest that endothelial senescence modulates TWIST1-PDGFB signaling and controls vascular remodeling in PH.

### Keywords
Endothelial cell, Senescence, Hypoxia, Pdgfb, Pulmonary hypertension, Twist1

### Affiliations
Medical College of Wisconsin
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States

### Submitter
Priscilla Kyi

### Lab Head
Dr Akiko Mammoto
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States


