### Accession
PXD037393

### Title
Synaptic proteomics reveal distinct molecular signatures of cognitive change and C9ORF72 repeat expansion in the human ALS cortex

### Description
Increasing evidence suggests synaptic dysfunction is a central and possibly triggering factor in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Despite this, we still know very little about the molecular profile of an ALS synapse. To address this gap, we designed a synaptic proteomics experiment to perform an unbiased assessment of the synaptic proteome in the ALS brain. We isolated synaptoneurosomes from fresh-frozen postmortem human cortex (11 controls and 18 ALS) and stratified the ALS group based on cognitive profile (Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS score)) and presence of a C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion (C9ORF72 -RE). This allowed us to assess regional differences and the impact of phenotype and genotype on the synaptic proteome, using Tandem Mass Tagging-based proteomics. We identified over 6000 proteins in our synaptoneurosomes and using robust bioinformatics analysis we validated the strong enrichment of synapses. We found more than 30 ALS-associated proteins in synaptoneurosomes, including TDP-43, FUS, SOD1 and C9ORF72. We identified almost 500 proteins with altered expression levels in ALS, with region-specific changes highlighting proteins and pathways with intriguing links to neurophysiology and pathology. Stratifying the ALS cohort by cognitive status revealed almost 150 specific alterations in cognitively impaired ALS synaptic preparations. Stratifying by C9ORF72 -RE status revealed 330 protein alterations in the C9ORF72 -RE+ve group, with KEGG pathway analysis highlighting strong enrichment for postsynaptic dysfunction, related to glutamatergic receptor signalling. We have validated some of these changes by western blot and at a single synapse level using array tomography imaging. In summary, we have generated the first unbiased map of the human ALS synaptic proteome, revealing novel insight into this key compartment in ALS pathophysiology and highlighting the influence of cognitive decline and C9ORF72 -RE on synaptic composition.

### Sample Protocol
Use of human tissue for post-mortem studies has been reviewed and approved by the Edinburgh Brain Bank ethics committee and the ACCORD medical research ethics committee, AMREC (ACCORD is the Academic and Clinical Central Office for Research and Development, a joint office of the University of Edinburgh and NHS Lothian, approval number 15-HV-016). The Edinburgh Brain Bank has research ethics committee (REC) approval (21/ES/0087).  Fresh frozen brain tissue was obtained from the primary motor cortex (BA4) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA9) of age/gender matched clinically diagnosed ALS patients (n=11) and control (no neurological condition) individuals (n=18). For preparing synaptoneurosome fractions tissue from BA4 and BA9 from each case was homogenised in homogenisation buffer (25mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 120mM NaCl, 5mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2, 2mM CaCl2, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors) using glass homogenisers, on ice. The homogenised tissue was then filtered through an 80µm nylon filter, and a TH aliquot was stored on dry ice. The remainder of the crude homogenate was filtered further through a 5µm filter and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1000g. Pellets were washed in homogenisation buffer and supernatant was disposed. The final pellet was weighed and resuspended in 100mM Tris-HCL Buffer (pH 7.6) 4% SDS containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail in 1:5 dilution based on pellet weight. Samples were further homogenised by hand and centrifuged at 17,000g at 4°C for 20 minutes, and the supernatant collected. Concentration of the samples were determined using a Micro BCA Protein Assay kit. 25µg of protein from each individual donor was pooled based on the stratification of the subjects, to generate 10 experimental pools. This resulted in one representative pooled master sample for each group: Pool 1 - Control BA9 (n=11); Pool 2 - ALS BA9 (n=18); Pool 3 - Control BA4 (n=11); Pool 4 - ALS BA4 (n=18); Pool 5 - ALSnoci BA9 (n=9); Pool 6 - ALSnoci BA4 (n=9); Pool 7 - ALSci BA9 (n=9); Pool 8 - ALSci BA4 (n=9); Pool 9 - C9ORF72-ve BA9 (n=12); Pool 10 - C9ORF72+ve BA9 (n=6). 100µg of total protein per experimental group was processed using S-trap mini protocol (Protifi) as recommended by the manufacturer. Samples were applied on the S-trap mini spin column and trapped proteins were washed 5 times with S-TRAP binding buffer. Samples were digested with trypsin (1:50) overnight at 37°C in 150µl of TEAB at a final concentration of 100mM. Peptides from S-Trap mini spin column were eluted by centrifugation at 4000g for 30 seconds in 160 µl of 50 mM TEAB, then 160 µl of 2% aqueous formic acid and finally 160 µl of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. Resulting tryptic peptides were pooled, dried and quantified using Pierce Quantitative fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific).  Samples were labelled with TMT tags using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, #84868) following manufacturer’s protocol. Desalted tryptic peptides (37µg each sample) were dissolved in 100µl of 100mM TEAB. The 10 TMT labels were added to different samples after being dissolved in 41µl of anhydrous acetonitrile. Mixtures were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, 8µl of 5% hydroxylamine was added per sample to stop the labelling reaction. Samples were mixed, desalted and dried in speed-vac at 30°C following labelling with TMT. 200µl of ammonium formate (NH₄HCO₂) (10mM, pH 9.5) was used to re-dissolve the samples and peptides were fractionated using High pH RP Chromatography. A C18 Column from Waters (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 X 150 mm, Waters, Ireland) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1X10mm, Waters) were used on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A: 10mM ammonium formate in milliQ water pH 9.5 and Buffer B: 10mM ammonium formate, pH 9.5 in 90% acetonitrile were used for fractionation. Fractions were collected at 1 minute intervals using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo Scientific). Column and guard were equilibrated with 2% Buffer B for 20 minutes at a flow rate of 0.2ml/min. Separation gradient of column was started 1 minute after 190µl of TMT labelled peptides were injected into the column. Elution of peptides was done with a column gradient of 2% Buffer B to 10% Buffer B in 6 minutes, and then from 10% Buffer B to 47% Buffer B in 53 minutes. Column was washed for 15 minutes in 100% Buffer B and equilibrated at 2% Buffer B for 20 minutes. Fraction collection resulted in a total of 80 fractions, 200µl each, as the fraction collection was stopped after 80 minutes. The total number of fractions concatenated was set to 20 and the content of the fractions was dried and suspended in 50µl of 1% formic acid prior to analysis with LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out at the ‘FingerPrints’ Proteomics Facility, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee.  Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 5-7.5 μL of each sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% formic acid. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% formic acid and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min starting from 5% buffer B to 5% buffer B in 8 min, then from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 125 min, and then to 98% buffer B within 2 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and re-equilibrated in 5% buffer B for 17 min. The column was kept all the time at a constant temperature of 50oC.   Q-Exactive HF was operated in data dependent positive ionisation mode. The source voltage was set to 2.4 kV and the capillary temperature was 250oC. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1600, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3x106) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (resolution 60000) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC 1x105, maximum ion injection time 200 ms, isolation window of 0.7 m/z, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, NCE/Stepped nce32, spectrum data type: centroid, AGC target of 1e5, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >6 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 45 s). Mass accuracy is checked before the start of samples.  The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single quantitated data set using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) [26] and searched against the SwissProt subset of the H. sapiens Uniprot database (May 2019 release) using the Andromeda search engine software [27]. Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage of N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: (i) variable modifications, methionine oxidation, deamidation (N,Q) protein N-acetylation, gln - pyro-glu, Phospho(STY); (ii) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iii) TMT 10-plex labels; (iv) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm , ITMS- 0.06 Da; (vi) maximum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (vii) maximum of labelled amino acids, 3; and (viii) false discovery rate, 1%. The correction factors for the TMT labelling were also applied.  MaxQuant output files were filtered by number of unique peptides per protein and by missing values. Protein identifications that were assigned with ≥2 unique peptides were retained. In addition, those proteins which were not detected in all samples, were excluded. After these robust clean-up steps, there were 5,348 analysis-ready proteins. ALS data was normalised to control and then 1/median normalized to correct for any minor loading variables, generating ratiometric values for each protein for each experimental comparison. All Swiss-Prot ID were then used for gene enrichment analysis and data visualisation.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests synaptic dysfunction is a central and possibly triggering factor in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Despite this, we still know very little about the molecular profile of an ALS synapse. To address this gap, we designed a synaptic proteomics experiment to perform an unbiased assessment of the synaptic proteome in the ALS brain. We isolated synaptoneurosomes from fresh-frozen post-mortem human cortex (11 controls and 18 ALS) and stratified the ALS group based on cognitive profile (Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS score)) and presence of a C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion (C9ORF72-RE). This allowed us to assess regional differences and the impact of phenotype and genotype on the synaptic proteome, using Tandem Mass Tagging-based proteomics. We identified over 6000 proteins in our synaptoneurosomes and using robust bioinformatics analysis we validated the strong enrichment of synapses. We found more than 30 ALS-associated proteins in synaptoneurosomes, including TDP-43, FUS, SOD1 and C9ORF72. We identified almost 500 proteins with altered expression levels in ALS, with region-specific changes highlighting proteins and pathways with intriguing links to neurophysiology and pathology. Stratifying the ALS cohort by cognitive status revealed almost 150 specific alterations in cognitively impaired ALS synaptic preparations. Stratifying by C9ORF72-RE status revealed 330 protein alterations in the C9ORF72-RE&#x2009;+ve group, with KEGG pathway analysis highlighting strong enrichment for postsynaptic dysfunction, related to glutamatergic receptor signalling. We have validated some of these changes by western blot and at a single synapse level using array tomography imaging. In summary, we have generated the first unbiased map of the human ALS synaptic proteome, revealing novel insight into this key compartment in ALS pathophysiology and highlighting the influence of cognitive decline and C9ORF72-RE on synaptic composition.

### Keywords
Synapse, Proteomics, Ftd, Human brain, Als, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Division of Systems and Cellular Medicine School of Medicine University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Zsofia Laszlo

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Henstridge
Division of Systems and Cellular Medicine School of Medicine University of Dundee


