### Accession
PXD004201

### Title
Human dermal papilla cell culture medium iTRAQ

### Description
Alopecia is an exceedingly prevalent problem and lacks effective therapy. Recently, research has focused on early-passage dermal papilla cells (DPCs), which have hair inducing activity both in vivo and in vitro. Our previous study indicated that factors secreted from early-passage DPCs contribute to hair follicle (HF) regeneration. To identify which factors are responsible for HF regeneration and why late-passage DPCs lose this potential，we collected 48-h-culture medium (CM) from both of passage 3 and 9 DPCs and subcutaneously injected the DPC-CM into NU/NU mice. Passage 3 DPC-CM induced HF regeneration, based on the emergence of a white hair coat, but passage 9 DPC-CM not. In order to identify the key factors responsible for hair inductive capacity, CM from passage 3 and 9 DPCs was analyzed by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic technology. We identified 1360 proteins, of which 213 proteins were differentially expressed between CM from early-passage vs. late-passage DPCs, including SDF1, MMP3, biglycan and LTBP1.Further analysis indicated that the differentially-expressed proteins regulated the Wnt, TGF-β and BMP signaling pathways, which directly and indirectly participate in HF morphogenesis and regeneration. Subsequently, we selected 19 proteins for further verification by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) between the two types of CM. These results would be used to identify the key factors for inducing HF regeneration and reveal the molecular mechanisms of losing inductive ability of DPCs. Furthermore, it is possible to explore some drugs for alopecia in the clinic according to this secretome date analysis.

### Sample Protocol
1. Preparation of secreted proteins from DPCs Primary cultured DPCs were inoculated into 75 cm2 culture flasks containing DMEM (Invitrogen-Gibco) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS Invitrogen-Gibco) and incubated in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37oC. After reaching confluence, cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated in serum-free DMEM for 48h, after which the CM was harvested, centrifuged (3000 g, 4oC, 10 min) and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter (Millipore) to ensure removal of cells. Supernatant from each dish (10 ml) was transferred to an Amicon ultrafiltration unit (3 kDa MWCO, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and concentrated to a final volume of 250 μl, and protease inhibitor cocktail was added at a ratio of 1:100. The proteins were reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) at 56°C for 1 h, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration) in the dark for 1 h. The reduced and alkylated protein mixtures were precipitated by adding 4× volume of chilled acetone and storage at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4°C, 30000 g for 20 min, the pellet was dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy) and sonicated on ice. After centrifuging at 30,000 g at 4°C for 20 min, an aliquot of the supernatant was taken for determination of protein concentration by using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford). 2. iTRAQ analysis 2.1 iTRAQ labeling A 100 μg aliquot of each sample solution was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), at a protein: trypsin ratio of 30:1, at 37°C for 16 hours. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, then reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL isopropanol. Samples were labeled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: DP3-1,113; DP3-2,115; DP3-3,118; DP9-1,114; DP9-2,117;DP9-3,121. The peptides were labeled with the isobaric tags and incubated at room temperature for 2h，and then labeled peptide mixtures were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 2.2 Strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) SCX chromatography was performed with an LC-20AB HPLC pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile (can), pH2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6 X 250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH2.7) for 27 min,　and 60-100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata XC18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. 2.3 LC-MS/MS Analysis Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μl on average. Ten μl supernatant was loaded on an LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan), by the auto sampler, onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, then the 35 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min, starting from 2 to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1% FA), followed by a 5 min linear gradient to 60%, then a 2 min linear gradient to 80%, then maintained at 80% B for 4 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min.  Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray IIIsource (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150. The MS was operated with an RP of greater than or equal to 30,000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms, and as many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed at 3.3 s. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulse frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detection. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35±5 eV, coupled with iTRAQ adjust rolling collision energy, was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), [5600 msconverter], and the MGF file was searched. Protein identification was performed by using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against a database containing 127497 sequences. For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da was permitted for intact peptide masses, and 0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), and deamidated (NQ) were the potential variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) were the fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at a 95% confidence interval (P < 0.05) with a false discovery rate (FDR) estimation ≤1.04% were counted as being successfully identified. Each confident protein identification involved at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contains at least two unique spectra. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values <0.05, and only fold changes of >1.2 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Alopecia is an exceedingly prevalent problem that lacks effective therapy. Recently, research has focused on early-passage dermal papilla cells (DPCs), which have hair inducing activity both in vivo and in vitro. Our previous study indicated that factors secreted from early-passage DPCs contribute to hair follicle (HF) regeneration. To identify which factors are responsible for HF regeneration and why late-passage DPCs lose this potential, we collected 48-h-culture medium (CM) from both of passage 3 and 9 DPCs, and subcutaneously injected the DPC-CM into NU/NU mice. Passage 3 DPC-CM induced HF regeneration, based on the emergence of a white hair coat, but passage 9 DPC-CM did not. In order to identify the key factors responsible for hair induction, CM from passage 3 and 9 DPCs was analyzed by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic technology. We identified 1360 proteins, of which 213 proteins were differentially expressed between CM from early-passage vs. late-passage DPCs, including SDF1, MMP3, biglycan and LTBP1. Further analysis indicated that the differentially-expressed proteins regulated the Wnt, TGF-&#x3b2; and BMP signaling pathways, which directly and indirectly participate in HF morphogenesis and regeneration. Subsequently, we selected 19 proteins for further verification by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) between the two types of CM. These results indicate DPC-secreted proteins play important roles in HF regeneration, with SDF1, MMP3, biglycan, and LTBP1 being potential key inductive factors secreted by dermal papilla cells in the regeneration of hair follicles.

### Keywords
Human, Dermal papilla cell, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Histology and Embryology, Shantou University Medical College
Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University Medical College, China.

### Submitter
Chang-Min Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Zhang
Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University Medical College, China.


