### Accession
PXD021218

### Title
Quantifying gene expression control by growth and metabolism reveals distinct regulation of central carbon metabolism genes in yeast

### Description
Here we quantitatively describe the influence of cell growth rate and amino acid metabolic context on gene expression in the eukaryal model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We show that growth rate and metabolic cues regulate ~70% of the yeast transcriptome and proteome, thereby exerting gene expression control in a global manner. We find that the growth rate-dependent differential gene expression largely reflects changing availabilities of the mRNA and protein synthesis machineries, while metabolic cues influences gene expression through the availabilities of amino acids and nucleotides. Genes in central carbon metabolism, however, are regulated independently of these global physiological controls, demonstrating distinct mechanisms to control their expression levels.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell pellets were suspended in the lysis buffer (2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) and homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix C, 1 mm silica spheres; MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds breaks in-between. The lysate was centrifuged at 21 100 xg for 20 min, the supernatant was transferred to new tubes, diluted 5 times with the lysis buffer and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Pooled reference sample (“Reference”) has been prepared by mixing equal amounts (according to BCA measurement) from each supernatant. For the TMT-based relative quantification, aliquots containing 25 ug of protein were taken from each experimental sample and from the pooled Reference sample; an aliquot of 50 ug of the Reference sample was spiked with 10.6 ug of the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO) for the IBAQ 1 quantification. Each sample was reduced by the addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The samples were processed according to the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method 2. In short, reduced samples were diluted to 300 ul by addition of 8M urea, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA) and washed 2 times with 200 ul of 8M urea. The free cysteine side chains were alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin in digestion buffer was added (250 ng for TMT samples/500 ng for the IBAQ sample) and the sample was incubated at 37°C for 3h, then another aliquot of trypsin (250/500 ng) was added and incubated overnight. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 9 500 xg for 20 min, followed by a wash with 20 ul of the digestion buffer and centrifugation at 9 500 xg for 20 min. Peptide samples for relative quantification were labelled using the 5 sets TMT 10plexTM isobaric reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific), combined into 5 pooled TMT samples, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation at 16 000 g for 10 min. The digested sample for IBAQ label-free quantification was acidified with 10% TFA and centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min to remove the precipitated deoxycholic acid. The TMT-sets were fractionated into 44 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.0 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21+41, 2+22+42, … 20+40), evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis. The pooled sample for the label-free quantification was fractionated into 44 primary fractions that were concatenated into 10 final fractions (1+11+21+31+41, 2+12+22+32+42, … 10+20+30+40). The final fractions were evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot (February 2018, 6049 sequences) and used for the database search on the TMT files; the concatenated database containing the above-mentioned sequences and the 48 UPS protein sequences was used for the processing of the UPS2-spiked reference files.  Precursor masses have been re-calibrated with the initial mass tolerance of 20 ppm prior to the main database search. Precursor mass tolerance for all database searches was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da; 1 missed cleavage was allowed; methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and methylthiolation on cysteine was set as fixed modification for all searches; TMT-6-plex on peptide N-terminus and on lysine was set as fixed modification for the searches on the TMT data. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified PSMs and proteins were subsequently filtered with the target FDR of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Minora feature detection node was used for precursor ion quantification, with the maximum intensity values used for quantification; abundance values for all unique and shared peptides were used for the IBAQ calculation. Abundances from the 3 technical replicates were averaged and divided by a number of theoretically observable peptides for a protein to yield the IBAQ intensity. The number of the observable peptides was calculated using an in-house Python script. The known absolute amount values of the UPS2 standard proteins were used to scale the Log-transformed IBAQ intensity values versus Log-transformed protein concentration. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with the mass tolerance of 3 mmu, the S/N abundances of the reporter ions for the unique peptides were used for relative quantification. The resulting TMT reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Systems biology, Tandem mass tag, Lfq, Tmt, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Label-free quantification, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Jens B Nielsen
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


