### Accession
PXD025072

### Title
Efficiency of isotopic labbeling in whole Drosophila body

### Description
We used isotopic (heavy) labelling to delineate between female and male proteins interacting in the female reproductive tract. Here, we test the efficiency of the labelling protocols on the whole body of males and females.

### Sample Protocol
A double auxotrophic (Lys and Arg) strain was produced from the diploid yol058W/yol058W (BY473 yeast deletion collection strain background SGD: S000005418) which is a double Arg (arg1/arg1) and heterozygous Lys mutant (lys2/lys2). To induce sporulation, we placed the diploid yeast strain (grown in yeast extract-peptone dextrose medium [YPD] at 32 C) into liquid culture with Simchen sporulation media at room temperature for 5 days and then pelleted, washed, and stored it in sterile water at 4oC. An aliquot of the frozen yeast culture with 10% Zymolase 100T was incubated at 30oC for 13 minutes and streaked onto YPD plates. Tetrads were dissected from dried plates with a micromanipulator and grown for several days on YPD at 30C. For tetrads with four visible spores, each spore was streaked onto YPD plates, regrown to confluence, and replicate plated onto synthetic complete media without Arg or Lys (Sunrise Science Products) to identify haploid strains auxotrophic in both amino acids. The arg1/lys2 haploid auxotrophic strain with the most robust growth rate was selected for subsequent use. This strain was grown following a standard two-day incubation protocol in a liquid culture with synthetic complete media powder excluding Arg and Lys (Sunrise Science Products), supplemented with 85mg/L each of isotopically labeled lysine (13C6 15N2) and arginine (13C6 15N4) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratory). At saturation (OD600 0.7 – 0.8), yeast was pelleted and stored at -20 o C.   D. melanogaster embryos were collected and transferred (25 embryos/vial) to vials with 4 ml heavy-yeast media (modified from standard media with 0.8% low-melting temperature agarose, 15g/100ml sucrose, and 3g/100ml heavy labelled yeast) on top of a 4 ml layer of 2.5% agar to prevent media from drying out. Media was further supplemented with a small pellet of labelled yeast. Within 14 hrs of eclosion, flies were collected, sexed, and transferred to a new vial with heavy labelled yeast and agar media. Males were aged at least 5 days and had mated at least once prior.  Labelling efficiency was determined using protein samples generated from five whole female and five whole male flies. Flies were flash frozen and solubilized in 2X Laemmli buffer with 5% tris(2-carboxyethyl)phospine (TCEP) reducing agent with alternating cycles of homogenization with a and heating at 95C and then centrifuged at 17,500 x g for 3 minutes to remove any insoluble material. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as described above. Each sample was trypsin digested, reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer with a nanospray Flex Ion Source coupled with a Dionex UltiMate3000RSLCnano system (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) (Harman et al. 2018, Yang et al. 2018). Peptide filtering, elution, and separation with equivalent columns and settings as described below. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in positive ion mode (spray voltage 1.6 kV and source temperature 275 C) with data-dependent acquisition analysis (1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation, 10,000 threshold ion count, 30% normalized collision energy) and a 50 s ± 10 ppm dynamic exclusion window using a Xcalibur 2.0 operation software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Resulting peptide mass spectra were identified with PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Identification of unlabeled (i.e. female-derived) proteins was based upon an analysis using the D. melanogaster reference genome protein annotation (r6.32; 45), including only the longest protein isoform of each gene, appended with the cRAP v 1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org). Search parameters allowed for semi-specific digestion with three missed tryptic cleavages as well as parent monoisotopic mass error of 15.0 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Post translational modifications included carbamidomethylation (cysteine; fixed), oxidation (methionine; variable) and deamidation (glutamine and arginine; variable). In addtion, variable modifications for SILAC Arg (13C6 and 15N4), Lys (13C6 and 15N2) and Arg conversion to proline (R to P [13C5] and R to P [13C5-15N1]) were included to identify efficiency of of isotopic labelling. PSMs were included if their -10logp ≥ 30 (total FDR < 0.05 estimated with a decoy-fusion approach (64)), had a PTM Ascore > 0, and a de novo identified had a score ≥ 50. This analysis resulted in 5628 PSMs, 91.3% of which (5140/5628) were labeled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproduction, Drosophila, Sex, Isotopic labelling

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Syracuse University Center for Reproductive Evolution

### Submitter
Caitlin McDonough-Goldstein

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Syracuse University Center for Reproductive Evolution


