### Accession
PXD039037

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small extracellular vesicles released from germinated kiwi pollen (pollensomes).

### Description
Allergen-bearing extracellular nanovesicles, termed “pollensomes”, are released by pollen during germination. These extracellular vesicles (EVs) may play an important role in pollen-pistil interaction during fertilization, stabilizing the secreted bioactive molecules and allowing long-distance signaling. However, the molecular composition and the biological role of these EVs are still unclear. The present study had two main aims: (I) to clarify whether pollen germination is needed to release pollensomes, or if they can be secreted also in high humidity conditions; and (II) to investigate the molecular features of pollensomes following the most recent guidelines for EVs isolation and identification. To do so, pollensomes were isolated from hydrated and germinated kiwi (Actinidia chinensis Planch.) pollen, and characterized using imaging techniques, immunoblotting, and proteomics. These analyses revealed that only germinated kiwi pollen released detectable concentrations of nanoparticles compatible with small EVs for shape and protein content. Moreover, a plant homolog of ALIX, which is a well-recognized and accepted marker of small EVs and exosomes in mammals, was found in pollensomes. The presence of this protein, along with other proteins involved in endocytosis, is consistent with the hypothesis that pollensomes could comprehend a prominent subpopulation of plant exosome-like vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
EVs isolation was carried out as previously described (Prado et al., 2014, 2015; Furini et al., 2018), with minor modifications. Briefly, pollen grains were pelleted at 5000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. Pelleted  pollen was stored at 4°C until protein extraction, while the supernatant was filtered twice in 0.22 µm syringe filters, and then EVs were pelleted by ultra-centrifuge at 100000 × g at 4°C for 1h. EVs from 3 germinated samples were lysed in RIPA buffer (25 mM TrisHCl pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl,  2 mM EDTA, 5% (w/v) Sodium deoxycholate, 1% (v/v) NP40, 0.1% (w/v) SDS), and their protein content was quantified by Bradford assay, BCA assay, and 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Italy), resulting in an average of 40 µg per sample. Proteins were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until analysis. EVs protein lysates were processed (reduced and alkyklated) and trypsinised using S-trap micro methodology (Protifi, USA). Samples were resuspended to 1 µg/µL in 5% acetonitrile (v/v) and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in a two-stage process.

### Data Protocol
Individual samples and a pool of all three samples were analysed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (MS) in data dependent acquisition mode (Top 30), according to literature (Furini et al., 2018) with some modifications. RP-HPLC mobile phases were solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC/MS grade water) and solvent B (LC/MS grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). Samples were injected (trap/elute via 5 x 0.3 µm YMC Triart C18 trap column) onto a YMC Triart-C18 column (15 cm, 3 µm, 300-um ID) at 5 µL/min using a microflow LC system (Eksigent ekspert nano LC 425) with an increasing linear gradient of B going from 3% to 30% in 68 min; to 40% at 73 min then washing to 80% for 3 min before re-equilibration in a total time of 87 min. Datafiles were searched both individually and together using ProteinPilot 5.0.3 (Sciex) against the Actinidia chinensis Swissprot database with iodoactamide selected as the alkylation method with the parameters of ID focus: Biological modifications and thorough ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pollensome, Kiwi, Proteome, Extracellular vesicals

### Affiliations
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University
Nottingham Trent University

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David Boocock
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University


