### Accession
PXD034940

### Title
A proteomic platform unveils PGK1 and 2  as  potential target for Tatridin A

### Description
A multi-disciplinary strategy has been developed and applied for identifying Tatridin A target(s) to fully address its mechanism of action, based on drug affinity response target stability and targeted limited proteolysis. Both approaches point to the identification of PGK 1 and 2 (phospoglicerate kinase 1 and 2) as major Tatridin A targets in THP-1 cell lysates, giving also detailed insights into the ligand/proteins interaction sites.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were lysed in MPER in presence of a protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma Aldrich). Lysate was centrifuged at 10.000 g for 10 min and the protein concentra-tion of the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. DARTS experiments were per-formed as reported: different amounts of unmodified tatridin A (1 μM, 10 μM and 100 μM) were incubated with 300 μg of U87MG cell lysate for 1 hour at room temperature. The obtained samples were then submitted to limited proteolysis, for 30 minutes at 25°C, with subtilisin (Sigma Aldrich) at different concentrations. The best subtilisin defect has been evaluated as 1/1000 w/w in respect of proteins amount. Two samples of cell lysate were solely treat-ed with DMSO and one of them with subtilisin, as control experiments. Then, the protease was quenched by adding PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, 1 mM final concentration) to each sample. Subsequently, all samples were boiled in SDS-PAGE loading buffer and 20 μg were loaded on a 4%–12% Bis-Tris CriterionTM XT Precast Gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories S.r.l.) which was then stained with a Comassie solution and submitted to a densitometric analysis through ImageJ. This experiment was carried out in triplicate. Protein bands were excised from the gels and submitted to an in situ tryp-tic digestion protocol. Briefly, gel slices were reduced with DTT (1,4-dithiothreitol), alkylated with IAA (iodoacetamide), washed, and rehydrated on ice for 1 h in a 12 ng/µl trypsin solution. Then, the enzyme excess was removed and replaced with ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic, 50 mM, pH 8.5), allowing protein digestion to proceed overnight at 37 °C. Subsequently, supernatants were collected and peptides were extracted from each gel slice, shrinking them in 100% ACN (acetonitrile). The obtained peptides mixtures were dried under vacuum and dissolved in formic acid (FA, 10%) for the LC-MSMS analysis. Then, 1µl of each sample was injected into a nano-UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) separating peptides on an EASY-Spray PepMAPTM RSLC C18 column (3µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen). at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. MS data were acquired on Q-Exactive Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), provided with a nano-electrospray (nanoESI) source.

### Data Protocol
All the raw MS files were searched with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4.1.15). MSPepSearch was used to perform a spectral library search with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.02 Da for MS2. The target false discoveryy rate (FDR) were set to 1% (strict) and 5% (relaxed). MS/MS spectra were also searched by sequest against a reviewed homo sapiens database using the following parameters: trypsin digestion, maximum two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidization, protein N-terminal acetylation, and/or de-methylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Target identification, Proteomics, Tatridin a, Phosphoglicerate kinase 1 and 2, Natural compound

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy
Università degli Studi di Salerno

### Submitter
Giusy Ferraro

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Chiara Monti
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy


