### Accession
PXD004198

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles derived from Merkel cell carcinoma cell lines

### Description
Exosomes constitute an evolutionary conserved mechanism of intercellular signaling. Their importance are gaining increasing such as prognostic and diagnostic markers, and potential therapeutic tool. Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive form of skin cancer with a poor prognosis. There are not available an effective systemic treatment for this type of cancer, and exosome-based therapy was proposed.  We identified with high confident 164 exosome-derived proteins that were common for all four cell lines, which were annotated in ExoCarta and Vesiclepedia databases. This list includes proteins implicated in motility, metastasis and tumor progression.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles purified from culture supernatants of the human Merkel cell carcinoma polyomavirus-negative cell lines MCC13 and MCC26 and polyomavirus-positive cell lines MKL-1 and MKL-2, as described previously (Lobb et al., 2015). Cells and cell debris were removed by centrifugation and filtration. EVs were isolated by supernatants were subjected to ExoQuick Exosome Precipitation Solution (System Biosciences, Cambridge, UK) and centrifugation. Precipitated EV proteins were separated by NuPage gel electrophoresis. Gel pieces were subjected to in gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion using 6 ng/μl trypsin (V511A, Promega, Wisconsin, USA) (Shevchenko et al., 1996). OMIX C18 tips (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) were used for sample clean up and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 50µm, 50 cm). Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 50 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The separated peptides was analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.  [1] Lobb, R. J., Becker, M., Wen, S., W., Wong, C., S., F., Optimized exosome isolation protocol for cell culture supernatant and human plasma. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015, 4, 10.3402/jev.v4.27031. [2] Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins from silver stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal. Chem. 1996, 68, 850-858.

### Data Protocol
Data from three biological replicates of each sample were collected in data dependent mode using a Top10 method. The raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniprotKB Homo Sapiens 2016/02/29 database using an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Sciences, UK). Peptide mass tolerances used in the search were 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Peptide ions was filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1 % for peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles or exosomes constitute an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of intercellular signaling. Exosomes are gaining an increasing amount of attention due to their role in pathologies, including malignancy, their importance as prognostic and diagnostic markers, and their potential as a therapeutic tool. Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive form of skin cancer with a poor prognosis. Because an effective systemic treatment for this cancer type is currently not available, an exosome-based therapy was proposed. However, comprehensive secretome profiling has not been performed for MCC. To help unveil the putative contribution of exosomes in MCC, we studied the protein content of MCC-derived exosomes. Since approximately 80% of all MCC cases contain Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), the secretomes of two MCPyV-negative and two MCPyV-positive MCC cell lines were compared. We identified with high confidence 164 exosome-derived proteins common for all four cell lines that were annotated in ExoCarta and Vesiclepedia databases. These include proteins implicated in motility, metastasis and tumor progression, such as integrins and tetraspanins, intracellular signaling molecules, chaperones, proteasomal proteins, and translation factors. Additional virus-negative and virus-positive MCC cell lines should be examined to identify highly representative exosomal proteins that may provide reliable prognostic and diagnostic biomarkers, as well as targets for treatment in the future. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004198.

### Keywords
Exosome, Merkel cell carcinoma, Polyomavirus, Proteomics, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, Faculty of Health Sciences NO-9037 Tromsø, Norway (group leader)
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Ugo Moens
Department of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, Faculty of Health Sciences NO-9037 Tromsø, Norway (group leader)


