### Accession
PXD031348

### Title
An atlas of Arabidopsis protein S-Acylation reveals its widespread role in plant cell organisation of and function.

### Description
S-acylation is the addition of a fatty acid to a cysteine residue of a protein. While this modification may profoundly alter protein behaviour, its effects on the function of plant proteins remains poorly characterised, largely as a result to the lack of basic information regarding which proteins are S-acylated and where in the proteins the modification occurs. In order to address this gap in our knowledge, we have performed a comprehensive analysis of plant protein S-acylation from 6 separate tissues. In our high and medium confidence groups, we identified 1849 cysteines modified by S-acylation, which were located in 1640 unique peptides from 1094 different proteins. This represents around 6% of the detectable Arabidopsis proteome and suggests an important role for S-acylation in many essential cellular functions including trafficking, signalling   and metabolism. To illustrate the potential of this dataset, we focus on cellulose synthesis and confirm for the first time the S-acylation of a number of proteins known to be involved in cellulose synthesis and trafficking of the cellulose synthase complex. In the secondary cell walls, cellulose synthesis requires three different catalytic subunits (CESA4, CESA7 and CESA8) that all exhibit striking sequence similarity and are all predicted to possess a RING-type zinc finger at their N-terminus composed of 8 cysteines.  For CESA8, we find evidence for S-acylation of these cysteines that is incompatible with any role in coordinating metal ions. We show that while CESA7 may possess a RING type domain, the same region of CESA8 appears to have evolved a very different structure. Together, the data suggests this study represents an atlas of S-acylation in Arabidopsis that will facilitate the broader study of this elusive post-translational modification in plants as well as demonstrates the importance of undertaking further work in this area.

### Sample Protocol
The optimised ACYL-RAC assay was based on previously described methods 18,53. About 800 mg of frozen tissue powder was pre-cleared by adding 20 mL of 10% TCA in ice-cold acetone with 10 mM TCEP and incubating at -20°C for 1 hour. Stem sample was spiked with 100 µL of E coli extract and was run in duplicate, one for unblocked control and one for blocked test sample. Tissue pellet was washed twice with ice cold acetone to remove TCA and TCEP and air dried. The pellet was then solubilised in 20 mL of lysis buffer (6M Urea, 100mM Tris pH 7.2, 150mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 2.5% SDS) with 50 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM PMSF and Sigma plant protease inhibitor cocktail) and incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes on end-on-end rotation. For unblocked sample, lysis buffer without iodoacetamide was used. Samples were then centrifuged at 4500g and supernatant filtered through miracloth and incubated at room temperature on a roller for 1 hour to block free cysteines. Free iodoacetamide was removed by chloroform methanol precipitation. Protein pellet was washed twice with 80% methanol and air dried followed by resuspension in 20 mL lysis buffer. Protein concentration was measured using Millipore BCA assay kit according to manufacturer’s instructions and typically revealed a protein concentration of 1-2 mg/mL.  9 mL of blocked protein sample was combined with 4.5 mL of either 1M hydroxylamine (final concentration 333 mM) or water and 50 mg (dry weight equivalent) thiopropyl sepharose beads (GE Healthcare Catalog number 17042001) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature in a column fitted with a porous disc. Samples were washed for 5 minutes in 3.5 ml: wash buffer (3x, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1 % SDS)and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) (4x) and the beads dried completely by centrifugation at 300g for 2 minutes. The columns were capped at the bottom and 200 µl AmBic containing 4 ng/µl of Trypsin + LysC (Promega Catalog number V5073) was added to each sample and incubated in a 37°C shaker for 16 hours. After digestion, unbound peptides were collected by centrifugation at 300g for 2 minutes and the beads were then washed again with 8M urea (1x), 2M NaCl (1x), 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% TFA (1x) and 50 mM AmBic (3x). Bound peptides were then eluted by adding 200 µl AmBic containing 50 mM DTT and incubating in a 37°C shaker for 30 minutes followed by centrifugation at 300g for 2 minutes. Peptides were alkylated by adding acrylamide to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubating in dark at room temperature with gentle agitation for 2 hours. Further DTT was added to bring final concentration to 100 mM to quench the unreacted IAM and samples stored at -20°C until further use. Reduced and alkylated peptides were acidified by adding equal volume of 0.1% formic acid. Acidified samples were bound to OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Scientific, catalogue number 1133903), washed twice with 0.1% formic acid and eluted with 200 µl of 30% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then quantified using Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, catalogue number 23290) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Known quantities (500 – 3000 ng) of peptides were then aliquoted into mass spec vials and dried completely using a speed vac.  Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 35 min, 27% B in 43 min and 60% B at 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 µM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and PSM (peptide spectrum matches) processing was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Two complementary search engines Sequest™ HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) were used for searching the data. These engines were set up to search the Arabidopsis thaliana Araport11 protein database (48359 entries) and uniport E coli proteome (for stem sample only) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. A Precursor Mass Tolerance of 10 ppm and Fragment Mass Tolerance of 0.02 Da was used for Sequest while Mascot was searched with a Precursor Mass Tolerance of 20 ppm and Fragment Mass Tolerance of 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine and propionamide of cysteine were specified as variable modifications for both search engines. All other program settings were kept as default. Modifications and precursor ion intensity were exported out of Proteome Discoverer and majority of further calculations and data processing was performed in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellulose synthesis, Acylome, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health University of Manchester

### Submitter
Manoj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Turner
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health University of Manchester


