### Accession
PXD025781

### Title
LSD1-directed therapy affects glioblastoma tumorigenicity by deregulating the protective ATF4-dependent integrated stress response

### Description
Despite the progress in medicine, no significant advancement in the standard of care for glioblastoma (GBM) patients have been reached. GBM heterogeneity, poor blood–brain barrier penetration and resistance to therapy highlight the need for new targets and clinical treatments. A step toward clinical translation includes the eradication of GBM Tumor-Initiating Cells (TICs), responsible for GBM heterogeneity and relapse. By using patient-derived TICs and xenograft orthotopic models, we demonstrate that Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (LSD1) is a druggable target in GBM. Here, we analyze the effect of LSD1i treatment on histone H3K4 in primary human cells and mouse brains.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were enriched from 0.5-1*106 GBM primary cells treated with LSD1i or vehicle. About 4 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of a heavy-labelled histone super-SILAC mix, which was used as an internal standard for quantification. After separating the samples on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel, bands corresponding to histones H3 were excised, chemically acylated with D6-acetic anhydride, in-gel digested with trypsin and desalted on handmade nanocolumns (StageTips). For the experiment involving tissues, normal and tumor tissues were manually macrodissected from hematoxylin and eosin-stained mouse brain sections and histones were extracted. The entire histone preparation was loaded on a gel together with the internal standard. Histone bands were chemically acylated with propionic anydride and in-gel digested with trypsin. After elution, the samples were derivatized with phenyl isocyanate. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system through an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive HF or a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50-min linear gradient of 0–35% solvent B for (cells), or a 50-min linear gradient of 10–45% for PRO-PIC digested tissue samples. The Q Exactive instruments were operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000-70,000 at m/z 200. The 10-12 most intense peptide ions with charge states comprised between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 80 ms for MS/MS, and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 sec, and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 1.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. One missed cleavage was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 4 amino acids. Variable modifications include D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation and demethylation. Data from PRO-PIC experiments (tissue samples) were searched using EpiProfile 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a fatal tumor whose aggressiveness, heterogeneity, poor blood-brain barrier penetration, and resistance to therapy highlight the need for new targets and clinical treatments. A step toward clinical translation includes the eradication of GBM tumor-initiating cells (TICs), responsible for GBM heterogeneity and relapse. By using patient-derived TICs and xenograft orthotopic models, we demonstrated that the selective lysine-specific histone demethylase 1 inhibitor DDP_38003 (LSD1i) is able to penetrate the brain parenchyma in vivo in preclinical models, is well tolerated, and exerts antitumor activity in molecularly different GBMs. LSD1 genetic targeting further strengthens the role of LSD1 in GBM TIC maintenance. GBM TIC plasticity supports their adaptation and survival under a plethora of environmental stresses, including nutrient deficiency and proteostasis perturbation. By mimicking these stresses in vitro, we found that LSD1 inhibition hampers the induction of the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the master regulator of the integrated stress response (ISR). The resulting aberrant ISR sensitizes GBM TICs to stress-induced cell death, hampering tumor aggressiveness. Functionally, LSD1i interferes with LSD1 scaffolding function and prevents its interaction with CREBBP, a critical ATF4 activator. By disrupting the interaction between CREBBP and LSD1-ATF4 axis, LSD1 inhibition prevents GBM TICs from overcoming stress and sustaining GBM progression. The effectiveness of the LSD1 inhibition in preclinical models shown here places a strong rationale toward its clinical translation for GBM treatment.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Lsd1

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European Instutute of Oncology

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Instutute of Oncology


