### Accession
PXD014230

### Title
Dinoflagellates contribute to primary and secondary production across biogeochemical gradients of the central Pacific Ocean

### Description
In this study we explored the metabolism of unicellular eukaryotic organisms (protists) across a 4,600 km meridional transect in the central Pacific Ocean. The region contains a natural biogeochemical gradient spanning from low nitrogen, oligotrophic waters to a productive equatorial upwelling system. We used a combined geochemical and 'omic approach to characterize the metabolic strategies these organisms rely upon to adapt to changes in their chemical environment. Samples were collected using underwater pumps, capable of filtering hundreds of liters of seawater, from seven stations and 3-13 different depths spanning 20-1,900 m in the water column.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen filters were thawed and extracted following an SDS detergent-based approach. Purified peptides were diluted to 0.1 µg µL-1 and 20 µL (2 µg) was injected onto a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLCnano system with an additional RSLCnano pump run in online 2-dimension active modulation mode coupled to a Thermo Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer monitored MS1 scans from 380-1580 m/z at 240K resolution. MS2 scans had a 1.6 m/z isolation window, 50 millisecond maximum injection time and a 5 second dynamic exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
The 3-51 µm size fraction translated metatranscriptome was used as a reference protein database, and spectra-peptide matches were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm within Proteome Discoverer. Protein identifications were made using Scaffold (Proteome Software). To avoid double-counting mass spectra, Scaffold's "exclusive spectral counts" were used in our downstream proteomic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Marine microeukaryotes play a fundamental role in biogeochemical cycling through the transfer of energy to higher trophic levels and vertical carbon transport. Despite their global importance, microeukaryote physiology, nutrient metabolism and contributions to carbon cycling across offshore ecosystems are poorly characterized. Here, we observed the prevalence of dinoflagellates along a 4,600-km meridional transect extending across the central Pacific Ocean, where oligotrophic gyres meet equatorial upwelling waters rich in macronutrients yet low in dissolved iron. A combined multi-omics and geochemical analysis provided a window into dinoflagellate metabolism across the transect, indicating a continuous taxonomic dinoflagellate community that shifted its functional transcriptome and proteome as it extended from the euphotic to the mesopelagic zone. In euphotic waters, multi-omics data suggested that a combination of trophic modes were utilized, while mesopelagic metabolism was marked by cytoskeletal investments and nutrient recycling. Rearrangement in nutrient metabolism was evident in response to variable nitrogen and iron regimes across the gradient, with no associated change in community assemblage. Total dinoflagellate proteins scaled with particulate carbon export, with both elevated in equatorial waters, suggesting a link between dinoflagellate abundance and total carbon flux. Dinoflagellates employ numerous metabolic strategies that enable broad occupation of central Pacific ecosystems and play a dual role in carbon transformation through both photosynthetic fixation in the euphotic zone and remineralization in the mesopelagic zone.

### Keywords
Dinoflagellates, Pacific ocean, Phytoplankton

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole MA 02540

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak A. Saito
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole MA 02540


