### Accession
PXD041836

### Title
Design principles for cyclin K molecular glue degraders

### Description
Molecular glue degraders are an effective therapeutic modality, but their design principles are not well understood. Recently, several unexpectedly diverse compounds were reported to deplete cyclin K by linking CDK12-cyclin K to the DDB1-CUL4-RBX1 E3 ligase. To investigate how chemically dissimilar small molecules trigger cyclin K degradation, we evaluated 91 candidate degraders in structural, biophysical, and cellular studies and reveal all compounds acquire glue activity via simultaneous CDK12 binding and engagement of DDB1 interfacial residues, in particular Arg928. While we identify multiple published kinase inhibitors as cryptic degraders, we also show that these glues do not require pronounced inhibitory properties for activity and that the relative degree of CDK12 inhibition versus cyclin K degradation is tuneable. We further demonstrate cyclin K degraders have transcriptional signatures distinct from CDK12 inhibitors, thereby offering unique therapeutic opportunities. The systematic structure-activity relationship analysis presented herein provides a conceptual framework for rational molecular glue design.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DMSO or a cyclin K degrader compound at 1 µM for 5 hrs. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed by addition of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and homogenization by bead beating (BioSpec) for three repeats of 30 seconds at 2400. Bradford assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the clarified cell lysate. 50 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described116 and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 h at 37 °C. Sample digests were acidified with formic acid to a pH of 2-3 prior to desalting using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum-centrifuged and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis. Data were collected using a TimsTOF Pro2 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoElute LC pump (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase C18 column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µM, IonOpticks, Australia) containing an integrated captive spray emitter. Peptides were separated using a 50 min gradient of 2 - 30% buffer B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min and column temperature maintained at 50 ºC. DDA was performed in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode to determine effective ion mobility windows for downstream diaPASEF data collection25. The ddaPASEF parameters included: 100% duty cycle using accumulation and ramp times of 50 ms each, 1 TIMS-MS scan and 10 PASEF ramps per acquisition cycle. The TIMS-MS survey scan was acquired between 100 – 1700 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2. Precursors with 1 – 5 charges were selected and those that reached an intensity threshold of 20,000 arbitrary units were actively excluded for 0.4 min. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 m/z for m/z <700 and 3 m/z for m/z >800, with the m/z between 700-800 m/z being interpolated linearly. The TIMS elution voltages were calibrated linearly with three points (Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix Ions; 622, 922, 1,222 m/z) to determine the reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0). To perform diaPASEF, the precursor distribution in the DDA m/z-ion mobility plane was used to design an acquisition scheme for DIA data collection which included two windows in each 50 ms diaPASEF scan. Data was acquired using sixteen of these 25 Da precursor double window scans (creating 32 windows) which covered the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged precursors, with singly charged precursors able to be excluded by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane. These precursor isolation windows were defined between 400 - 1200 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF raw file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides was performed using directDIA analysis in Spectronaut 14 (Version 15.5.211111.50606, Biognosys). DirectDIA mode includes first extracting the DIA data into a collection of MS2 spectra which are searched using Spectronaut’s Pulsar search engine. The search results are then used to generate a spectral library which is then employed for the targeted analysis of the DIA data. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (January 2021). Database search criteria largely followed the default settings for directDIA including: tryptic with two missed cleavages, fixed carbomidomethylation of cysteine, and variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini and precursor Q-value (FDR) cut-off of 0.01. Precursor quantification was performed using MS1 areas, cross run normalization was set to localised and imputation strategy was set to no imputation. Proteins with poor quality data were excluded from further analysis (summed abundance across channels of <100 and mean number of precursors used for quantification <2). Protein abundances were scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework26 and statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework27.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular glue degraders are an effective therapeutic modality, but their design principles are not well understood. Recently, several unexpectedly diverse compounds were reported to deplete cyclin K by linking CDK12-cyclin K to the DDB1-CUL4-RBX1 E3 ligase. Here, to investigate how chemically dissimilar small molecules trigger cyclin K degradation, we evaluated 91 candidate degraders in structural, biophysical and cellular studies and reveal all compounds acquire glue activity via simultaneous CDK12 binding and engagement of DDB1 interfacial residues, in particular Arg928. While we identify multiple published kinase inhibitors as cryptic degraders, we also show that these glues do not require pronounced inhibitory properties for activity and that the relative degree of CDK12 inhibition versus cyclin K degradation is tuneable. We further demonstrate cyclin K degraders have transcriptional signatures distinct from CDK12 inhibitors, thereby offering unique therapeutic opportunities. The systematic structure-activity relationship analysis presented herein provides a conceptual framework for rational molecular glue design.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Degrader, Molecular glue, Cdk12, Cyclink, Cr8

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


