### Accession
PXD009638

### Title
Surface proteome of Lactobacillus casei GCRL163 under heat adaptation – extracellular fluid

### Description
Cell surface proteins are constantly impacted by environmental stresses. To understand the impact of heat adaptation on the Lactobacillus casei GCRL163, trypsin shaving technique was used to extract the surface proteins of the strain and the protein fraction obtained analysed using gel-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture fluid, from the cell suspension used for surface protein extracts, were concentrated to 2.5% of the original volume using Amicon stirred cells with PLBC ultrafiltration discs, generated cellulose, 3000 NMWL, 63.5mm filter diameter (Merck PL, Australia). The proteins were then precipitated by mixing 1 mL of the concentrate with 8 mL of 100% ice-cold acetone and 1 mL pure trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (1:8:1) for 45 min at -20oC. The acetone used was pre-chilled and stored in a -20oC freezer until needed and kept on ice during the entire procedure. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 11,500 rpm for 15 min at 4oC, soaked for 20 min in 100% ice-cold acetone at -20°C and washed thrice with 5 mL ice-cold acetone at 11,500 rpm for 15 min at 4oC to remove residual TCA. The final pellets were then dried at room temperature to remove residual acetone and then resuspended in 1 mL of Tris-HCl buffer (0.04 M, pH 7.4) and stored at -20oC to be used for further analysis. All protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assay.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant environment used for searching the Lactobacillus casei strain W56 (ID UP000003734) database comprising 3092 protein entries, using default parameters for Orbitrap data.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lactobacillus casei</i> group bacteria improve cheese ripening and may interact with host intestinal cells as probiotics, where surface proteins play a key role. Three complementary methods [trypsin shaving (TS), LiCl-sucrose (LS) extraction, and extracellular culture fluid precipitation] were used to analyze cell surface proteins of <i>Lactobacillus paracasei</i> GCRL163 by label-free quantitative proteomics after culture to the mid-exponential phase in bioreactors at pH 6.5 and temperatures of 30-45 &#xb0;C. A total of 416 proteins, including 300 with transmembrane, cell wall anchoring, and secretory motifs and 116 cytoplasmic proteins, were quantified as surface proteins. Although LS caused significantly greater cell lysis as growth temperature increased, higher numbers of extracytoplasmic proteins were exclusively obtained by LS treatment. Together with the increased positive surface charge of cells cultured at supra-optimal temperatures, proteins including cell wall hydrolases Msp1/p75 and Msp2/p40, &#x3b1;-fucosidase AlfB, SecA, and a PspC-domain putative adhesin were upregulated in surface or secreted protein fractions, suggesting that cell adhesion may be altered. Prolonged heat stress (PHS) increased binding of <i>L. paracasei</i> GCRL163 to human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells, relative to acid-stressed cells. This study demonstrates that PHS influences cell adhesion and relative abundance of proteins located on the surface, which may impact probiotic functionality, and the detected novel surface proteins likely linked to the cell cycle and envelope stress.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Heat adaptation, Surface proteins, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


