### Accession
PXD046998

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of lung tumors and normal tumor-adjacent tissue of non-small cell lung cancer patients

### Description
Lung tumors, as well as normal tumor-adjacent (NTA) tissue of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, were collected and subjected label-free quantitation shotgun proteomics in data-independent mode to identify differences between the tumors and adjacent tissue. By employing in-depth proteomics, we identified several pathways that are up- or downregulated in the tumors of non-small cell lung cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
From each tissue sample (n = 25 patients, paired tumor and NTA) a piece was cut (ca. 1.5 x 1.5 mm) and transferred into an Eppendorf tube with 200 µl lysis buffer (= 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 1 % SDS, 100 mM TrisHCl (pH = 8.5)). The samples were homogenized using a rotor stator homogenizer (Miccra, Germany) and the tissue and cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 5 min, 4°C). The samples were heated to 95°C for 10 minutes and protein estimation was performed using the Pierce™ BCA protein assay (#23225, Thermo Fisher). 100 µg were used for acetone precipitation and the obtained protein pellet after centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C was dissolved in 50 µl of 25 % TFE and brief sonication using a sonication probe. The samples were brought to 10 % TFE by addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 1 µg sequencing grade modified trypsin (#V5111, Promega) at 37°C overnight. The samples were further desalted on self-packed 2-layer 200 µl styroldivinylbenzol-reversed phased sulfonate (SDB-RPS) Stage Tips (#2241, Empore SPE Disks, Sigma-Aldrich), dried in a vacuum concentrator centrifuge, and redissolved in 2 % ACN, 1 % formic acid. Peptides were separated by nano-HPLC coupled to a timsTOF (Bruker, Germany) mass spectrometer in positive mode in DIA mode.

### Data Protocol
The protein search was carried out by employing Dia-NN with the default settings Briefly, library-free search with library generation was performed with carbamidomethylation on cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification. Peptide length range was set to 6 – 30; precursor m/z range: 300 – 1800; Fragment ion m/z range: 300 – 1800; 0.01 FDR filtering; trypsin as protease with 1 missed cleavage maximum and match between runs enabled. Further data analysis of generated lists of proteins and quantities was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.12.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsclc, Shotgun proteomics, Lung tumor

### Affiliations
Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 6, 8010 Graz, Austria
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Sophie Honeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


