### Accession
PXD003144

### Title
Measuring C2C12 Myotube Protein Expression Changes in Inflammation using Punch-P

### Description
Selective identification of newly synthesized proteins provides insight on biological processes that depend on the continued synthesis of specific proteins to maintain homeostasis as well as those that are up- or down-regulated in response to changing needs. We used puromycin-associated nascent chain proteomics (PUNCH-P) to characterize new protein synthesis in C2C12 myotubes and changes resulting from exposure to a combination of lipopolysaccharide and interferon-(LPS/IFN) for either a short (4h) or prolonged (16h) time period.  We identified sequences of nascent polypeptide chains belonging to a total of 1,523 proteins and report their detection within three independent samples for each growth condition. The identified proteins correspond to approximately 15% of presently known proteins in C2C12 myotubes and are enriched in specific cellular components and pathways. A subset of these identified proteins have functional characteristics and were identified only in treated samples, consistent with new protein synthesis in response to LPS/IFN. Thus, the identification of proteins from their nascent polypeptide chains provides a resource to analyze the role of newly synthesizing proteins in protein homeostasis and proteome responses in C2C12 myotubes.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 myotubes were harvested and pooled for individual ribosome isolations and processed  for PUNCH-P. Cells were washed once in ice-cold PBS (Invitrogen), pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 gav for 5 min at 4ºC and used either immediately or stored frozen at -80ºC.  Thawed cell pellets were re-suspended in 500 µl of ice-cold polysome buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2 and 25 mM KCl] containing 1.25 mM DTT, complete EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, 1.4 µg/ml pepstatin, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, and 40 U/ml ribonuclease inhibitor. Cells were lysed for 20 min on ice upon addition of 1/10th volume of lysis buffer [11%(w/v) sodium deoxycholate and 11% (v/v) Triton X-100 in polysome buffer] to the cell suspension. Lysed cells were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC. The supernatant was layered onto a 2 M sucrose cushion in polysome buffer at an approximate ratio of 2:1. After centrifugation at 37000 rpm for 160 min at 4ºC, the ribosome pellet was washed with 500 µl of ice-cold RNase-free water to remove sucrose residue and re-suspended in 100 µl of polysome buffer for subsequent quantitation and puromycylation reaction. An aliquot of the re-suspended ribosome preparation was diluted in water and scanned in a UV spectrophotometer blanked with water and containing the corresponding volume of polysome buffer. The absorbance/concentration of ribosomes was determined by the rRNA absorbance at 254 nm corrected for any background absorbance at 320 nm and estimated using a molar extinction coefficient  for ribosomes of 5 x 107  M-1 cm-1 18 .   Puromycylation reactions were carried out in a volume of 100 µl containing 0.75-1 µM ribosomes and 10 µM biotin-puromycin, and were incubated for up to 60 min at 37 ºC. Under some reaction conditions, biotin-puromycin was substituted with unconjugated puromycin or did not contain any form of puromycin (Figure 1).   Following puromycylation, 100 µl of washed streptavidin-agarose beads were added to each sample and the volume was adjusted to a final volume of 1 ml with urea/SDS buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 8M urea, 2% (w/v) SDS and 150 mM NaCl]. The bead containing mixture was rotated overnight at room temperature to allow binding of biotinylated peptides and was followed by a series of five wash steps using urea/SDS buffer, followed by a single high salt solution [1M NaCl] wash for 30 min before the final 5 washes with ultrapure water . For the reduction and alkylation steps,  beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 gav for 1 min, re-suspended in 1 ml of 1 mM DTT and mixed  for 30 min at RT. After the last wash, the pelleted beads were re-suspended in 1 ml of 50 mM iodoacetamide and tumbled in the dark for 30 min at RT. The beads were transferred to a fresh tube following two wash steps with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and re-suspended in 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.2 µg of trypsin. Beads were incubated at 42 ºC for ~ 3 hours then 37ºC for an overnight incubation to allow digestion of proteins on beads. After centrifugation at 1000 gav for 1 min, the beads were re-suspended with100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, mixed, centrifuged as before to collect residual peptides in the supernatant and combined in the fresh tube for concentration . Samples were lyophilized and processed on a C18-stage tip.  Eluted peptides were vacuum-centrifuged to dryness and re-suspended in 6 µl volume of 0.1% FA, of which 4-6 µl volume was injected onto an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra 2D Plus/CHiPLC NanoFlex and separated through a 30 cm column length (two tandemly-arranged 75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 120 A columns) coupled to an ABSciex 5600 Triple TOF analyzer. The eluent was sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer operating in positive ion mode, with settings of curtain gas = 25, Gas1=8, and Gas2 =0. Nanospray interface temperature (IHT) =150 and the Ion Spray Voltage Floating (ISVF) = 2500. Rolling collision energy was used for collision-induced fragmentation of parent ions for generation of MS/MS spectra, with the center of the collision energy range for each peptide automatically calculated based on the peptide mass (invoked using default instrument setting of Collision Energy (CE) = 0). Collision energy spread (CES) was set to 3, and declustering potential (DP) to 100. After a 250 ms parent scan, a maximum of 50 candidates were chosen for MS/MS at 50 ms each per cycle, with a total cycle time of 2.804 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data collected as described above were used to generate peak lists and Protein IDs with the Paragon algorithm (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17533153) utilized in ProteinPilotTM version 5.0 software (Build 4688 with ParagonTM Algorithm build 4632) and analyzed against a mouse-specific NCBI RefSeq database (Jan 1, 2015 containing 25,132 protein entries), concatenated with 536 common lab contaminants and with a decoy database. The decoy database consisted of the direct reversed sequence of each entry in the normal “forward” RefSeq database and the number of decoy database hits accumulated at decreasing Paragon/ProteinPilot Unused Scores was used to estimate the Global False Discovery Rate as originally described in.19 The ProteinPilot settings used were Trypsin digestion, iodoacetamide alkylation of cysteines, thorough searching, biological modifications and amino acid substitutions. The primary quality score for a protein identification in the Paragon/ProteinPilot program is the Unused Score, the sum of all individual peptide scores not “used” or claimed by higher ranking proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation in muscle induces the synthesis of mediators that can impair protein synthesis and enhance proteolysis, and when sustained lead to muscle atrophy. Furthermore, muscle-derived mediators that are secreted may participate in disrupting the function of other peripheral organs. Selective identification of newly synthesized proteins can provide insight on biological processes that depend on the continued synthesis of specific proteins to maintain homeostasis as well as those proteins that are up- or down-regulated in response to inflammation. We used puromycin-associated nascent chain proteomics (PUNCH-P) to characterize new protein synthesis in C2C12 myotubes and changes resulting from their exposure to the inflammatory mediators lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon (IFN)-&#x3b3; for either a short (4&#xa0;h) or prolonged (16&#xa0;h) time period. We identified sequences of nascent polypeptide chains belonging to a total of 1523 proteins and report their detection from three independent samples of each condition at each time point. The identified nascent proteins correspond to approximately 15% of presently known proteins in C2C12 myotubes and are enriched in specific cellular components and pathways. A subset of these proteins was identified only in treated samples and has functional characteristics consistent with the synthesis of specific new proteins in response to LPS/IFN&#x3b3;. Thus, the identification of proteins from their nascent polypeptide chains provides a resource to analyze the role of new synthesis of proteins in both protein homeostasis and in proteome responses to stimuli in C2C12 myotubes. Our results reveal a profile of actively translating proteins for specific cellular components and biological processes in normal C2C12 myotubes and a different enrichment of proteins in response to LPS/IFN&#x3b3;. Collectively, our data disclose a highly interconnected network that integrates the regulation of cellular proteostasis and reveal a diverse immune response to inflammation in muscle which may underlie the concomitantly observed atrophy and be important in inter-organ communication.

### Keywords
Myotubes, Mouse, Muscle, Inflammatio, 5600 tripletof, Lps, Interferon gamma

### Affiliations
Penn State College of Medicine
Section of Research Resources H093 The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine 500 University Drive Hershey, PA 17033-0850 USA

### Submitter
Bruce Stanley

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce A. Stanley
Section of Research Resources H093 The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine 500 University Drive Hershey, PA 17033-0850 USA


