### Accession
PXD042946

### Title
Metaproteomic assessment of gut microbial and host functional perturbations in Helicobacter pylori-infected patients subjected to an antimicrobial protocol

### Description
The impact of therapeutic interventions on the human gut microbiota (GM) is a clinical issue of paramount interest given the strong interconnection between microbial dynamics and human health. Orally administered antibiotics are known to reduce GM biomass and modify GM taxonomic profile. However, the impact of antimicrobial therapies on GM functions and biochemical pathways has scarcely been studied. Here, we characterized the fecal metaproteome of 10 Helicobacter pylori-infected patients before (T0) and after 10 days (T1) of a successful quadruple therapy (bismuth, tetracycline, metronidazole, and rabeprazole) and 30 days after therapy cessation (T2), to investigate how GM and host functions change during the eradication and healing processes. At T1, the abundance ratio between microbial and host proteins was reversed compared with that at T0 and T2. Several pathobionts (including Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterococcus, Muribaculum, and Enterocloster) were increased at T1. Therapy reshaped the relative contributions of the functions required to produce acetate, propionate, and butyrate. Proteins related to the uptake and processing of complex glycans were increased. Microbial cross-feeding with sialic acid, fucose, and rhamnose was enhanced, whereas hydrogen sulfide production was reduced. Finally, microbial proteins involved in antibiotic resistance and inflammation were more abundant after therapy. Moreover, a reduction in host proteins with known roles in inflammation and H. pylori-mediated carcinogenesis was observed. In conclusion, our results support the use of metaproteomics to monitor drug-induced remodeling of GM and host functions, opening the way for investigating new antimicrobial therapies aimed at preserving gut environmental homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from fecal samples was performed as follows. Extraction buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5; 100 µl per 50 mg of stool) and a steel bead (5 mm diameter; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) were added to each sample. Then, samples were processed as follows: incubated at 95°C for 20 min in a thermoblock (FALC, Treviglio, Italy); incubated at -80°C for 10 min; bead beaten for 10 min (30 cycles/s in a TissueLyser LT mechanical homogenizer, Qiagen); incubated at -80°C for 10 min, incubated at 95°C for 10 min; bead beaten for 10 min (30 cycles/s); centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants were collected and further processed according to a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Protein extracts (30 µl each) were diluted with 370 µl of UT solution (8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), loaded onto an Amicon Ultra-0.5 filtration device (30 kDa cutoff; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min. Then, the following solutions were sequentially added to the samples, which were then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min: 200 μl of UT solution, 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UT solution (followed by 20 min incubation at RT), 100 μl of UT solution, further 100 μl of UT solution, 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, samples were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (1 μg per sample, dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution). A first eluate was collected by centrifugation (14,000 x g for 15 min); then 100 μl of elution solution (20% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) were added to each sample and a second eluate was collected by centrifugation (14,000 x g for 15 min) and merged with the first one. Peptide mixtures were finally concentrated using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and sent to an external laboratory for LC-MS/MS analyses. Reconstituted peptide mixtures (approximately 5 µg) were purified by SCX StageTips, eluted in 10 µl of 500 mM ammonium acetate containing 20% acetonitrile, then evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 0.2% formic acid. A 200-ng aliquot of peptide mixture was injected for a preliminary nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The appropriate injection volume (between 1 and 8 µl) was estimated by analyzing a 1 µl aliquot of the digest using a short LC gradient and by estimating peptide amount based on the overall peptide signal (area under the curve). LC was performed on an EasyLC 1200 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The nanoLC column was a pulled capillary, 0.075x160 mm (i.d. and column length, respectively), in-house packed with C18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were loaded at 500 nl/min in mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted at 300 nl/min by the following gradient: from 0% B to 25% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min, from 25% B to 45% B in additional 10 minutes, then to 100% B in 8 minutes. The column was regenerated for 10 min at 100% B and equilibrated at 0% B for 20 min before the following injection. Two blank injections were performed in between samples. A shorter gradient (45 min) was utilized for blank injections. Peptides were electrosprayed in positive ion mode using 1800 V as spray voltage into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Internal calibration was automatically performed at the beginning of each run (RunStart Easy IC-on). Full scan MS parameters were as follows: scan range 375-1400 m/z; resolution 60,000; RF lens 40%; AGC target 100%; maximum injection time 50 msec. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using the following parameters: dependent scans 15 (top-15); dynamic exclusion 20 sec; charge states 2-6; intensity threshold 5e4. Tandem mass spectrometry scans were acquired as follows: isolation window 1.6 m/z; resolution 30,000; normalized collision energy 30%; AGC target 100%; maximum injection time 120 msec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer™ software (v.2.5; Thermo Fisher Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation, setting the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold to 1%. Search parameters were as follows: precursor mass range 350-5000 Da; minimum peak count 6; S/N Threshold 2, enzyme trypsin (full); maximum missed cleavage sites 2; peptide length range 5-50 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da; static modification cysteine carbamidomethylation; dynamic modification methionine oxidation. Searches were conducted in parallel against two sequence databases, namely a collection of human gut metagenomes (available at https://ftp.cngb.org/pub/SciRAID/Microbiome/humanGut_9.9M/GeneCatalog/IGC.pep.gz) and the Homo sapiens reference proteome retrieved from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (release 2021_04); proteins were categorized as 'microbial' or 'human' when belonging to the first or second database, respectively. Offline mass recalibration and label-free MS1 quantitation were carried out using the Spectrum Files RC and the Minora Feature Detector nodes, respectively. Optimal settings for retention time and mass tolerance windows were calculated by the Minora algorithm based on mass accuracy and retention time variance distribution. A consensus feature list was defined based on Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes outputs. MS1 signals of all peptides significantly matching with at least an MS2 spectrum from at least one sample were mapped across runs and quantified by calculating the integrated area of the chromatographic peak. Unipept Desktop (v.2.0.0, available at http://unipept.ugent.be/desktop) was used to carry out peptide taxonomic annotation, selecting the three available options ("equate I and L", "filter duplicate peptides" and "advanced missed cleavage handling"). Protein sequences were subjected to functional annotation using the eggNOG-mapper web application (v.2.1.9, available at http://eggnog-mapper.embl.de/), keeping default parameters and then choosing KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) orthology (KO) information as main functional classification. Meta4P (v.1.2, available at https://github.com/TheMassimo/Meta4P/releases) was used to parse identification, quantification and annotation data and generate aggregated abundance tables.

### Publication Abstract
The impact of therapeutic interventions on the human gut microbiota (GM) is a clinical issue of paramount interest given the strong interconnection between microbial dynamics and human health. Orally administered antibiotics are known to reduce GM biomass and modify GM taxonomic profile. However, the impact of antimicrobial therapies on GM functions and biochemical pathways has scarcely been studied. Here, we characterized the fecal metaproteome of 10 <i>Helicobacter pylori</i>-infected patients before (T0) and after 10&#x2009;days (T1) of a successful quadruple therapy (bismuth, tetracycline, metronidazole, and rabeprazole) and 30&#x2009;days after therapy cessation (T2), to investigate how GM and host functions change during the eradication and healing processes. At T1, the abundance ratio between microbial and host proteins was reversed compared with that at T0 and T2. Several pathobionts (including <i>Klebsiella</i>, <i>Proteus</i>, <i>Enterococcus</i>, <i>Muribaculum</i>, and <i>Enterocloster</i>) were increased at T1. Therapy reshaped the relative contributions of the functions required to produce acetate, propionate, and butyrate. Proteins related to the uptake and processing of complex glycans were increased. Microbial cross-feeding with sialic acid, fucose, and rhamnose was enhanced, whereas hydrogen sulfide production was reduced. Finally, microbial proteins involved in antibiotic resistance and inflammation were more abundant after therapy. Moreover, a reduction in host proteins with known roles in inflammation and <i>H. pylori</i>-mediated carcinogenesis was observed. In conclusion, our results support the use of metaproteomics to monitor drug-induced remodeling of GM and host functions, opening the way for investigating new antimicrobial therapies aimed at preserving gut environmental homeostasis.

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Human microbiome, Antibiotics, Metaproteomics, Helicobacter, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Italy
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Sardinia

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Professor Sergio Uzzau
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Italy


