### Accession
PXD008976

### Title
Characterization of Metronidazole-tolerant Porphyromonas gingivalis Persisters

### Description
This project investigated the phenotypic characteristics of Metronidazole-tolerant Porphyromonas gingivalis persisters, the relevant modulatory effects of hemin and their underlying survival mechanisms. Proteomic analysis was performed to delineate the protein expression profiles of Metronidazole-tolerant P. gingivalis persister fractions and the controls incubated with different levels of hemin supplementation.

### Sample Protocol
The late exponential-phase P. gingivalis cultured with different levels of hemin supplementation (0, 1 and 10 μg/ml) was treated with metronidazole (100 μg/ml) for 6 h to harvest persisters. Proteins from three biological replicates of the MTZ-exposed cells and the untreated controls were precipitated in acetone at -20°C for 30 min and re-suspended in 0.1 M Tris-HCl containing 8 M urea for in-solution trypsin digestion. Each protein sample (100 μg) was reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 20 min at room temperature, and alkylated with 25 mM of iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Subsequently, proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h at 37°C. The peptide mixtures were acidified by formic acid to stop trypsin digestion. After centrifugation, the supernatants were desalted on StageTips, dried down in SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid. The peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the samples were loaded with auto-sampler into a self-packed PicoTip column with a 360 μm outer diameter, 75 μm inner diameter and 15 μm tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with 8-10 cm of ODS-A C18 5 μm phase (YMC, Allentown, PA). The peptides were then rinsed with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, and separated with a linear gradient from 2-35% of buffer B (100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) over 150 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Full mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner cycling through a full scan (300-1800 m/z) followed by collision-induced dissociation scans on the 20 most abundant ions. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.0.25; Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany. MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against P. gingivalis (ATCC 33277) database (UniProt release 2014-10). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. An initial search and a main search were included with the peptide mass tolerance set at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm respectively. Carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both at peptide and protein levels. Label-free quantitation was performed in MaxQuant to determine the normalized protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Hemin, Lc-ms/ms, Metronidazole, Persisters

### Affiliations
Peking University
Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Peng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Lijian Jin
Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong


