### Accession
PXD021974

### Title
Proteomics of Human Milk: Definition of a Discovery Workflow for Clinical Research Studies

### Description
Proteins in milk have been studied for decades and proteomics, peptidomics, and glycoproteomics are the main approaches previously deployed to decipher the proteome of human milk. In the present work, we aimed at implementing a highly automated pipeline for the proteomic analysis of human milk with liquid chromatography (LC) mass spectrometry (MS). Commercial human milk samples were used to evaluate and optimize workflows.

### Sample Protocol
To a volume of 40 μL of human milk sample was added 40 μL of sodium dodecyl sulfate 2% in H2O. The samples were centrifuged at 1000 × g at 4 °C for 1 h on a benchtop centrifuge. Volumes of 10 μL of the skimmed milk fractions (located under the fat layer) were recovered. Those skimmed milk fractions were diluted in 95 μL of triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer 100 mM (optionally spiked with β-lactoglobulin (LACB) from bovine milk at 0.12 μg·μL−1), reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (about 1 mM in solution), alkylated with iodoacetamide (about 7.5 mM in solution), digested with trypsin/Lys-C (with incubation at 37 °C overnight), and 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled. After reaction quenching with hydroxylamine, sets of six differentially labeled samples were pooled. Solid-phase extraction purifications (Oasis HLB and strong cation-exchange) were performed. The pooled 6-plex TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. Optionally, some samples were fractionated with off-gel electrophoresis using the 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies). The dried samples were dissolved in H2O/CH3CN/FA 96.9/3/0.1. RP-LC MS/MS was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 300 µm × 5 mm (C18, 5 µm, 100 Å) pre-column, and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) (Thermo Scientific). The column was heated to 50 °C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany). Peptide separation was performed with a gradient of mobile phase A (H2O/CH3CN/FA 97.9/2/0.1) and B (H2O/CH3CN/FA 19.92/80/0.08): from 6.3% (hold for 1 min) to 11% B over 11 min, from 11% to 17.5% B over 75 min, from 17.5% to 25.5% B over 42 min and from 25.5% to 40% B over 28 min, with final elution (98% B) and equilibration (6.3% B) for a further 23 min. The flow rate was 300 nL·min−1 with a total analysis time of 180 min. Data were acquired using a data-dependent method. A positive ion spray voltage of 1900 V and a transfer tube temperature of 275 °C were set up. For MS survey scans in profile mode, the Orbitrap resolution was 120000 at m/z = 200 (automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 × 105) with a m/z scan range from 300 to 1500, RF lens set at 30%, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 35% of the normalized collision energy, AGC target was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 0.7 in the quadrupole), with a resolution of 30000 at m/z = 200, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 105 ms with Orbitrap acquiring in profile mode. A duty cycle time of 3 s was used to determine the number of precursor ions to be selected for HCD-based MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 10 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.12002 was used.

### Data Protocol
Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (02/2020 release) including or not the LACB sequence (20368 or 20367 sequences in total). Mascot (version 2.6.1, Matrix Sciences, London, UK) was used as the search engine via the Mascot Daemon 2.6.0 interface using ProteoWizard msConvert 3.0 for data import. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus (+229.163 Da); 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine (+229.163 Da) was set as fixed modification as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. All Mascot results files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.8.8 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) to be further searched with X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version Alanine (2017.2.1.4)). Both peptide and protein false discover rates were fixed at 1% maximum, with a two-unique-peptide criterion to report protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Milk is a complex biological fluid composed mainly of water, carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and diverse bioactive factors. Human milk represents a unique tailored source of nutrients that adapts during lactation to the specific needs of the developing infant. Proteins in milk have been studied for decades, and proteomics, peptidomics, and glycoproteomics are the main approaches previously deployed to decipher the proteome of human milk. In the present work, we aimed at implementing a highly automated pipeline for the proteomic analysis of human milk with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (MS). Commercial human milk samples were used to evaluate and optimize workflows. Centrifugation for defatting milk samples was assessed before and after reduction, alkylation, and enzymatic digestion of proteins, without and with presence of surfactants. Skimmed milk samples were analyzed using isobaric labeling-based quantitative MS on an Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer. Sample fractionation using isoelectric focusing was also evaluated to more deeply profile the human milk proteome. Finally, the most appropriate workflow was transferred to a liquid handling workstation for automated sample preparation. In conclusion, we have defined and describe herein an efficient highly automated proteomic workflow for human milk sample analysis. It is compatible with clinical research, possibly allowing the analysis of sufficiently large cohorts of samples.

### Keywords
Human, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun, Milk

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences


