### Accession
PXD009453

### Title
TAILS N-Terminomics and Proteomics Show Complex Regulation of Proteolytic Processing by O-glycosylation

### Description
Proteolytic processing is an irreversible post-translational modification functioning as a ubiquitous regulator of cellular activity. Protease activity is tightly regulated by control of gene expression, compartmentalisation of enzyme and substrate, zymogen activation, enzyme inactivation, and substrate availability. Emerging evidence suggests that proteolysis can also be regulated by substrate glycosylation and that glycosylation of individual sites on a substrate can decrease, or in rare cases, increase its sensitivity to proteolysis. In the present study we investigated the relationship between site-specific O-glycosylation and proteolytic cleavage of extracellular proteins. By in silico analysis we found a significant association between O-glycosylation sites and cleavage sites. We then used a positional proteomic strategy, Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates (TAILS) to map in vivo cleavage sites in HepG2 cells with and without one of the key initiating GalNAc-transferases, GalNAc-T2. To reduce complexity, the comparison were performed in so-called SimpleCells. In these cells the Core 1 β3-galactosyltransferase-specific molecular chaperone (COSMC; C1GALT1C1) has been knocked out, resulting in global truncation of O-glycans leaving only the initial GalNAc. Surprisingly, we found that loss of GalNAc-T2 resulted in not only an increase in cleavage, but also a decrease in cleavage across a broad range of other substrates, including key regulators of the protease network. GALNT2 has previously been identified as a candidate gene for dyslipidaemia and has been shown to specifically glycosylate central regulators of lipid homeostasis, here we find altered processing of several of these regulators including Apolipoproteins B (ApoB) and the Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP), providing new clues to the link between GALNT2 and lipid homeostasis. In contrast to the findings from the majority of previous studies, these results indicate that O-glycosylation can both decrease and increase substrate cleavage. We challenged this system with exogenous matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and neutrophil elastase and observed substantial changes to the neutrophil elastase N-terminome, but no evidence for a similar role for MMP9. Overall, we show that loss of O-glycosylation leads to a general decrease in cleavage, that GalNAc-T2 O-glycosylation affects key regulators of the cellular proteolytic network, including multiple members of the Serpin family.

### Sample Protocol
In silico screen. All analysis was performed using R. O-glycosylation and protease cleavage site data were obtained from the glycodomain47 and TopFIND67 databases respectively. Analysis was only performed on the canonical protein isoform as defined in the UniProtKB database. Cleavage sites for which the effector protease has not been described (those labelled as ‘nterm’ in the TopFIND database) were discarded from the dataset. Only proteases with well defined substrate degradomes (>20 proteins, >40 sites) were included for further analysis. Disordered regions were defined by extracting disordered loops/coil predictions from the DisEMBL prediction server.68 All analysis was restricted to human and murine species; no appreciable difference was noted when analysis was performed on a single species compared to when site data from both species was analysed simultaneously. Consensus sequence analysis. To assess whether O-glycosites were under- or over-enriched amino acid sequences were obtained for each protein in the filtered TopFIND dataset and known O-glycosylated Ser or Thr amino acids were re-coded as “X”, thereby treating these modified residues as independent amino acids. For generation of the reference dataset, 10 psuedo-cleavage sites were randomly sampled from each protein listed in the filtered TopFIND dataset. The sequence window +/- 7 amino acids from P1’ was identified using the canonical sequence from the UniProtKB database, and cleavage sites < 21 amino acids from the Nor C- terminal of proteins removed. As both O-glycans and proteolytic cleavage sites tend to residue in disordered regions, analysis was performed both with and without disorder correction. For disorder correction, only reference and experimentally derived cleavage sites residing within disordered loops/coils were considered. IceLogo plots and heatmaps were generated using IceLogo 2.1,69 with a p-value threshold of 0.001. Collagen and elastin substrates were removed from the MMP analysis as the majority of these data originate from a series of focused studies and the homogeneity of these target sequences resulted in the presence of confounding and highly-dominant repetitive glycine residues. Due to the highly similar consensus sequences within protease subfamilies, proteases were analysed as groups. Small differences in protease specificity were noted between highly-homologous proteases, however, dominant trends were stable irrespective of the analysis approach.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. Raw data were analysed using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software and searched against the UniProt KB/SwissProt-reviewed database downloaded on July 8, 2010, containing 20,212 entries. An additional fasta file containing contaminants obtained from a common repository at the Max Planck Institute was included in the search: (http://www.matrixscience.com/help/ seq_db_setup_contaminants.html). HCD data were searched using the SEQUEST HT node in PD 2.1. In all cases, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 50 millimass units. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine and dimethyl labelling (light: +28.031 Da, heavy: +34.069 Da) of lysine were set as static modifications. Dimethylation of the protein N termini, acetylation of protein N termini (+42.011), formation of pyroglutamate on peptide N termini (+17.027) and methionine oxidation (+15.996Da) were considered dynamic modifications. The search was conducted using semi-specific trypsin cleavage with up to two missed cleavages. All spectra were searched against non-decoy and decoy databases to allow calculation of the false discovery rate. Afterwards, percolator was used to calculate the local false discovery rate and a threshold FDR of 1% was applied at the peptide level. Data were subsequently analysed R. The technical variance was measured by comparison of two identical non-treated samples (Figure 3). The samples were differentially labelled and compared using TAILS; in the ideal scenario, quantitation of the two fractions should result in a heavy:light ratio of 1.0 for all quantified N-termini peptides. A deviation from this ratio represents the technical error associated with TAILS enrichment and quantitation by LC23 MS/MS. From this analysis 98% of peptides were quantified with a less than 2-fold change (H:L ratio range log(2) -0.73 to 0.21) indicating good technical replication. Subsequently, internal tryptic peptide dimethyl ratios were combined by sample type and used to define significant outlier cut-offs by box-and-whisker plot analysis using the BoxPlotR72 tool as previously described73 (coefficient = 1). Final log(2) upper and lower threshold values were 1.52 and -1.69 respectively. These results are in agreement with previously reported lower limits of detection for dimethyl quantitation and TAILS experiments.11,74 Peptide Maps. Data for proteins containing quantified N-termini were subsequently mapped onto protein schematics using R to produce a peptide map summarising total quantitation from all experiments. These barcodes provide a visual method for assessing the changes detected in each treatment group. Two separate analyses were performed to obtain these data: as MMP9 and neutrophil elastase specific effects were only a small portion of the total dataset, the analysis was repeated by combining all experimental groups to generate treatment-independent quantification. These data are represented by the ‘shotgun’ and ‘all’ rows in the peptide map. Substrate winnowing. Correctly mapped peptides designated as outliers were subjected to a substrate winnowing process to separately identify protease dependent and independent targets. Only peptides identified in ≥ 2 spectra were considered and peptides identified with variable N-termini forms (for example a peptide identified with both an N-terminal dimethyl and N-terminal pyroglutamate label in the same sample) were excluded due to the uncertainty in quantitation of these species. Protease independent targets were defined as outlier peptides identified across multiple treatment groups, whereas protease dependent targets were defined as high-confidence targets uniquely identified in that treatment group. Peptides quantified only in one channel were only accepted for further consideration if they were identified by ≥ 2 high quality spectra. Such peptides were deemed singlets and assigned a ratio of 1:50 based on the channel in which they were identified. Of the remaining peptides ~50% of treatment-independent and 65% of treatment dependent (MMP9 or neutrophil elastase) substrates were known O-glycoproteins. Substrates passing these quality checks are listed in the candidate peptides tables in the main text. GO term analysis of protease substrates was performed using the DAVID75, GOrilla76 and REVIGO77 tools. Network effects were assessed with STRING.78 All analysis was performed using unchanged proteins identified in HepG2 cells during TAILS as the reference dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic processing is an irreversible post-translational modification functioning as a ubiquitous regulator of cellular activity. Protease activity is tightly regulated via control of gene expression, enzyme and substrate compartmentalization, zymogen activation, enzyme inactivation, and substrate availability. Emerging evidence suggests that proteolysis can also be regulated by substrate glycosylation and that glycosylation of individual sites on a substrate can decrease or, in rare cases, increase its sensitivity to proteolysis. Here, we investigated the relationship between site-specific, mucin-type (or GalNAc-type) <i>O</i>-glycosylation and proteolytic cleavage of extracellular proteins. Using <i>in silico</i> analysis, we found that <i>O</i>-glycosylation and cleavage sites are significantly associated with each other. We then used a positional proteomic strategy, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), to map the <i>in vivo</i> cleavage sites in HepG2 SimpleCells with and without one of the key initiating GalNAc transferases, GalNAc-T2, and after treatment with exogenous matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) or neutrophil elastase. Surprisingly, we found that <i>loss</i> of GalNAc-T2 not only increased cleavage, but also decreased cleavage across a broad range of other substrates, including key regulators of the protease network. We also found altered processing of several central regulators of lipid homeostasis, including apolipoprotein B and the phospholipid transfer protein, providing new clues to the previously reported link between <i>GALNT2</i> and lipid homeostasis. In summary, we show that loss of GalNAc-T2 <i>O</i>-glycosylation leads to a general decrease in cleavage and that GalNAc-T2 <i>O</i>-glycosylation affects key regulators of the cellular proteolytic network, including multiple members of the serpin family.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Degradomics, O-glycoproteomics, Tails

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenahgen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wandall
University of Copenahgen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics


