### Accession
PXD022682

### Title
Lipocalin 13 enhances insulin secretion but is dispensable for systemic metabolic control

### Description
Members of the lipocalin protein family serve as biomarkers for kidney disease and acute phase inflammatory reactions, and are under pre-clinical development for the diagnosis and therapy of allergies. However, none of the lipocalin family members has made the step into clinical development, mostly due to their complex biological activity and the lack of in-depth mechanistic knowledge. Here, we show that the hepatokine lipocalin 13 (LCN13) triggers glucose-dependent insulin secretion and cell proliferation of primary mouse islets. However, inhibition of endogenous LCN13 expression in lean mice did not alter glucose and lipid homeostasis. Enhanced hepatic secretion of LCN13 in either diet-induced or genetic obesity led to no discernable impact on systemic energy homeostasis, neither in preventive nor therapeutic setting. Of note, loss or forced LCN13 hepatic secretion did not trigger any compensatory regulation of related lipocalin family members. Together, these data are in stark contrast to the suggested gluco-regulatory and therapeutic role of LCN13 in obesity, and imply complex regulatory steps in LCN13 biology at the organismic level mitigating its principal insulinotropic effects.

### Sample Protocol
In order to initially investigate the effects of LCN13 on β-cell function, we employed the murine pancreatic β-cell line MIN6, which expresses a potential receptor for lipocalin family members (Blache et al, 1998).   To guarantee optimal insulin secretion capacity, MIN6 cells were grown as pseudo-islets and used for experiments after reaching a size similar to primary mouse islets (Fig 1A; Hauge-Evans et al, 1999). To assess LCN13’s ability to enhance glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS), pseudo-islets were incubated in low or high glucose (2.8 and 16.7 mM, respectively) in the presence or absence of recombinant bacterial LCN13.  Recombinant LCN13 production To generate recombinant mammalian LCN13 protein, the LCN13 cDNA (NCBI Reference Sequence: NM_153558.1) lacking the putative signal sequence (amino acid 1 to 18) was cloned into the SP-6xHis-Fc-pEFIRES-PURO vector, carrying the signaling peptide of a known secreted protein (kind gift of Dr. Anastasia Georgiadi) to generate SP-6xHis-Fc-LCN13. Both 6xHis-Fc-LCN13 and the control 6xHis-Fc were produced in Chinese hamster ovary CHO-S cells (kindly provided by Dr. Anastasia Georgiadi). In short, cells were transfected using lipofectamine 300 reagent (Life Technologies) and successfully transfected cells were selected with 25 ug/ml puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMEM/F12 culture medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 and 21% O2. For cell expansion, stable CHO-S cells were cultured in suspension in 100 mL serum-free OptiCHO medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 0.5 mg/mL alanyl-glutamin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 120 rpm and 37°C for 5 to 7 days. Afterwards, cells were further grown in 300 mL of the same medium at 120 rpm and 31°C for another 5 days. After 10 to 12 days, the cell suspension was centrifuged at 9500 x g and 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant was supplemented with 1M NaCl, 5 mM imidazole and 1x Halt™ Protease Phosphatase Inhibitor-Cocktail (EDTA-free; Life Technologies), passed through a Corning® bottle-top vacuum filter  with a pore size of 0.45 µm (Sigma-Aldrich), degassed and adjusted to a pH of 7.2 on ice. For protein purification, HisTrap™ HP 5ml chromatography columns (GE Healthcare) were attached to a ÄKTA pure 25 (GE Healthcare). Columns were washed with 50 mL ultrapure water and equilibrated with 50 mL washing buffer 1 (W1; 0.2 M NaCl, 0.02 M NaHPO4, 5 mM imidazole, pH 7.2). Supernatants were loaded at a flow rate of 1mL/min onto the columns, the system was washed with 50 mL W1 and subsequently with 50 mL washing buffer 2 (W2; 0.2 M NaCl, 0.02 M NaHPO4, 20 mM imidazole, pH 7.2) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Protein was eluted in 7 fractions of 5 mL each using 400 mM imidazole elution buffer (0.2 M NaCl, 0.02 M NaHPO4, pH 7.2) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Eluted protein was dialyzed in DPBS (Life Technologies) and snap frozen until further usage.  FASO digest and MS analysis of Fc-LCN13 Dialyzed Fc-LCN13 and the Fc control (10 and 12 µg protein, respectively) were proteolyzed by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and described (Grosche et al, 2016). Briefly, proteins were diluted 1:10 with 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 and 50 µl 100 mM dithiothreitol was added for 30 min at 60°C. After cooling down, 500 µl UA buffer (8 M urea and 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 diluted in HPLC-grade water) and 100 µl 300 mM iodoacetamide were added and incubated for 30min at RT in the dark. Eluates were transferred to 30 kDa cut-off centrifuge filters (Sartorius) and washed 5 times with 200 µl UA-buffer and 2 times with 100 µl ABC buffer (50 mM NH3HCO3 diluted in HPLC-grade water). After washing, proteins were subjected to proteolysis at RT for 2 h with 0.5 µg Lys C in 40 µl ABC-buffer followed by addition of 1 µg trypsin and incubation at 37°C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in the data-dependent mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex) as described previously (Lepper et al, 2018). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column, eluted after 5 min and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters) by a 90 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 and after each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was loaded into Progenesis QI software for proteomics for MS1 intensity based label-free quantification (v3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters), and analyzed as described previously (Grosche et al, 2016). MSMS spectra were exported and searched against the SwissProt mouse database (16,868 sequences) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1). Search settings were: enzyme trypsin, 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine and glutamine de-amidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search was performed with an average false discovery rate of <1%. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software. The abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of fold-changes of protein ratios between Fc-LCN13 and the Fc control samples. Only proteins quantified by at least two unique peptides and identified by 3 or more spectral counts were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Obesity, Lipocalin 13, Hepatokine, Metabolic diseases

### Affiliations
Institute for Diabetes and Cancer (IDC), Helmholtz Centre Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Herzig
Institute for Diabetes and Cancer (IDC), Helmholtz Centre Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany


