### Accession
PXD044915

### Title
Ustilago maydis PR-1-like protein has evolved two distinct domains for dual virulence activities

### Description
Diversification of effector function, driven by a co-evolutionary arms race, enables pathogens to establish compatible interactions with hosts. Structurally conserved plant pathogenesis-related PR-1 and PR-1-like (PR-1L) proteins are involved in plant defense and fungal virulence, respectively. It is unclear how fungal PR-1L counters plant defense. Here, we show that Ustilago maydis UmPR-1La and yeast ScPRY1, with conserved phenolic resistance functions, are Ser/Thr-rich region-mediated cell-surface localization proteins. However, UmPR-1La has gained specialized activity in sensing phenolics and eliciting hyphal-like formation to guide fungal growth in plants. Additionally, U. maydis hijacks maize cathepsin B-like 3 (CatB3) to release functional CAPE-like peptides by cleaving UmPR-1La’s conserved CNYD motif, subverting plant CAPE-primed immunity and promoting fungal virulence. Surprisingly, CatB3 avoids cleavage of plant PR-1s, despite the presence of the same conserved CNYD motif. Our work highlights that UmPR-1La has acquired additional dual roles to suppress plant defense and sustain the infection process of fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Protease-cleaved samples were prepared following the suspension trapping (S-Trap) protocol, as adapted from a previous report. The samples were lysed in a buffer consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 5% (v/v) Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and the protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to trypsin digestion, disulfide bonds within proteins were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and then alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at 45 °C for 10 minutes. For digestion, each protein sample was treated with Lys-C and trypsin within an S-trap microcolumn, utilizing an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Following digestion, the peptides were eluted using 40 μL of a solution composed of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid (FA), and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN). Subsequently, a desalting step was conducted using a Ziptip Pipette Tip, and the desalted peptides were then dried using a vacuum centrifugation concentrator. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) FA, centrifuged to collect the supernatant, and finally subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The PRM raw files were analyzed using Skyline software (version 22.2). The fragment spectra predictions for PPGNYIGK and PPGNFR was conducted using Prosit. Protein digestion was set to Trypsin (semi) [KR|P], with a minimum length of peptide set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications applied included Label:13C(6)15N(2)(C-term K) and Label:13C(6)15N(4)(C-term R). Mass accuracy filtering was set to 10 ppm. Ion match tolerance was set at 0.5 m/z, and a minimum of 3 product ions was required for analysis. Both fragment b and y ions were employed for quantification. The peak area of selected fragment ions was extracted for quantification. All data were checked manually for peak selection and retention time.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ustilago maydis, Pr-1-like, Phenolic resistance, Cathepsin b-like 3, Fungal virulence, Cnyd motif, Cape-like, Pry1

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Lay-Sun Ma
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica


