### Accession
PXD036886

### Title
semi-automated enrichment of AHA-containing newly-synthesized proteins with magnetic alkyne agarose beads

### Description
Development of an improved workflow for newly synthesized proteome analysis, based on combined pulsed metabolic labelling with L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) and semi-automated click chemistry-based enrichments with magnetic alkyne agarose beads.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were pulse labelled with SILAC amino acids and AHA for, 4 h without additional perturbations, and automated newly synthesized protein enrichments were carried out with varying amounts of magnetic alkyne agrose beads and total protein input were carried out.  Measurements of the samples were performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant version 2.0.3 and the Andromeda search engine. A human proteome fasta file, retrieved from the SwissProt database (version from February 2021 with 20934 entries) was used for the analysis of the samples. The enzymatic digestion was set to Trypsin/P and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. For the analysis of the nascent proteome, raw files of both the nascent proteome and global proteome samples were processed together, using Maxquant version 2.0.3. The multiplicity was set to 3, comprising of a light channel, an intermediate channel with Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy channel with Arg10 and Lys8. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine were set as variable peptide modifications. The Re-quantify function was enabled, match between runs was disabled and other search functions were left with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Automation, Nascent proteome, Silac, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) University Clinic Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Toman Bortecen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) University Clinic Heidelberg


