### Accession
PXD019137

### Title
Proline hydroxylation of ChREBP

### Description
This project investigated proline hydroxylation of ChREBP. Proline hydroxylation was investigated in flag-IP enriched protein extracts from ChREBP-flag overexpressing HEK293 cells (A) and in ChREBP-IP enriched mouse liver protein (male, C57BL6/J) (B).

### Sample Protocol
Flag-and ChREBP-immunoprecipitation (IP) HEK293 cells, 2 days after transient transfection with murine ChREBPalpha, were lysed in RSB-100 (10 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100, phosphatase and protease inhibitor tablets (Roche)) directly on the cell culture plate. After 15 min incubation on ice, cells were scraped down and sonicated with 3x5 impulses at low intensity and 2 min incubation on ice in between. Protein lysate was vortexed vigorously every 2 min during another 15 min incubation on ice. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm in a table top centrifuge at 4 °C, supernatant was collected and protein concentration determined. IP was performed with 4000 µg of protein in a total volume of 1 ml (RSB-100). Flag-IP was performed with anti-Flag M2 Affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4 °C. Beads were collected by centrifugation and washed five times with 1 ml of RSB-100. ChREBP IP was performed accordingly with RSB-100 protein extracts of mouse liver (8000 µg) for 4 hours at 4 °C with 10 µg of ChREBP antibody (NB 400-135) and subsequent binding to protein A sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) for 2 hours at 4 °C and 5 cycles of washing with 1 ml of RSB-100.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) IP-enriched proteins were denatured for 7 min at 95 °C, cooled down to room temperature and incubated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark for alkylation of cysteine residues. After centrifugation, proteins were separated by SDS PAGE and stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The band corresponding to ChREBP was excised and protein digestion was carried out using trypsin (specificity to generate peptides: R,K/P) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight as previously described (1). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reversed-phase separations were performed using a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 A, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 0-40% B in 85 min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water; mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with one MS survey scan with a resolution of 60,000 (Orbitrap Elite) and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions in the linear trap quadrupole. 1. Lange, S., Sylvester, M., Schumann, M., Freund, C., and Krause, E. (2010) Identification of phosphorylation-dependent interaction partners of the adapter protein ADAP using quantitative mass spectrometry: SILAC vs (18)O-labeling. J Proteome Res 9, 4113-4122

### Data Protocol
The processed MS/MS spectra (Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0) and the search engine Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd., London) were used to search in-house against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database MOUSE 2016 okt (57951 sequences; 26573730 residues). The maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and the mass tolerance of precursor and sequence ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.35 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethyl and propionamide modification of C , oxidation of H, W, M and hydroxylation of P were considered as possible variable modifications. Protein level: a protein was accepted as unambiguously identified if the total MASCOT score was greater than the significance threshold and if at least 2 peptides appeared the first time in the report and were the top ranking peptides. Based on decoy database searches, the false positive rate was estimated to be <1%. To identify individual peptides, probability-based scoring (MASCOT score) was used. The threshold/expection value for accepting peptide spectra were ions score >34, indicating identity or extensive homology (p<0.05). Ions score is -10*Log(P), where P is the probability that the observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular energy demands are met by uptake and metabolism of nutrients like glucose. The principal transcriptional regulator for adapting glycolytic flux and downstream pathways like <i>de novo</i> lipogenesis to glucose availability in many cell types is carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP). ChREBP is activated by glucose metabolites and post-translational modifications, inducing nuclear accumulation and regulation of target genes. Here we report that ChREBP is modified by proline hydroxylation at several residues. Proline hydroxylation targets both ectopically expressed ChREBP in cells and endogenous ChREBP in mouse liver. Functionally, we found that specific hydroxylated prolines were dispensable for protein stability but required for the adequate activation of ChREBP upon exposure to high glucose. Accordingly, ChREBP target gene expression was rescued by re-expressing WT but not ChREBP that lacks hydroxylated prolines in ChREBP-deleted hepatocytes. Thus, proline hydroxylation of ChREBP is a novel post-translational modification that may allow for therapeutic interference in metabolic diseases.

### Keywords
Hek293, Proline hydroxylation, Mouse liver

### Affiliations
Charite University Medicine Berlin
Institute of Pharmacology
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute of Pharmacology, 10115 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Schupp

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Schupp
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute of Pharmacology, 10115 Berlin, Germany


