### Accession
PXD038018

### Title
Deciphering intercellular signaling complexes by interaction-guided chemical proteomics

### Description
Indirect cell-cell interactions mediated by secreted proteins and their plasma membrane receptors play essential roles for regulating intercellular signaling. However, systematic profiling of the interactions between living cell surface receptors and secretome from neighboring cells remains challenging. Here we developed a chemical proteomics approach, termed interaction-guided crosslinking (IGC), to identify ligand-receptor interactions in situ. By introducing glycan-based ligation and click chemistry, the IGC approach via glycan-to-glycan crosslinking successfully captured receptors from as few as 0.1 million living cells using only 10 ng of secreted ligand. The unparalleled sensitivity and selectivity allow systematic crosslinking and identification of ligand-receptor complexes formed between cell secretome and surfaceome in an unbiased and all-to-all manner, leading to the discovery of a novel ligand-receptor interaction between pancreatic cancer cell-secreted urokinase (PLAU) and neuropilin 1 (NRP1) on pancreatic cancer-associated fibroblasts. This approach is thus useful for systematic exploring new ligand-receptor pairs and discovering critical intercellular signaling events.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysis and Pull-Down. After washed with PBS three times, cells were lysed with lysis buffer containing 2% Triton X-100, 150 mM HEPES pH 8.2, 1.5 mM EDTA, 60 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride, 5 μg/mL aprotinin (Amresco), 5 μg/mL pepstatin (Amresco) and 50 U/mL non-restriction nucleases (Beyotime). The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000g, 4 °C for 6 min, and the resulting supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific; 1 μL bead volume for 106 cells) were added to the supernatant, and samples were placed on an end-over-end rotator for overnight at 4 °C. Beads were then transferred to spin column and washed three times with washing buffer (6 M urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) and once with 1.5 M NaCl. Then the beads were incubated in alkylation buffer (5 mM TCEP, 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate, and 0.5 M NaCl) at 37 °C for 60 min and wash three times with 20% ethanol to completely remove detergents. The purified proteins on beads were digested with 8 ng/μL Trypsin (Promega) and 1.6 ng/μL Lys-C (Wako) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight on an end-over-end rotator. Digestion mixtures were acidified to pH <3 using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted with StageTips, and lyophilized. LC-MS/MS Analysis. Peptide samples were dissolved in a solution of 5% ACN and 4% FA. The resulting samples were analyzed by a nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Q Exactive, Q Exactive HF-X, Orbitrap Fusion or Bruker timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. Detailed instrument settings can be found in SI Appendix, Supplemental Methods.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw files were searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.14).35 UniProtKB human proteome database (UP000005640; released in January 2020), UniProtKB mouse proteome database (UP000000589; released in December 2020), and UniProtKB Chlorocebus sabaeus proteome database (UP000029965; released in March 2020; appended with sequences of mFc tagged SARS-CoV-2 RBD) were used for database search of samples from human cells, NIH 3T3 cells and Vero E6 cells, respectively. Contaminants were included in the search, and the reverse database was used to determine the false-discover rate (FDR). Both peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% FDR. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The LFQ (minimum ratio count 1, normalization type none) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) were enabled to evaluate protein abundances. The “match between runs” feature was activated with a match window of 0.2 min.

### Publication Abstract
Indirect cell-cell interactions mediated by secreted proteins and their plasma membrane receptors play essential roles for regulating intercellular signaling. However, systematic profiling of the interactions between living cell surface receptors and secretome from neighboring cells remains challenging. Here we develop a chemical proteomics approach, termed interaction-guided crosslinking (IGC), to identify ligand-receptor interactions in situ. By introducing glycan-based ligation and click chemistry, the IGC approach via glycan-to-glycan crosslinking successfully captures receptors from as few as 0.1 million living cells using only 10&#x2009;ng of secreted ligand. The unparalleled sensitivity and selectivity allow systematic crosslinking and identification of ligand-receptor complexes formed between cell secretome and surfaceome in an unbiased and all-to-all manner, leading to the discovery of a ligand-receptor interaction between pancreatic cancer cell-secreted urokinase (PLAU) and neuropilin 1 (NRP1) on pancreatic cancer-associated fibroblasts. This approach is thus useful for systematic exploring new ligand-receptor pairs and discovering critical intercellular signaling events.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Jiangnan Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Ruijun Tian
Southern University of Science and Technology


