### Accession
PXD042218

### Title
PC4-mediated Ku PARylation facilitates NHEJ-dependent DNA damage repair

### Description
Radiotherapy is one of the mainstays for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); however, a substantial fraction of HCC patients develops radioresistance and eventually suffer from tumour progression or relapse, a major impediment to the use of radiotherapy. One of the main goals in HCC management is to elucidate the mechanisms underlying radioresistance and identify novel therapeutic targets to improve the patients' prognosis. In this study, we report a DNA repair enhancer, human positive cofactor 4 (PC4), that promotes NHEJ-based DNA repair and renders HCC cells resistant to radiation. Mechanistically, PC4 interacts with PARP1 and directs Ku complex PARylation, resulting in successful recruitment of the Ku complex to damaged chromatin and increasing the efficiency of NHEJ repair. Clinically, PC4 is highly expressed in tumour tissues, which is correlated with poor prognosis in HCC patients. Taken together, our data suggest that PC4 is a DNA repair driver that can be targeted to radiosensitize HCC.

### Sample Protocol
Cells lysates were incubated with PC4 antibody and immunoprecipitated protein were reduced with 50mM dithiothreitol (DTT)(Sigma-Aldrich) at 56°C for half one hour. After that, the proteins were alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Acros, Belgium) at room temperature in the darkness for 15 min. Subsequently, the precipitation was digested by incubation with 0.01μg/μL trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Next, the peptides were desalted by C18 Ziptips and analyzed by the liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on Thermo ScientificTMEASY-nLCTM 1000.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the Swiss-prot Homo sapiens protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Radiotherapy is one of the mainstay treatments for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, a substantial number of patients with HCC develop radioresistance and eventually suffer from tumor progression or relapse, which is a major impediment to the use of radiotherapy. Therefore, elucidating the mechanisms underlying radioresistance and identifying novel therapeutic targets to improve patient prognosis are important in HCC management. In this study, using in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo models, laser microirradiation and live cell imaging methods, and coimmunoprecipitation assays, we report that a DNA repair enhancer, human positive cofactor 4 (PC4), promotes nonhomologous end joining-based DNA repair and renders HCC cells resistant to radiation. Mechanistically, PC4 interacts with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and directs Ku complex PARylation, resulting in the successful recruitment of the Ku complex to damaged chromatin and increasing the efficiency of nonhomologous end joining repair. Clinically, PC4 is highly expressed in tumor tissues and is correlated with poor prognosis in patients with HCC. Taken together, our data suggest that PC4 is a DNA repair driver that can be targeted to radiosensitize HCC cells.

### Keywords
Pc4, Liver cancer, Ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Rocket Force Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University)
Army Medical University

### Submitter
Qimei Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Chummeng Shi
Institute of Rocket Force Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University)


