### Accession
PXD023122

### Title
Pseudouridine-modified tRNA fragments repress malignant protein synthesis and predict leukemic progression in myelodysplastic syndrome

### Description
Transfer RNA (tRNA)-derived fragments (tRF) are emerging small noncoding (nc) RNAs that, while commonly altered in cancer, have poorly defined roles in tumorigenesis. Here we show that pseudouridylation (Ψ) of a stem-cell-enriched tRF subtype, mTOG, selectively inhibits malignant protein synthesis programs, thereby promoting engraftment and differentiation of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC). Building on evidence that mTOG-Ψ target the polyadenylate-binding protein cytoplasmic 1 (PABPC1), we employed HDX-MS to reveal critical interactions between mTOG and functional RNA-recognition motif (RRM) domains in PABPC1. Mechanistically, this hinders the recruitment of the translational co-activator PABPC1-interacting protein 1 (PAIP1) and strongly represses translation of transcripts sharing 5’UTR pyrimidine-enriched sequences (PES), including 5’ terminal oligopyrimidine tracts (TOP) that encode protein machinery components, and are frequently altered in cancer. Significantly, mTOG dysregulation leads to aberrantly increased 5’PES mRNA translation in malignant MDS-HSPC and is clinically associated with leukemic transformation and reduced patient survival. Taken together, these results define a critical role for tRF and Ψ in difficult-to-treat subsets of MDS characterized by high risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
HDX was performed on recombinant PABPC1 at a concentration of 2.4 µg/µl in 50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 2 mM DDT, pH 7.5 with and without ligand, mTOG-Ψ 100 µM. PABPC1 samples were taken from -80 °C, thawed at RT, as a precaution against sample deterioration all samples were filled in such a way that no sample were left sitting in the autosampler for longer than 12 h. The HDX-MS analysis was performed using automated sample preparation on a LEAP H/D-X PAL™ platform interfaced to an LC-MS system, comprising an Ultimate 3000 micro- LC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus MS. CTR samples constituted of 2 l PABPC1 and 3 µl H2O and interaction analysis samples of 2 µl PABPC1 mixed with 3 µl mTOG-Ψ. Samples were diluted with 25 µl 50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 2 mM DDT, pH 7.2 or HDX labeling buffer of the same composition prepared in D2O, pH 6.9. The HDX labeling reactions were carried out for t = 0, 30, 300, 1000, 3000 and 9000 s at room temperature. The labeling reactions were quenched by dilution with 25 µl of 1% TFA, 0.4 M TCEP, 4 M urea, pH 2.5 at 1 °C. 50 µl of the quenched samples were directly injected and subjected to online pepsin digestion at 4 °C (Life Technogies, pepsin column, 2.1 x 30 mm). The online digestion and trapping was performed for 4 min using a flow of 50 µL/min 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.5. The peptides generated by pepsin digestion were subjected to online SPE on a PepMap300 C18 trap column (1 mm x 15mm) and washed with 0.1% FA for 60 s. Thereafter, the trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase analytical column, Hypersil GOLD, particle size 1.9 µm, 1 x 50 mm, and separation was performed at 1 °C using a gradient of 5-50 % B over 8 min and then from 50 to 90 % B for 5 min, the mobile phases were 0.1 % formic acid (A) and 95 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (B). Following the separation, the trap and column were equilibrated at 5 % organic content, until the next injection. The needle port and sample loop were cleaned three times after each injection with mobile phase 5% MeOH 0.1% FA, followed by 90% MeOH 0.1% FA and a final wash of 5% MeOH 0.1% FA. After each sample and blank injection the pepsin column was washed by injecting 90 µl of pepsin wash solution 1% FA 4 M urea 5% MeOH. In order to minimize carry-over a full blank was run between each sample injection. Separated peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus MS, equipped with a HESI source operated at a capillary temperature of 250 °C with sheath gas 12, Aux gas 2 and sweep gas 1 (au). For undeuterated samples (t = 0 s) 1 injection was acquired using data dependent MS/MS HCD for identification of generated peptides. For HDX analysis (all labeled samples and one t= 0 s) MS full scan spectra at a setting of 70 K resolution, AGC 3e6, Max IT 200 ms and scan range 300-2000 were collected.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 8.5 Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) was used for peptide identification after pepsin digestion of undeuterated samples (t= 0 s.). The search was done on a FASTA file with only the PABPC1 sequence, search criteria was a mass error tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da Variable Modifications: Oxidation (M): 15.99, and allowing for fully unspecific cleavage by pepsin. Peptides identified by PEAKS with a peptide score value of log P > 25 and no oxidation were used to generate a peptide lists containing peptide sequence, charge state and retention time for the HDX analysis. HDX data analysis and visualization was performed using HDExaminer, version 2.5.1 (Sierra Analytics Inc., Modesto, US). The analysis allowed only for EX2 and the two first residues of a peptide were assumed unable to hold deuteration. Due to the comparative nature of the measurements, the deuterium incorporation levels for the peptic peptides were derived from the observed mass difference between the deuterated and nondeuterated peptides without back-exchange correction using a fully deuterated sample. HDX data was normalized to 100% D2O content with an estimated average deuterium recovery of 80%. The presented deuteration data is the average of all high and medium confidence results. The allowed retention time window was ± 0.5 min. Heat-map settings were uncoloured proline, heavy smoothing and the difference heat-map was drawn using the residual plot as significance criterion (± 0.5 Da). The spectra for all timepoints were manually inspected; low scoring peptides, obvious outliers and peptides were retention time correction could not be made consistent were removed. In the performed bottom-up labeling HDX-MS the structural resolution is limited by the degree of overlap of the peptides generated by pepsin digestion. After manual curation the HDX analysis is based on 300 peptides in the medium to high confidence interval, of which 97 (74.1% sequence coverage) peptides were in the high confidence interval. Average peptide length was 14.6 ± 7.9 SD and an average redundancy of 6.9.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna modifications; development; hematopoiesis; pseudouridine; stem cells; trna fragments; translation control. hdx ms

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Stem Cell Center, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
BioMS - Swedish National Infrastructure for Biological Mass Spectrometry, Lund University, BMC D1330, 221 84 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Simon Ekström

### Lab Head
Dr Cristian Bellodi
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Stem Cell Center, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


