### Accession
PXD015839

### Title
In planta bacterial multi-omics illuminates regulatory principles underlying plant-pathogen interactions

### Description
Gene regulation of bacterial pathogens in the host is not comprehensively understood due to the difficulty in analyzing genome-wide mRNA and protein expression of bacteria during infection. Here, we jointly analyzed transcriptome and proteome of a foliar bacterial pathogen in plants. Bacterial transcriptome changes can explain to a large extent their proteome changes in resistant and susceptible plants. However, a part of bacterial type III secretion system was suppressed by plant immunity preferentially at the protein level. Also, gene co-expression analysis uncovered previously unknown gene regulatory modules underlying bacterial virulence. Collectively, integrated in planta bacterial omics provides molecular insights into multiple layers of bacterial gene regulation that contributes to virulence and roles of plant immunity in controlling it.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were pelleted and re-dissolved in 8 M urea 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, then protein mixtures were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with chloroacetamide, and digested first with Lys-C for 3 h and subsequently with trypsin o/n. Samples were submitted to SDB-RPS fractionation using a protocol adapted from a previous report (41). In brief, stage tips were prepared with 2 layers of SDB-RPS membrane and activated with 100 µL acetonitrile, followed by equilibration with 100 µL equilibration buffer (30% (v/v) MeOH, 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and 100 µL 0.2% TFA. Next, peptides were immobilized on the membrane and washed with 100 µL 0.2% TFA. Peptides were then eluted into 3 consecutive fractions using SDB-RPS buffer 1 (100 mM NH4HCO2, 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% FA), SDB-RPS buffer 2 (150 mM NH4HCO2, 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) and finally SDB-RPS buffer 3 (5% Ammonia (v/v), 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). The collected fractions were evaporated to dryness to remove residual ammonia. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) or using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), respectively. Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1%FA) (0-5 min: 5%, 5-65 min: 20%, 65-90 min: 35%, 90-100 min: 55%, 100-115 min: 95%) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z (Q Exactive Plus) or 2.0 m/z (Q Exactive). HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (42) to calculate label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ values (43). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the amino acid sequences of Pto (The Pseudomonas Genome Database) and 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Data analysis  iBAQ values were used for statistical analysis. Protein groups were omitted. iBAQ values were normalized by TMM normalization in the package edgeR (44). For this, normalization factors were calculated with the calcNormFactors function with default settings based on proteins with iBAQ values greater than zero in all the samples. When iBAQ values were zero in more than one replicate out of three replicates, the protein was defined as “not detected” and the iBAQ values of all the replicates were converted to NA. TMM normalized iBAQ values were then log2 transformed. To each protein, a linear model was fit by using the function lmFit in the limma package with the following terms: Sgptr = GPTgpt + Rr+ ɛgtr, where S is the log2 count per million, GPT is the host genotype (or liquid medium): Pto strain: time point interaction and the random factors, R is the biological replicate, and ɛ is the residual. The eBayes function in the limma package was used for variance shrinkage in the calculation of the p-values, which was then used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR; the Storey’s q-values) using the qvalue function in the qvalue package (36). To determine proteins with significant expression changes, the cutoff of q-value < 0.01 and |log2FC| >2 was applied. Hierarchical clustering was done using the dist and hclust functions in the R environment or using the Cluster3.0 software (37). Heatmaps were created with the TreeView (38). Enriched gene ontology terms were identified using BiNGO plugin for cytoscape (45).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the gene regulation of plant pathogens is crucial for pest control and thus global food security. An integrated understanding of bacterial gene regulation in the host is dependent on multi-omic datasets, but these are largely lacking. Here, we simultaneously characterized the transcriptome and proteome of a bacterial pathogen in plants. We found a number of bacterial processes affected by plant immunity at the transcriptome and proteome levels. For instance, salicylic acid-mediated plant immunity suppressed the accumulation of proteins comprising the tip component of the bacterial type&#x2009;III secretion system. Interestingly, there were instances of concordant and discordant regulation of bacterial messenger RNAs and proteins. Gene co-expression analysis uncovered previously unknown gene regulatory modules underlying virulence. This study provides molecular insights into the multiple layers of gene regulation that contribute to bacterial growth in planta, and elucidates the role of plant immunity in affecting pathogen responses.

### Keywords
Bacterial virulence, Plant immunity, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


