### Accession
PXD038658

### Title
Targeted cross-linker delivery for in situ mapping of protein conformations and interactions in mitochondria

### Description
Current methods for intracellular protein analysis mostly require the separation of specific organelles or the change of intracellular environment. However, the functions of these proteins are determined by their native microenvironment as they usually form complexes with ions, nucleic acids, and other proteins. Thus, we have explored a method for in situ crosslinking and mapping of mitochondrial proteins in living cells. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles are functionalized with dihexadecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) to deliver protein crosslinkers  into mitochondria. In situ crosslinked proteins are analyzed using mass spectrometry. With this method, we have totally identified a total of 74 pairs of74 pairs of protein-protein interactions that do not exist in the STRING database. Our data on mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins (~93%) are also consistent with the experimental or predicted structural analysis of these proteins. Thus, we have established a promising technology platform for in situ defined protein analysis in cellular organelles under their native microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
The i-FASP protocol  for the sample preparation was chosen. The HepG2 cells were lysed in lysis buffer (10 % C12Im-Cl, 1 % protease inhibitor cocktail) by ultrasonication for 60 s at 60 W, followed by centrifugation at 16 000 g (20 min, 4 °C). The supernatant proteins concentration was measured by the bicinchoninic acid assay. The proteins were reacted with 100 mM DTT at 95°C for 3 min for denaturation and reduction. Each 150 μg of the protein extract was transferred to a 10 k Da filter. After centrifugation at 14 000g for 10 min at 25 °C, the concentrate was diluted in the device with 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 and centrifuged at 14 000 g at 20 °C for 15 min. Subsequently, 20 mM IAA was added for alkylation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The proteins in filter were washed three times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by centrifugation at 15 000 g to remove the C12Im-Cl, DTT, and unreacted IAA. Afterward, the proteins were digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 15 h. Then, the generated peptides were collected by centrifugation at 15 000g, followed by washing the filter with 10 mM NH4HCO3 twice. The collected peptides were stored at −80 °C for further MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (1.6.3.3) was used to identify proteins and peptides. The tandem mass spectrum was searched against the Uniprot FASTA databases of Human (downloaded in May 2018, 70956 entries), and a common contaminants database was added to the database. Enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The searching tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm, and that for fragment ions was 20 ppm. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl cysteine. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, DSS modification of protein N-terminus (C8H12O3, mass shift 156.0786442) and DSS modification of lysine were set as variable modification. For the label-free quantification method, six raw files from the two samples were analyzed in the Max Quant environment (v1.6.3.3). The search parameters were the same as above and the LFQ algorithm were performed, and ‘match between runs’ was used with a retention time window of 1min. To obtain the ratio of DSS-labeled mitochondrial peptides among peptides detected in the three methods, three raw files for each sample were analyzed separately in the Max Quant environment (v1.6.3.3). The search parameters were the same as above. The LFQ algorithm were performed and ‘match between runs’ was used with a retention time window of 1min.pLink 225 software (2.3.5) was used to identify the cross-linking information. The search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, precursor filter tolerance 10 ppm, cross-linker DSS (cross-linking sites K and protein N terminus, cross-link mass shift 138.0680796, mono-link mass shift 156.0786442). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl cysteine. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification. The Human protein sequences downloaded from UniProt (downloaded in May 2018, 70956 entries) were used with a separate FDR ≤ 1% at PSM level. The raw data generated from the same sample were searched together.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, In-cell cross-linking, Protein conformations and interactions, Nanocarrier delivery, Chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.

### Submitter
Yuwan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lihua Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.


