### Accession
PXD025805

### Title
Oxonium ion guided analysis of quantitative proteomics data reveals site-specific O-glycosylation of anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2)

### Description
Developments in mass spectrometry (MS)-based analyses of glycoproteins have been important to study changes in glycosylation related to disease. Recently, the characteristic pattern of oxonium ions in glycopeptide fragmentation spectra had been used to assign different sets of glycopeptides. In particular this was helpful to discriminate between O-GalNAc and O-GlcNAc. Here, we thought to investigate how such information can be used to examine quantitiative proteomics data. For this purpose, we used TMT (Tandem Mass Tag)-labeled samples from total cell lysates and secreted proteins from three different colorectal cancer cell lines. Following automated glycopeptide assignment (Byonic) and evaluation of the presence and relative intensity of oxonium ions, we observed that in particular the ratio of the ions at m/z 144.066 and 138.055, respectively, could be used to discriminate between O-GlcNAcylated and O-GalNAcylated peptides, with concomittant relative quantification between the different cell lines. Among the O-GalNAcylated proteins, we also observed anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2), a protein which glycosylation site and status was hitherto not well documented. Using a combination of multiple fragmentation methods we then not only assigned the site of modification, but also showed different glycosylation between intracellular (ER-resident) and secreted AGR2. Overall, our study shows the potential of broad application of the use of the relative intensities of oxonium ions for the confident assignment of glycopeptides, even in complex proteomics datasets.

### Sample Protocol
P1301 CRC cellular proteins TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analyses Cellular pellets from HCT116, HT29, and LS174T cells were used for protein extracts, in triplicate and 100 µg of protein was used for subsequent reduction with TCEP (5 mM), alkylation with iodoacetamide (15 mM) and quenching with 10 mM DTT. Methanol-chloroform precipitation was used to obtain cleaned protein pellets, then resuspended in 40 mM HEPES (pH 8.4) to perform trypsin (10 µg) digestion O/N at 37°C. Ten µg of each of the samples was labelled with one of the 9 amine reactive TMT10plex Label Reagents (HT29: 126, 127N,127C, HCT116: 128N, 128 C, 129N, LS174T: 129C, 130N, 130C), Thermo Scientific, Lot #UG282327) for 1 h at RT and excess TMT label was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. The labeled peptide samples were then mixed, fractionated by high-pH SPE in five fractions, freeze-dried and stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. TMT-labeled peptides were analyzed in duplicate by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS coupling an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 µm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), equilibrated with solvent A (100/0.1 water/formic acid v/v) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 µm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm) using solvent B (80/20/0.1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid v/v/v). The gradient was from 5-30% B in 240 minutes. The MS spectra were recorded at m/z range 350–1200 in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Dynamic exclusion was after n = 1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 36%) using the Orbitrap.   P1357 CRC secretome TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analyses Secreted proteins (35 µg) from HCT116, HT29, and LS174T cells were reduced with TCEP (5 mM), and alkylated using iodoacetamide (15 mM) and quenching with 10 mM DTT. Methanol-chloroform precipitation was used to obtain cleaned protein pellets, then resuspended in 40 mM HEPES (pH 8.4) to perform trypsin (4 µg) digestion O/N at 37°C. Ten µg of each of the samples was labelled with one of the 3 amine reactive TMT10plex Label Reagents (LS174T: 127N, HCT116: 129C, HT29: 131., Thermo Scientific, Lot #UG282327) for 1 h at RT and excess TMT label was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. The labeled peptide samples were then mixed, fractionated by high-pH SPE in five fractions, freeze-dried and stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. TMT-labeled peptides were analyzed by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS coupling an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 µm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), equilibrated with solvent A (100/0.1 water/formic acid v/v) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 µm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm) using solvent B (80/20/0.1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid v/v/v). The gradient was from 2-36% B in 120 min. The MS spectra were recorded at m/z range 350–1200 in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Dynamic exclusion was after n = 1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 36%) using the Orbitrap.   Targeted analyses TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analyses Cellular pellets and secretome samples were labeled as described above. The labeled peptides were analyzed by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS by coupling an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo)  (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 µm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), equilibrated with solvent A (100/0.1 water/formic acid v/v) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 µm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm) using solvent B (80/20/0.1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid v/v/v). The gradient was from 10-40% B in 60 minutes. Targeted analysis of selected precursors was performed using EThcD (ETD 29.06 and HCD 15.00), CID and MS3 analysis (combining CID and HCD).

### Data Protocol
P1301 CRC cellular proteins data analysis Fragmentation spectra containing the HexNAc oxonium ion at m/z 204.087 were searched for glycopeptides against the human database (20596 entries, Feb 2019) using Byonic version 2.13.2 (proteinmetrics.com). Two glycan databases consisting of 309 common mammalian N-glycans (for N-glycopeptide searches) and 70 human O-glycans (for O-glycopeptide searches) were used, respectively. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A precursor and fragment tolerance of 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, was allowed. For both N- and O-glycopeptide searches, glycosylation was set as rare modification, while oxidation of Met was set as a common, dynamic modification. The maximum number of common and rare modifications were set at 2 and 1, respectively. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) and TMT-10 plex (+229.162932, on Lys and peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications. A Byonic score higher than 250 was considered stringent for further glycopeptides selection. Parallel to the search, the presence and intensity of oxonium ions at at m/z 126.055 [HexNAc-C2H6O3]+, 138.055 [HexNAc-CH6O3]+, 144.066 [HexNAc-C2H4O2]+, 168.066 [HexNAc-2H2O]+, 186.076 [HexNAc-H2O]+, 204.087 [HexNAc]+, were registered with a tolerance of m/z 0.001, minimum intensity of 1000 count, and a peak rank in the top 100 peaks (in house software). Finally, the peptide identifications with scores 250 and higher (Byonic search) and the oxonium ions intensities were linked according to the spectrum ID and merged into one dataset for further processing.   P1357 CRC secretome data analysis For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the human database (20596 entries, Feb 2019) using Mascot Version 2.2.07 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: 10 ppm and 20 milli mass units deviation for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT6plex on Lys and N-term were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were oxidation (on Met) and acetylation on the protein N-terminus. All searches and subsequent data analysis, including Percolator and relative quantification, were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Peptide-spectrum matches were adjusted to a 1% FDR.    Targeted investigation data analysis Two different O-glycopeptides peptides from anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2) have been analysed and data were manually interpreted. Peptide A:  TMTRDTTVKTMTPGAKTMT+ HexNAc (calculated [M+H]+:1963.1791) Peptide B: TMTRDTTVKTMTPGAKTMT+ HexNAc3HexFucNeuAc (calculated [M+H]+:2968.5440) TMT= Tandem Mass Tag (10-plex, mass: 229.1629 a.m.u.)  Data files: L20202000241e: Targeted EThcD of peptide A from cellular AGR2 (precursor ion at m/z 491.550 ([M+4H]4+). Retention time 16.27-16.55 min. L2020001343c: Targeted EThcD of peptide B from secreted AGR2  (precursor ion at m/z 742.892 ([M+4H]4+). Retention time 16.79-16.88 min L2020001343e: Targeted CID MS2 analysis of  peptide B from secreted AGR2  (precursor ion at m/z 742.892 ([M+4H]4+). Retention time 16.98-17.13 min L2020001343h: Targeted MS3 analysis of peptide B from secreted AGR2 (MS3 (HCD) of the fragment ion at m/z  670.114 after CID MS2 of the precursor ion at  m/z 742.892 ([M+4H]4+). Retention time: 16.67-16.89 min.

### Publication Abstract
Developments in mass spectrometry (MS)-based analyses of glycoproteins have been important to study changes in glycosylation related to disease. Recently, the characteristic pattern of oxonium ions in glycopeptide fragmentation spectra had been used to assign different sets of glycopeptides. In particular, this was helpful to discriminate between <i>O</i>-GalNAc and <i>O</i>-GlcNAc. Here, we thought to investigate how such information can be used to examine quantitative proteomics data. For this purpose, we used tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled samples from total cell lysates and secreted proteins from three different colorectal cancer cell lines. Following automated glycopeptide assignment (Byonic) and evaluation of the presence and relative intensity of oxonium ions, we observed that, in particular, the ratio of the ions at <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> 144.066 and 138.055, respectively, could be used to discriminate between <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated and <i>O</i>-GalNAcylated peptides, with concomitant relative quantification between the different cell lines. Among the <i>O</i>-GalNAcylated proteins, we also observed anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2), a protein which glycosylation site and status was hitherto not well documented. Using a combination of multiple fragmentation methods, we then not only assigned the site of modification, but also showed different glycosylation between intracellular (ER-resident) and secreted AGR2. Overall, our study shows the potential of broad application of the use of the relative intensities of oxonium ions for the confident assignment of glycopeptides, even in complex proteomics datasets.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics; tmt labeling; oxonium ion; lc−ms/ms; o-glycosylation; colorectal cancer; agr2

### Affiliations
LUMC/UVIC
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


