### Accession
PXD044048

### Title
RNA helicase Ighmbp2 regulates THO complex to ensure cellular mRNA homeostasis

### Description
RNA helicases constitute a large protein family implicated in cellular RNA homeostasis and disease development. Here we show that the RNA helicase Ighmbp2, linked to the neuromuscular disorder SMARD1 associates with polysomes and impacts on translation of cellular mRNAs containing short, GC-rich and highly structured 5’UTRs. Using UV-crosslinking followed by RNAseq and BS3-crosslinking combined with mass spectrometry we were able to localize Ighmbp2 on ribosomes. Absence of Ighmbp2 causes ribosome stalling at the start codon of target mRNAs, leading to their reduced translation efficiency. The main mRNA targets of Ighmbp2-mediated regulation encode for components of the THO complex that links mRNA production and nuclear export. Accordingly, failure of Ighmbp2 regulation of the THO complex causes perturbations of the cellular transcriptome and its encoded proteome. Ablation of essential THO complex subunits phenocopies these perturbations. Thus, Ighmbp2 is an upstream regulator of the THO complex that affects cellular mRNA homeostasis. Of note, Ighmbp2-dependent regulation of the THO complex is also observed in astrocytes derived from SMARD1 patients, suggesting that de-regulated mRNA metabolism contributes to SMARD1 etiology and offers new avenues for developing alternative therapeutics to treating SMARD1.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred µg purified human 80S ribosome-Ighmbp2 complexes were crosslinked with 2 mM BS3 for 1h at RT, quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and precipitated with ethanol. After centrifugation, the pelleted complexes were washed with 80% ethanol and dried. Subsequently, the complexes were dissolved in 4 M Urea / 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at RT, acetylated with 40mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to 1M Urea. RNA was digested with 1 µl Universal nuclease (Pierce) and 1 µl Nuclease P1 (New England Biolabs) for 2h at 37 °C, followed by an overnight digestion of proteins using 5µg trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C. The sample was acidified with formic acid (FA) to an end concentration of 0.1 % (v/v) and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to 5 % (v/v). Peptides were reversed-phase extracted with Micro SpinColumns C18 (Harvard Apparatus), dissolved in 30 % (v/v) ACN / 0.1 % TFA (v/v) and fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography (pSEC) on an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC system using a Superdex Peptide PC3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µl/min. One-minute-fractions containing the crosslinked peptides were vacuum dried and dissolved in 5% ACN / 0.1% TFA for a subsequent uHPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Online chromatographic separation was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a custom 30cm C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Flow rate was set to 300 nl/min and 45 min linear gradient was formed with mobile phase A (0.1% v/v FA) and B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) from 10%, 15 or 20% to 46% mobile phase B for early, intermediate and late pSEC fractions, respectively. Data were acquired in a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) in technical duplicates. Resolution for MS1 scans was set to 120 000, automatic gain control target to 1e6 and dynamic exclusion to 30s. Top30 precursors with a charge of 3-8 were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and fragmented with normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 spectra were acquired at resolution of 30 000, maximum injection time of 128 ms and automatic gain control target of 2e5.

### Data Protocol
Proteins present in the human 80S ribosome-Ighmbp2 complexes were identified by searching Thermo raw files with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0, https://www.maxquant.org) against a database containing UniProt human reference proteome (https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz, Release 2023-06-28, 20598 entries), common contaminants and a sequence of FLAG/HA-tagged Ighmbp2. The proteins identified by MaxQuant were used to compile a database for a subsequent search of protein-protein crosslinks with pLink (version 2.3.11, http://pfind.org/software/pLink).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mrna homeostasis, Ighmbp2, Smard1, Smubp-2, Rna helicase, Thoc

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group,  Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany; Bioanalytics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Olexandr Dybkov

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group,  Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany; Bioanalytics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


