### Accession
PXD011023

### Title
Heat and pressure resistance relates to protein folding and aggregation

### Description
The locus of heat resistance (LHR) confers extreme heat resistance in E. coli. This study explored the role of the LHR in pressure resistance of E. coli, as well as its relationship with protein folding and aggregation in vivo. The role of LHR was investigated in E. coli MG1655 expressing a ibpA-yfp fusion. The expression of proteins by the LHR was determined by mass spectrometry based proteomics; inclusion bodies of untreated and treated cells were also analysed by proteomics, and by observation with fluorescence microscope. In total, 11 proteins of LHR were expressed, including sHSP20, ClpKGI, sHSP, YdfX1 and YdfX2, HdeD, KefB, Trx, PsiE, DegP, and a hypothetical proteins. The proteomic analysis of inclusion bodies revealed a differential abundance of proteins related to oxidative stress in strains carrying the LHR. The LHR reduced the presence of inclusion bodies after heat or pressure treatment, indicating that proteins expressed by the LHR prevent or reverse protein aggregation. The phenotype of the LHR was also mediated by the expression of a fragment containing only sHSP20, ClpKGI, sHSP. The LHR and the fragment encoding only for sHSP20, ClpKGI, sHSP also enhanced pressure resistance in E. coli MG1655 but had no effect on pressure resistance of E. coli LMM1010. In conclusion, the LHR confers pressure resistance to some strains of E. coli, and reduces protein aggregation. Pressure and heat resistance, however, are also dependent on additional LHR-encoded functions.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of proteins from whole cells and inclusion bodies. Inclusion bodies were isolated according a protocol developed for E. coli. Cells were grown to an OD600 1.0 in 50 mL LB broth, harvested after centrifugation at 5300 x g at 4 °C, and washed in 5 mL buffer. The cell pellet was resuspended in 10mM Tris-HC1, pH 7.5, containing 0.75 M sucrose and 0.2 g L-1 lysozyme. After 10 min incubation at 20 C, 3 mM EDTA solution was added at a 2:1 (v/v) ratio and cells were kept on ice for approximately 5 min. The cells were lysed by sonication for 3 min, and the lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The pellet containing the inclusion bodies was resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HC1 buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.25 M sucrose and 1 mM EDTA. The resuspended pellet was layered on the top of a sucrose gradient (40, 53, and 67% (w/w)) in 1 mM Tris-HC1 buffer, pH 8.0, containing 1 mM EDTA. The sucrose gradient was prepared by carefully layering the sucrose solutions. The total volume was 4.7 mL, consisting of 1.3 mL 67% sucrose, 1.2 mL 53% sucrose, and 1.2 mL of 40% sucrose solution and ~1.0 mL cell lysate. Centrifugation was performed at 108,000 x g for 90 min at 4 oC. Inclusion bodies that were focused in a band at the interface between the 53% and 67% sucrose layers were recovered with a glass pipette. Inclusion bodies were resuspended with native lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH: 8, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and recovered by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 30 min. The pellet was washed again with 1XPBS+1% TRITON-100, recovered by centrifugation with 30,000 x g for 30 min, and dissolved in LDS buffer with 50 mM DTT. Proteins were denatured by heating at 70 oC for 10 min and stored at -20 oC. Proteome analysis was based on triplicate independent proteins extractions for each condition.  Protein digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS. Samples were alkylated by using 55 mM chloroacetamide. Tryptic in-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed by using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, U.S.A.) coupled online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water, and 1 μg was injected for each measurement. Peptide samples were first loaded on a trap column (75 µm inner diameter x 2 cm, packed in house with 5 µm, Reprosil ODS-3; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 µm x 40 cm, C18 column, Reprosil Gold, 3 µm: Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted at 0.3 µL min-1 with a linear gradient from 96% solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water), and 4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) at 0 min to 68% A and 32% B at 110 min. MS measurement was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically extracting the ten most prominent precursor ions in the full MS spectra for HCD fragmentation at 30% collision energy. Full MS spectra and MS/MS spectra were acquired at 30,000 resolution and 7,500 resolution, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification. Label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) by searching against an E. coli K12 UniProt reference database (version 31.10.2016, 5970 entries) and the 16 LHR protein sequences using the search engine Andromeda with default settings. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was used as fixed modification; variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed miscleavage sites. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Label-free quantification, calculation of intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values and match-between-runs options were enabled and results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids, 1% peptide and protein FDR as well as reverse identifications. Data analysis. Significant differences between cell counts before and after treatments were determined using one way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak post hoc analysis. MaxQuant results were imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus (v.1.5.6.0). The iBAQ intensities were filtered for at least 3 valid values per experimental group. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). Principal component analysis was performed using standard settings in Perseus. A two-sided student’s t-test was performed to assess statistical significance. Protein P-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation based 1% FDR cut-off. Hierarchical clustering was performed on Z-scored median log2 transformed iBAQ intensities of significant proteins. Significance was assessed at an error probability of 0.1% (P<0.001) for proteomic analysis, and 5% (P<0.05) for data of cell counts. The experiments of proteomic analysis were performed in quadruplicate independent protein isolations and all other experiments were performed in triplicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Inclusion bodies, Food preservation, Pressure resistance

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Scienes Weihenstephan Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr BayBioMS Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Scienes Weihenstephan Freising, Germany


