### Accession
PXD017365

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of lytic KSHV infection in human endothelial cells reveals novel targets of viral immune modulation

### Description
Kaposi’s Sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic human virus and leading cause of mortality in HIV infection. Reactivation of KSHV from latent to lytic stage infection initiates a cascade of viral gene expression, and here we show how these changes remodel the host cell proteome to enable viral replication. By undertaking a systematic and unbiased analysis of changes to the endothelial cell proteome following lytic KSHV reactivation, we quantify >7000 cellular and 71 viral proteins. Lytic KSHV infection resulted in >2-fold downregulation of 291 cellular proteins, including PKR, the key cellular sensor of double-stranded RNA. A complementary KSHV genome-wide CRISPR genetic screen identified K5 as the viral gene responsible for the downregulation of two novel KSHV targets, Nectin-2 and CD155, both ligands of the NK cell DNAM-1 receptor. Despite the high episome copy number, we show that CRISPR Cas9 provides a remarkably efficient way to target KSHV genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using an IST-NHS digestion kit (Preomics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modification. Briefly, samples were lysed by heating at 95 degrees in lysis buffer for 45 minutes.  This is longer than the 10min indicated by the protocol to effect decrosslinking. Nucleic acids were sheared by sonication in a Bioruptor sonicator (30s on/off, for 10 minutes) (Diagenode). Samples were quantified by BCA assay against a BSA standard curve dissolved in lysis buffer. 25µg of each sample was reduced, alkylated and digested according to the manufacturer’s protocol. TMT labelling was not conducted prior to the clean-up step as suggested in the protocol. Instead, samples were cleaned up according to the protocol, dried under vacuum, resuspended in 21uL 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer to which were added 0.2mg of TMT label dissolved in 9µL anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2h at room temperature before pooling of samples.  Sample pools were partially dried under vacuum to remove excess ACN and subsequently diluted to ~1mL with 0.1% Trifluoracetic acid (TFA). Additional formic acid was added to bring the pH <2. Samples were subjected to SPE clean-up using 50mg tC-18 cartridges (Waters). Cartridges were wetted with 1mL methanol, followed by 1mL ACN and equilibrated with 3mL 0.1% TFA. They were then loaded onto cartridges, washed with 1mL 0.1% TFA and eluted sequentially with 250uL 40% ACN, 60% ACN and 80% ACN. Eluates were dried under vacuum.   Samples were subjected to HpHRP fractionation on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm × 15 cm, 1.7µ Kinetex Evo C18 column (Phenomenex, UK). Solvent A was 3% ACN, Solvent B was 100% ACN, solvent C was 200 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). Throughout the analysis, solvent C was kept at a constant 10%. The flow rate was 400 µL/min and UV was monitored at 280 nm. Samples were loaded in 90% A for 10 min before a gradient elution of 0–10% B over 10 min (curve 3), 10-34% B over 21 min (curve 5), 34-50% B over 5 mins (curve 5) followed by a 10 min wash with 90% B. 15 s (100 µL) fractions were collected throughout the run. Peptide containing fractions were recombined into 24 fractions (i.e. fractions 1, 25, 49, 73, 97 combined) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions were stored at −80°C prior to analysis.  Data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). HpRP fractions were resuspended in 20 µl 5% DMSO 0.5% TFA and 10µL injected. Fractions were loaded at 10 μl/min for 5 min on to an Acclaim PepMap C18 cartridge trap column (300 um × 5 mm, 5 um particle size) in 0.1% TFA. After loading a linear gradient of 3–32% solvent B over 3 hr was used for sample separation over a column of the same stationary phase (75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm particle size) before washing at 90% B and re-equilibration. Solvents were A: 0.1% FA and B:ACN/0.1% FA. An SPS/MS3 acquisition was used for all samples and was run as follows. MS1: Quadrupole isolation, 120’000 resolution, 5e5 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time, ions injected for all parallelisable time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, CID fragmentation (NCE 35) with the ion trap scanning out in rapid mode from m/z 120, 8e3 AGC target, 70 ms maximum injection time, ions accumulated for all parallelisable time. In synchronous precursor selection mode the top 10 MS2 ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (65NCE) and scanned out in the orbitrap at 50’000 resolution with an AGC target of 2e4 and a maximum accumulation time of 120 ms, ions were not accumulated for all parallelisable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3s. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/−10 ppm for 90s, MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursor ions 5e3 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched by Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 in two rounds of searching. The first search was against the UniProt Human reference proteome (26/09/17), the KSHV proteome, a database of non-canonical KSHV sequences (Arias et al., 2014) and compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the human trEMBL database (Uniprot, 26/0917). The following search parameters were used. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da, Fixed mods: Ist-alkylation (+113.084064 Da) (C) and TMT (N-term, K), Var mods: Oxidation (M), Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion-based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel. Protein/peptide abundance was calculated and output in terms of ‘scaled’ values, where the total s/n across all reporter channels is calculated and a normalised contribution of each channel is output. Proteins/peptides satisfying at least a ‘medium’ FDR confidence were taken forward to statistical analysis in R. This consisted of a moderated T-test (Limma) with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypotheses to provide a q value for each comparison

### Publication Abstract
Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic human virus and the leading cause of mortality in HIV infection. KSHV reactivation from latent- to lytic-stage infection initiates a cascade of viral gene expression. Here we show how these changes remodel the host cell proteome to enable viral replication. By undertaking a systematic and unbiased analysis of changes to the endothelial cell proteome following KSHV reactivation, we quantify &gt;7,000 cellular proteins and 71 viral proteins and provide a temporal profile of protein changes during the course of lytic KSHV infection. Lytic KSHV induces &gt;2-fold downregulation of 291 cellular proteins, including PKR, the key cellular sensor of double-stranded RNA. Despite the multiple episomes per cell, CRISPR-Cas9 efficiently targets KSHV genomes. A complementary KSHV genome-wide CRISPR genetic screen identifies K5 as the viral gene responsible for the downregulation of two KSHV targets, Nectin-2 and CD155, ligands of the NK cell DNAM-1 receptor.

### Keywords
Kshv, Proteomics, Immune modulation

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID),  University of Cambridge,  UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID),  University of Cambridge,  UK


