### Accession
PXD000114

### Title
Metaproteomics of Premature Infant Gut Colonization

### Description
Microbial colonization of the human gastrointestinal tract plays an important role in establishing health and homeostasis. However, the time-dependent and related functional signatures of microbial and human proteins during early colonization of the gut have yet to be determined. Thus, we employed shotgun proteomics via nano-2D-LC-MS/MS to simultaneously monitor microbial and human proteins in fecal samples from a healthy preterm infant during early development. ). All MS/MS spectra were searched against a predicted protein database containing 25 microbial species along with the Human RefSeq2011 genome using the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al, 1994), and filtered with DTASelect version 1.9 (Tabb et al, 2002) at the peptide level with standard filters [SEQUEST Xcorrs of at least 1.8 (+1), 2.5 (+2) 3.5 (+3)] organizing identified peptides to their corresponding protein sequences. This study provides the first elucidation of coordinated human and microbial proteins in the infant gut during early development.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Microbial colonization of the human gastrointestinal tract plays an important role in establishing health and homeostasis. However, the time-dependent functional signatures of microbial and human proteins during early colonization of the gut have yet to be determined. To this end, we employed shotgun proteomics to simultaneously monitor microbial and human proteins in fecal samples from a preterm infant during the first month of life. Microbial community complexity increased over time, with compositional changes that were consistent with previous metagenomic and rRNA gene data. More specifically, the function of the microbial community initially involved biomass growth, protein production, and lipid metabolism, and then switched to more complex metabolic functions, such as carbohydrate metabolism, once the community stabilized and matured. Human proteins detected included those responsible for epithelial barrier function and antimicrobial activity. Some neutrophil-derived proteins increased in abundance early in the study period, suggesting activation of the innate immune system. Likewise, abundances of cytoskeletal and mucin proteins increased later in the time course, suggestive of subsequent adjustment to the increased microbial load. This study provides the first snapshot of coordinated human and microbial protein expression in a preterm infant's gut during early development.

### Keywords
Colonization/ infant gut/ microbiome/ metaproteomics

### Affiliations
Chemical Science Division

### Submitter
Jacque Young

### Lab Head


