### Accession
PXD010558

### Title
Protein Deacetylase CobB Interplays with c-di-GMP

### Description
As a ubiquitous bacterial secondary messenger, c-di-GMP plays key regulatory roles in processes like bacterial motility and transcription regulation. We found that c-di-GMP had impact on lysine acetylation level. To further investigate the regulation role, we performed a quantitative analysis of E. coli acetylome. In addition, we found that CobB is an effective deacetylase of YdeH, a major diguanylate cyclase (DGC) of E.coli that is endogenously acetylated. Mass spectrometry analysis identified YdeH K4 as the major site of acetylation, and it could be deacetylated by CobB.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli was cultured in SILAC M9 medium. In heavy cell, we induced the expression of YdeH. Cells were lysed in 8M Urea. Light-labeled and heavy-labeled lysate were equally mixed before reduction and alkylation reaction. Approximately 2 mg proteins were tryptically digested and desalted followed by affinity pulldown. The enriched acetyl-lysine peptides were analyzed by Fusion. For YdeH acetylation stoichiometry, purified YdeH proteins were digested by trypsin overnight after reduction and alkylation reaction. Then tryptic peptides were desalted. AQUA peptides were spiked into the digested YdeH samples with the close intensity to the native peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data files (.raw) were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) against Escherichia coli (strain K12) database from Uniprot (proteome ID: UP000000625, 4309 sequences, last modified on May 13th, 2017) with a reversed decoy database. SILAC was selected as “doublets” and “Heavy labels” panel was selected as heavy lysine (Lys6). Trypsin/P was chosen as the digestion enzyme and two maximum missing cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as the fixed modification and variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and acetylation (K). False discovery rates (FDR) at protein, peptide and modification level were all set as 1%. For quantitative analysis, the normalized H/L ratio of each acetylated peptide exported by MaxQuant software was corrected at the protein level to eliminate the protein abundance difference. For YdeH acetylation stoichiometry, XIC peak areas of native peptide and corresponding heavy labeled peptide were used for stoichiometry calculation.

### Publication Abstract
As a ubiquitous bacterial secondary messenger, c-di-GMP plays key regulatory roles in processes such as bacterial motility and transcription regulation. CobB is the Sir2 family protein deacetylase that controls energy metabolism, chemotaxis, and DNA supercoiling in many bacteria. Using an Escherichia coli proteome microarray, we found that c-di-GMP strongly binds to CobB. Further, protein deacetylation assays showed that c-di-GMP inhibits the activity of CobB and thereby modulates the biogenesis of acetyl-CoA. Interestingly, we also found that one of the key enzymes directly involved in c-di-GMP production, DgcZ, is a substrate of CobB. Deacetylation of DgcZ by CobB enhances its activity and thus the production of c-di-GMP. Our work establishes a novel negative feedback loop linking c-di-GMP biogenesis and CobB-mediated protein deacetylation.

### Keywords
C-di-gmp, Ydeh, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Zhaowei Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaowei Xu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University


