### Accession
PXD017987

### Title
Validation of Nri1/Nri2 physical interaction with the Candida albicans RSC complex

### Description
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. In this study, we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans (CaRSC). To precisely determine the composition of the CaRSC complex, we immunopurified Myc-tagged Sth1, the core catalytic subunit of the CaRSC complex encoded by C3_02490C and identified its physical interactors using high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Strikingly, we identified two novel hitherto uncharacterized proteins that co-purified with Sth1, C2_01370p (Nri1) and C1_01800p (Nri2), whose homologs are annotated only in the CTG clade of fungi. Here, we performed reciprocal co-immunoprecipitations of Myc-tagged Nri1 and Nri2 followed by LC-MS/MS to validate these interactions. For each condition, biological duplicates were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight culture of wild-type and N¬RI1-MYC/NRI1-MYC and NRI2-MYC/NRI2-MYC strains were adjusted to 0.2 OD in YPD. Approximately 2 X 109 mid-log-phase cells were harvested. The frozen cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM magnesium chloride, 250 mM sodium chloride, 0.1% Triton X-100 and freshly prepared protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and lysed by bead-beating for 10 cycles of 30 seconds with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were precleared using Protein G-conjugated Dynabeads (Invitrogen, 10003D). Anti-Myc antibody (9E10, mouse monoclonal) was added to the lysate at a final concentration of 10 µg/ml and incubated at 4°C with rotation. After 2 hours, Protein G-coupled Dynabeads were added and further incubated for 2 hours at 4°C. The beads were once washed using lysis buffer followed by four washes with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM magnesium chloride, 200 mM sodium chloride) at 4°C. Acidic elution with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5 was performed at room temperature and the eluate was neutralized with 1 M Tris pH 8. The eluted proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and cysteine-alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) before overnight digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega). The mixture was acidified with formic acid to inactivate trypsin and desalted using ziptips packed with C18 resin (Agilent Technologies). Trypsin-digested samples were dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in Mass Spectrometry Sample Loading Buffer (0.1% formic acid spiked with 10 pmole iRT (indexed retention time) peptides, Biognosys) for LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were separated on Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) by injecting 6 µl sample onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm wide, 50 cm long, nanoViper C18 with 2 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size ( Thermo Fischer Scientific)) using a 158 min in-house gradient protocol. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode on a QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected in-line to the LC system. Up to twelve most abundant precursor ions were isolated from a survey scan of 375–1600 m/z at 70,000 resolution for fragmentation in an HCD (High energy Collisional Dissociation) cell. MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 17,500 with a scan range of 200-2000 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 15 s to minimize repeated selection of precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were searched against the C. albicans proteome database downloaded from UniProt (May 2017 with 6040 entries) and appended with the iRT peptide sequences. Byonic (v3.1.0, Protein Metrics) was used to search the database with the following parameters: digestion by C-terminal cutter (trypsin) with maximum 2 missed cleavages per peptide, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and, oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 and 20 ppm respectively, with HCD as the fragmentation type. Decoy-based false discovery rate of protein identification was set to 1%. Only proteins that have been exclusively identified in the Nri1 and Nri2 pulldown samples, but not in the controls (untagged and minus antibody samples), were deemed significant.  An excel file (Sample annotation.xls) has been included with annotation details of raw files used for the AP-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of gene expression programs is crucial for the survival of microbial pathogens in host environments and for their ability to cause disease. Here we investigated the epigenetic regulator RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) in the most prevalent human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Biochemical analysis showed that CaRSC comprises 13 subunits and contains two novel non-essential members, which we named Nri1 and Nri2 (Novel RSC Interactors) that are exclusive to the CTG clade of Saccharomycotina. Genetic analysis showed distinct essentiality of C. albicans RSC subunits compared to model fungal species suggesting functional and structural divergence of RSC functions in this fungal pathogen. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of a conditional mutant of the essential catalytic subunit gene STH1 demonstrated global roles of RSC in C. albicans biology, with the majority of growth-related processes affected, as well as mis-regulation of genes involved in morphotype switching, host-pathogen interaction and adaptive fitness. We further assessed the functions of non-essential CaRSC subunits, showing that the novel subunit Nri1 and the bromodomain subunit Rsc4 play roles in filamentation and stress responses; and also interacted at the genetic level to regulate cell viability. Consistent with these roles, Rsc4 is required for full virulence of C. albicans in the murine model of systemic infection. Taken together, our data builds the first comprehensive study of the composition and roles of RSC in C. albicans, showing both conserved and distinct features compared to model fungal systems. The study illuminates how C. albicans uses RSC-dependent transcriptional regulation to respond to environmental signals and drive survival fitness and virulence in mammals.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Ap-ms, Rsc, Nri2, Nri1

### Affiliations
IIT Bombay and Monash University
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India

### Submitter
Vinutha K B

### Lab Head
Dr Santanu Kumar Ghosh
Chromosome and Plasmid Segregation Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India


