### Accession
PXD022829

### Title
Diminazene aceturate (DIZE) stabilizes atherosclerotic plaques and attenuates hepatic steatosis in apolipoprotein E knockout mice by influencing macrophages polarization and taurine biosynthesis

### Description
Atherosclerosis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the Western countries. NAFLD is an important independent risk factor for the development of atherosclerosis. The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) with its two main opposing effectors: angiotensin II (Ang II) and Ang-(1-7) is widely recognized as a major regulator of cardiovascular function and body metabolic processes. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) by breaking-down Ang II forms Ang-(1-7) and thus favors Ang-(1-7) actions. Therefore, the aim of our study was to comprehensively evaluate the influence of prolonged treatment with ACE2 activator – diminazene aceturate (DIZE) on the development of atherosclerotic lesions and hepatic steatosis in apoE-/- mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). We have shown that DIZE at a dose of 30 mg/kg/day given orally for 16 weeks was able to stabilize atherosclerotic lesions and attenuate hepatic steatosis in apoE-/- mice fed an HFD. Such effects were associated with decreased total macrophages content and increased α-smooth muscle actin levels in atherosclerotic plaques. Moreover, DIZE changed polarization of macrophages towards increased amount of anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages in atherosclerotic lesions. Interestingly, the anti-steatotic action of DIZE in the liver was related to the elevated HDL in the plasma, decreased triglycerides levels and increased biosynthesis and concentration of taurine in liver of apoE-/- mice. However, the exact molecular mechanisms of both the anti-atherosclerotic and anti-steatotic actions of DIZE require further investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples from apoE-/- mice and apoE-/- mice treated with DIZE  (n=4 per group) were homogenized using a Tissue Lyser LT (Qiagen, Germany) and lysed in a buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, and 50 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, USA) at 96 °C for 10 min. Protein concentration was measured by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Seventy micrograms of protein content were digested using the multiple enzyme digestion filter aided by a sample preparation method (MED FASP)26,27 with two enzymes: endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. Next, samples were purified with C18 MacroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA) and prepared as recommended by the iTRAQ protocol (ABSciex, USA). Four samples from each group were labeled with iTRAQ reagents as follows: control - 113, 115, 117, 119; DIZE - 114, 116, 118, 121. Then labeled samples were combined, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany), and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in order to purify it with C18 MacroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Eluates were reconstituted in 0.2 ammonium formate, pH 10.0, and subject to fractionation under high pH conditions (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Peptides were eluted in 10 consecutive salt steps (15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 32.5%, 35%, and 50% acetonitrile in 0.05 M ammonium formate) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm column, Thermo Scientific Dionex, USA) and then injected on-line onto a PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm column (Thermo Scientific Dionex, USA). Peptides were separated over a 90 min 7%–55% B phase linear gradient (A phase: 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid; B phase: 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min by UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex, USA) and applied on-line to a Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA) dual-pressure ion-trap mass spectrometer. The nano-electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Scientific, USA) parameters consisted of ion spray voltage 1.7 kV and capillary temperature 250 °C.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were collected over a full scan mode (400–1500 Da) followed by one higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the five most intense ions from the preceding survey’s full scan under dynamic exclusion criteria. These spectra were analyzed by the X!Tandem (The Global Proteome Machine Organization) and Comet search algorithms and then validated with Peptide Prophet and iProphet under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software (Institute for Systems Biology, USA). Search parameters consisted of several aspects: (1) taxonomy: rat (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot); (2) enzyme: trypsin; (3) missed cleavage sites allowed: 2; (4) fixed modification: Methylthio(C); (5) variable modifications: methionine oxidation(M); (6) iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), iTRAQ8plex(Y); (7) parent mass error: 1.5 to + 3.0 Da; and (8) peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.7 Da. Quantitative information was extracted with Libra software under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. The peptide false discovery rate was estimated by Mayu (Trans-Proteomic Pipeline), and peptide identifications with false discovery rates < 1% were considered correct matches. DanteR software was used for statistical analysis of iTRAQ-labeled peptides 28. Briefly, data was log2 transformed and normalized using quantile regression. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed at a peptide level and the Benjamini & Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction was used to adjust p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the Western countries. The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) with its two main opposing effectors, i.e., angiotensin II (Ang II) and Ang-(1-7), is widely recognized as a major regulator of cardiovascular function and body metabolic processes. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) by breaking-down Ang II forms Ang-(1-7) and thus favors Ang-(1-7) actions. Therefore, the aim of our study was to comprehensively evaluate the influence of prolonged treatment with ACE2 activator, diminazene aceturate (DIZE) on the development of atherosclerotic lesions and hepatic steatosis in apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). We have shown that DIZE stabilized atherosclerotic lesions and attenuated hepatic steatosis in apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice fed an HFD. Such effects were associated with decreased total macrophages content and increased &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin levels in atherosclerotic plaques. Moreover, DIZE changed polarization of macrophages towards increased amount of anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages in the atherosclerotic lesions. Interestingly, the anti-steatotic action of DIZE in the liver was related to the elevated levels of HDL in the plasma, decreased levels of triglycerides, and increased biosynthesis and concentration of taurine in the liver of apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice. However, exact molecular mechanisms of both anti-atherosclerotic and anti-steatotic actions of DIZE require further investigations.

### Keywords
Dize, Ace2, Macrophages polarization, Fatty liver, Apoe-knockout mice, Atherosclerosis

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Aneta Stachowicz

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Olszanecki
Chair of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland


