### Accession
PXD009911

### Title
Soybean root LC-MSMS -  iTRAQ Proteomic Analysis of Continuously Cropped Soybean Root Inoculated With Funneliformis mosseae

### Description
Soybean (Glycine max) is susceptible to root rot when subjected to continuous cropping, and this disease can seriously diminish the crop yield. Herein, isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were employed for proteomic analysis of continuously cropped soybean inoculated with the arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungus Funneliformis mosseae. Differential expression of proteins in soybean roots was determined following 1 year of continuous cropping. A total of 131 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in F. mosseae-treated samples, of which 49 and 82 were up- and down-regulated, respectively. The DEPs were annotated with 117 Gene Ontology (GO) terms, with 48 involved in biological processes, 31 linked to molecular functions, and 39 associated with cell components. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis mapped the DEPs to 113 mainly metabolic pathways including oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and amino acid metabolism. Expression of glucan 1,3-beta-glucosidase, chalcone isomerase, calcium-dependent phospholipid binding and other defense-related proteins was up-regulated by F. mosseae, suggesting inoculation promotes the growth and development of soybean and increases disease resistance. The findings provide an experimental basis for further research on the molecular mechanisms of AM fungi in resolving problems associated with continuous soybean cropping.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were conducted using potted plants, and the production management model was the same as that used on land for growing field crops. Pots of the same size were placed around pots containing soybean plants to protect the line and reduce marginal effects. Treatment group T was inoculated with F. mosseae, but Control group C was not. Soil from soybean continuously cropped for 1 year was used in experiments. A 2 kg sample of air-dried soil was placed in each pot, and 50 g of selected bacterial agent was added and mixed in treatment group pots. Plants were seeded five per pot, and three plants were eventually kept. The experiment included 3*2 treatments, with three replicates for C and T groups per treatment.  Treated soybean plants were randomly selected, and debris on the surface of pots was removed. Roots were removed by digging the top 10-20 cm soil profile, and fibrous soybean roots were harvested and stored in 10 mL centrifuge tubes. Three biological replicates were included for each treatment, and samples were taken at 60 days after sowing.  Protein extraction    Protein extraction was performed using SDT lysis (Zhu et al., 2014), and the bicinchroninic acid (BCA) method was used for protein quantification. SDS-PAGE was performed to verify protein quality, and protein digestion was conducted according to the FASP procedure as previously described (Zhu et al., 2014).         iTRAQ markers and string cation exchange (SCX) chromatography    Peptides (100 μg) from each sample were labeled according to the instructions supplied with the iTRAQ Labeling Kit (AB SCIEX) (Relative et al., 2004). Labeled peptides from each group were mixed, and iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated using an AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare ) equipped with an SCX  column.         LC-MS/MS analysis    For nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, each peptide mixture was injected onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100; 100 μm ´ 2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to a C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column; 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) equilibrated in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled using IntelliFlow technology. A 1 h gradient was employed as follows: 0-35% buffer B for 50 min, 35-100% buffer B for 5 min, and holding in 100% buffer B for 5 min.         LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 60 min period in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using the data-dependent top10 method to dynamically choose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, the maximum injection time was 10 ms, and the dynamic exclusion duration was 40 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and the isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis    Raw MS data were analyzed as RAW files. Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. 2012) were used for identification and quantitative analysis. For protein quantitation, each protein was required to contain at least two unique peptides. Quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com). DEPs between F. mosseae-treated and control groups were only included if >1.2-fold or <0.833-fold, with p <0.05, and standard proteins were considered differentially expressed.         Bioinformatics analysis    Functional classification of DEPs was performed according to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analysis (http://www.geneontology.org). DEPs were classified into three categories, namely molecular function, biological process and cellular component. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG; http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) analysis was used to predict molecular function, biological processes and pathways associated with DEPs.         Firstly, normalization (to the [-1, 1] interval) of quantitative information for target proteins was conducted by cluster analysis. Secondly, Cluster 3.0 software was used to simultaneously classify the two dimensions of samples and protein expression (distance algorithm = Euclid, connection type = Average linkage). Finally, a hierarchical clustering heat map was generated using Java Treeview software.

### Publication Abstract
Soybean (<i>Glycine max</i>) is susceptible to root rot when subjected to continuous cropping, and this disease can seriously diminish the crop yield. Proteomics analyses can show the difference of protein expression in different treatment samples. Herein, isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were employed for proteomic analysis of continuously cropped soybean inoculated with the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus (AMF) <i>Funneliformis mosseae</i>. The AMF can reduce the incidence of root rot and increase plant height, biomass index in 1, 2, and 4 year of continuous cropping. Differential expression of proteins in soybean roots was determined following 1 year of continuous cropping. A total of 131 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in <i>F. mosseae</i>-treated samples, of which 49 and 82 were up- and down-regulated, respectively. The DEPs were annotated with 117 gene ontology (GO) terms, with 48 involved in biological processes, 31 linked to molecular functions, and 39 associated with cell components. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis mapped the DEPs to 113 mainly metabolic pathways including oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, and amino acid metabolism. Expression of glucan 1,3-beta-glucosidase, chalcone isomerase, calcium-dependent phospholipid binding and other defense-related proteins was up-regulated by <i>F. mosseae</i>, suggesting inoculation promotes the growth and development of soybean and increases disease resistance. The findings provide an experimental basis for further research on the molecular mechanisms of AMF in resolving problems associated with continuous soybean cropping.

### Keywords
Soybean root, Itraq proteomic analysis; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
College of Life sciences, Heilongjiang University/Heilongjiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Ecological Restoration and Resource Utilization for Cold Region, China
Heilongjiang University

### Submitter
baiyan Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Baiyan Cai
College of Life sciences, Heilongjiang University/Heilongjiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Ecological Restoration and Resource Utilization for Cold Region, China


