### Accession
PXD001500

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Hematopoietic Stem Cells during acute inflammation

### Description
Infections are associated with extensive consumption of blood platelets representing a high risk for health. How the hematopoietic system coordinates the rapid and efficient regeneration of this particular lineage during such stress scenarios remains unclear. Here we report that the phenotypic hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) compartment contains highly potent megakaryocyte-committed progenitors (hipMkPs), a cell population that shares many features with multipotent HSCs and serves as a lineage-restricted emergency pool for inflammatory insults. Our data show that during homeostasis, hipMkPs are maintained in a primed but quiescent state, thus contributing little to steady-state megakaryopoiesis. Moreover, homeostatic hipMkPs show expression of megakaryocyte lineage priming transcripts  for which  protein synthesis is suppressed. We demonstrate that acute inflammatory signaling instructs activation of hipMkPs, as well as Mk protein production from pre-existing transcripts and drives a rapid maturation of hipMkPs and other Mk progenitors. This results in an efficient regeneration of platelets that are lost during inflammatory insult. Thus, our study reveals an elegant emergency machinery that counteracts life-threating depletions in the platelet pool during acute inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis. Lin-cKit+CD150+CD48- HSCs and Lin-cKit+CD150+CD48+ progenitors were FACS-sorted from wildtype and IFNAR-/- mice 16 hours after PBS or pI:C treatment and subjected to quantitative proteome analaysis in three  (wt) and two (IFNAR-/-) biological replicates.  Cell pellets corresponding to 4.5x105 cells were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then heated at 90 ºC for 5 minutes, followed by sonication for 20 minutes and removal of cell debris by centrifugation. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 ºC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, followed by protein digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 ºC overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.2% (v/v), and RapiGest was precipitated by further incubation at 37 ºC for 45 minutes. Following centrifugation supernatants were collected and protein digests were stored at -20 ºC until further use. Peptides of PBS- and pI:C condition were differentially labeled with stable isotope dimethyl labeling on column as previously described with slight modifications (Boersema, Raijmakers et al. 2009). Briefly, SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) were washed with ACN and conditioned with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Acidified samples were loaded and washed with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were labeled by flushing the columns with labeling reagent (‘light’ or ‘heavy’ using CH2O (Fisher) + NaBH3CN (Fluka) or CD2O (Isotec) + NaBH3CN, respectively). After washing with 0.1% formic acid, labeled peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) ACN/0.05% (v/v) formic acid. In a second (wt and IFNaRKO) and third (wt) biological replicate experiment, cell population reagents were swapped once, and the ‘light’ and ‘heavy’ labeled samples were mixed in 1:1 ratio based on total peptide amount. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in IPG rehydration buffer and fractionated according to manufacturer’s instructions using pH 3-10 IPG strips and 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent). The 12 fractions resolved were acidified and desalted with C18 Stagetips (Empore 3M) (Rappsilber, Mann et al. 2007). Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 ºC until further use. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. In technical duplicates, peptides were separated using the nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm particle size, 180 µm inner diameter x 20 mm length) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm particle size, 75µm inner diameter x 200 mm length). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Proxeon nanospray source. The mobile phases for LC separation were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN (solvent B). Peptides were first loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 15 µl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 2 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 7% in 10 minutes, then increased to 25% in 100 minutes and finally to 40% in a further 10 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 230 °C. Full scan spectra from m/z 300 to 1700 at resolution 30,000 FWHM (profile mode) were acquired in the Orbitrap MS. The filling time was set at maximum of 500 ms with limitation of 106 ions. From each full-scan spectra, the 15 ions with the highest relative intensity were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. Normalized collision energy of 40% was used, and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3 x 104 ions or after filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data was acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ and 3+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries with maximum retention period of 30 s and relative mass window of 7 ppm. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The derived peak list was searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine (version 1.2.2.5) in MaxQuant against the Uniprot mouse database (2011.06.21) containing 53,623 proteins to which 248 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries had been added. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search, and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ion masses. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acid residues and three labeled amino acid residues were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required at both the protein level and the peptide level. In addition to the FDR threshold, proteins were considered identified if they had at least one unique peptide. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. The ‘match between runs’ was enabled for consecutive peptide fractions with a 2 minutes time window. The iBAQ algorithm was used for estimation of the abundance of different proteins within a single sample (proteome) (Schwanhausser et al. 2011). For evaluation of differential protein expression between PBS and pI:C, statistical analysis was performed for the proteins quantified in at least two replicates using the Limma package in R/Bioconductor (Gentleman, Carey et al. 2004; Smyth 2004). After fitting a linear model to the data, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used for the protein ratios. P-values were then adjusted for multiple testing with Benjamini and Hochberg's method and proteins with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed between PBS and pI:C.

### Publication Abstract
Infections are associated with extensive platelet consumption, representing a high risk for health. However, the mechanism coordinating the rapid regeneration of the platelet pool during such stress conditions remains unclear. Here, we report that the phenotypic hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) compartment contains stem-like megakaryocyte-committed progenitors (SL-MkPs), a cell population that shares many features with multipotent HSCs and serves as a lineage-restricted emergency pool for inflammatory insults. During homeostasis, SL-MkPs are maintained in a primed but quiescent state, thus contributing little to steady-state megakaryopoiesis. Even though lineage-specific megakaryocyte transcripts are expressed, protein synthesis is suppressed. In response to acute inflammation, SL-MkPs become activated, resulting in megakaryocyte protein production from pre-existing transcripts and a maturation of SL-MkPs and other megakaryocyte progenitors. This results in an efficient replenishment of platelets that are lost during inflammatory insult. Thus, our study reveals an emergency machinery that counteracts life-threatening platelet depletions during acute inflammation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Hematopoietic stem cells

### Affiliations
Genome Biology Unit, EMBL Heidelberg
Lund University

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Genome Biology Unit, EMBL Heidelberg


