### Accession
PXD028094

### Title
Drosophila Schneider S2 cell TFIIA-L Immunoprecipitation

### Description
In order to identify interaction partner of the Drosophila melanogaster TFIIA protein, we have immunoprecipitated an endogenously 3xFLAG-AID tagged TFIIA-L from Drosophila Schneider S2 cells

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei were isolated from 3 billion S2 cells containing an endogenously tagged 3xFLAG-AID-TFIIA-L. Nuclei were lysed and sonicated. Soluble proteins were used for an immunoprecipitation using M2 FLAG antibody beads (Thermo). Proteins were digested off the beads using LyC and trypsin. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 380-1200, resolution 60,000, target value 3E6) at 2 different CVs (-50, -70), followed each by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 30, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 45.000, the target value of 1E5 and intensity threshold of 2E4 and fixed first mass of m/z=120. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2-5) were excluded for 30 s. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). RAW-files were searched in 2 steps: First, against the drosophila database called dmel-all-translation-r6.34.fasta (Flybase.org, 22,226 sequences; 20,310,919 residues), or against an earlier version dmel-all-translation-r6.17.fasta ( 21,994 sequences; 20,118,942 residues) / a small custom drosophila database called Leonid_proteins-of-interest_plus-DNA-binder_small-db.fasta (107 sequences; 61,976 residues), each case supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm (HF-X) or to ±6 ppm (Exploris). The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic specificity with no proline restriction. Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level and was used to generate a smaller sub-database for further processing. As a second step, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus the following search parameters: Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. In some data sets acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitinylation residue on lysine, biotinylation on lysine, formylation on lysine were set as additional variable modifications. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Peptide areas were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2019, 18(1):535-541). Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth, G. K. (2004). Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Volume 3, Article 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tfiia, Ip-ms, Drosophila

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Stark
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria


