### Accession
PXD023634

### Title
Rapid immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins on chromatin (RIME) analysis of androgen receptor and 14-3-3 ζ in PIM1 over-expressing LNCaP cells

### Description
14-3-3 ζ is an androgen receptor (AR) co-activator. To further understand how 14-3-3 ζ may be modulating AR activity, we performed rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins for analysis of chromatin complexes (RIME) on AR and 14-3-3 ζ in LNCaP prostate cancer cells in the presence of PIM1. This enabled us to observe what other proteins associate with both 14-3-3 ζ and AR on chromatin. Notably, several of the proteins we identified as associated with both AR and 14-3-3 ζ are known AR co-regulators. We hypothesized that to co-regulate AR, 14-3-3 ζ may be recruiting or altering interactions between AR and AR co-regulators.

### Sample Protocol
Based on published protocol (Mohammed et al., 2016), beads with antibody-bound proteins were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10 ng/μl trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) followed by overnight incubation at 37°C with vigorous shaking in thermomixer (Eppendorf). After digestion, beads were pelleted and supernatants containing peptides were transferred to new tubes. After mixing with 5 μl 20% heptafluorobutyric acid, peptides were desalted using C18 spin tips according to manufacturer protocol (Thermo Scientific). Desalted and dried peptides were reconstituted in 12 μl 0.1% formic acid. Peptides concentration was measured spectrophotometrically at 205 nm using NanoDrop One (Thermo Scientific). 0.5-2 μg of peptides from individual samples were analyzed by LC-MS on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. Peptides were resolved on 50-cm long EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) by 90-min long linear gradient of 4-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acids at flowrate 0.25 μl/min. Method for data-dependent acquisition was based on published CHOPIN protocol (Davis et al., 2017) with exception of each cycle was set to last for 2 s instead of 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identification and label-free quantitation was done in MaxQuant 1.6. Protein database included whole proteome of Homo sapiens and Escherichia coli, immunoglobulin G binding proteins A and G, list of known protein contaminants. Peptides were set to have up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages, dynamic modifications were set to include: oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus and carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Intensity determination option in MaxQuant was set to “Total sum” and “Match between runs” option was enabled. All the other parameters were left at their defaults.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Androgen receptor, Pim1, Protein interactions, Prostate cancer, 14-3-3 ζ

### Affiliations
Julie Wilson Anderson Professor of Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, US
NYU School of Medicine

### Submitter
Nikita Vasilyev

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Nudler
Julie Wilson Anderson Professor of Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, US


