### Accession
PXD009920

### Title
Activity-dependent degradation of the nascentome by the neuronal membrane proteosome

### Description
Activity-dependent changes in neuronal function require coordinated regulation of the protein synthesis and protein degradation machinery to maintain protein homeostasis, critical to proper neuronal function. However, the biochemical evidence for this balance and coordination remains poorly understood and largely underexplored. Leveraging our recent discovery of a neuronal-specific 20S membrane proteasome complex (NMP), we began exploring how neuronal activity regulates its function. Remarkably, we observed polypeptides being synthesized during neuronal stimulation were rapidly turned over by the NMP. This turnover correlated with enhanced production of NMP-derived peptides in the extracellular space. Using parameters determined in these experiments, we constructed Markov process chain models in silico which predicted that the kinetics of this process necessitate coordination of translation and degradation. In a series of biochemical analyses, this predicted coordination was instantiated by NMP-mediated and ubiquitin-independent degradation of ribosome-associated nascent polypeptides. Using in-depth, global, and unbiased mass spectrometry, we identified the nascent protein substrates of the NMP. Among these substrates, we found that immediate-early gene products c-Fos and Npas4 were targeted to the NMP during ongoing activity-dependent protein synthesis, prior to activity-induced transcriptional responses. We propose that these findings generally define an activity-dependent protein homeostasis program through the NMP that selectively targets nascent polypeptides prior to adopting their final functional conformations.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed by adding in 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysates were sonicated with 35% amplitude for 1 min. Protein lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4 °C to exclude cell debris (pelleting at the bottom), and protein concentration was estimated using a SDS-PAGE method. Briefly, protein lysate was loaded with BSA standard ranging from 0.33 μg to 9 μg on a 3-12% NuPAGE gradient gel and separated for about 0.5 cm. The gel was stained with Colloidal Coomassie G-250 followed by destaining with water. The band intensities were measured by ImageJ software.  A total of 200 µg of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for one hour and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. The protein samples were digested using endoproteinase LysC (Wako, 1:100 ratio of enzyme to protein) at 37 °C for 3 hours followed by sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, 1:50 ratio of enzyme to protein) at 37 °C overnight. After the digestion, the peptide samples were subjected to desalting and labeling with 10-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the 9/10 channels (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C) were used for labeling. The labeling reaction was performed for one hour at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The digested and labeled peptides from all 9 channels were pooled.  The peptides were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) into 96 fractions, followed by concatenation into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fractions. Briefly, Agilent 1260 offline LC system was used for bRPLC fractionation, which includes a binary pump, VWD detector, an autosampler, and an automatic fraction collector. In brief, lyophilized samples were reconstituted in solvent A (10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and loaded onto XBridge C18, 5 μm 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were resolved using a gradient of 3 to 50% solvent B (10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate in acetonitrile, pH 8.5) at a flow rate of 1 ml per min over 50 min collecting 96 fractions. Subsequently, the fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions followed by vacuum drying using SpeedVac. The dried peptides were suspended in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the UltiMateTM RSLCnano nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded on a Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 5 μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 5 μl per minute. Peptides were resolved at 250-nl/min flow rate using a linear gradient of 10% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 µm C18 particles, which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV.  Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data-dependent manner with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 350 to 1550 in the “Top Speed” setting, three seconds per cycle. MS1 and MS2 were acquired for the precursor ion detection and peptide fragmentation ion detection, respectively. MS1 scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. MS2 scan were acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000, at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control for MS1 was set to one million ions and for MS2 was set to 0.05 million ions. A maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. MS1 was acquired in profile mode and MS2 was acquired in centroid mode. Higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to 35 for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.  Data analysis Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During the preprocessing of MS/MS spectra, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against mouse RefSeq protein database (version 84) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1 % false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively.  The protein quantification was performed with following parameters and methods. The most confident centroid option was used for the integration mode while the reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The MS order was set to MS2 and the activation type was set to HCD. Unique and razor peptides both were used for peptide quantification while protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on signal-to-noise ratio and the missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. The quantification value corrections for isobaric tags and data normalization were disabled while the co-isolation threshold was set to 50%. The highest signal-to-noise ratio value from PSMs for a peptide was used to generate a peptide level abundance followed by averaging peptide level signal-to-noise ratio values for a protein to generate a protein level abundance. Protein grouping was performed with strict parsimony principle to generate the final protein groups. All proteins sharing the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped while protein groups with no unique peptides were filtered out. The Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected PSM with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-dependent changes in neuronal function require coordinated regulation of the protein synthesis and protein degradation machinery to maintain protein homeostasis, critical for proper neuronal function. However, the biochemical evidence for this balance and coordination is largely lacking. Leveraging our recent discovery of a neuronal-specific 20S membrane proteasome complex (NMP), we began exploring how neuronal activity regulates its function. Here, we found that the NMP degrades exclusively a large fraction of ribosome-associated nascent polypeptides that are being newly synthesized during neuronal stimulation. Using deep-coverage and global mass spectrometry, we identified the nascent protein substrates of the NMP, which included products encoding immediate-early genes, such as c-Fos and Npas4. Intriguingly, we found that turnover of nascent polypeptides and not full-length proteins through the NMP occurred independent of canonical ubiquitylation pathways. We propose that these findings generally define a neuronal activity-induced protein homeostasis program of coordinated protein synthesis and degradation through the NMP.

### Keywords
Degradation, Neuronal-specific 20s membrane proteosome complex, Translation, Nascentome

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Department of Biological Chemistry  Woods Basic Science Building Room 517 725 N. Wolfe St. Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Seth Margolis
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Department of Biological Chemistry  Woods Basic Science Building Room 517 725 N. Wolfe St. Baltimore, MD 21205, USA


