### Accession
PXD021239

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of actin-rich protrusions and cell-bodies in migratory cells

### Description
This upload concerns 2 independent but related experiments that were searched together:   a) To reveal proteins that consistently localise to actin-rich protrusions across different human migratory cell-lines, we profiled the distribution of cellular proteins between protrusions and cell-bodies in a panel of 5 established human cell-lines (see experimental design). Cell lines were seeded on top of collagen-I coated 3 micron transwell filters (corning). No media was added to the bottom chamber and cells were allowed to adhere to the filter overnight. The next day, the media on top of the cells was refreshed, and media was also added to the bottom chamber in order to open the pores and allow formation of protrusions. Cells were allowed to form protrusions for 2 hrs before being  fixed with ice-cold methanol. Cells were then rehydrated in PBS, followed by independent lysis of protrusions and cell-bodies on opposite sides of the filters in 2% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 7.5    b) To analyse the temporal dynamics of protein localisation to cell protrusions, we carried out a time-course spatial proteomics analysis of protrusions and cell-bodies in MDA-MB231 cells. Cells were seeded on top of collagen-I coated 3 micron transwell filters (corning). No media was added to the bottom chamber and cells were allowed to adhere to filter overnight. The next day, the media on top of cells was refreshed, and the filters were either left with no media in the bottom chamber (closed pores), or media  added to the bottom chamber (open pores) for different lengths of times (1, 2, 4 , & 8 hrs) to induce protrusion formation.  Cells were then  fixed with ice-cold methanol, rehydrated in PBS, followed by independent lysis of protrusions and cell-bodies on opposite sides of each filter by 2% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 7.5.

### Sample Protocol
Isobraric Filter Aided Sample Preparation (iFASP) (McDowell et al., 2017) was performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before, with some modifications. Briefly, from each sample, 25 micrograms of total protein were first reduced with 50 mM Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (ThermoFisher) at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Reduced samples were then diluted 7 fold in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer), transferred to Vivacon 500 filter, and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min. Samples were washed twice by addition of 400 micolitres of UA buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Iodoacetamide was then removed by centrifugation and samples were further washed by UA buffer as before for three times, followed by three washes with 100 mM Dissolution Buffer TEAB to reduce the urea concentration. Trypsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin (1:100 w/w) in TEAB buffer to the filter tops and overnight incubation at 37 degrees C. Each sample was then incubated with 0.2 micrograms of TMT labelling reagent at 25°C for 1 h in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer, and quenched with 5% hydroxylamine at 25°C for 30 min in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer. Subsequently, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g, and the elution was repeated three times following addition of TEAB buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation. A final elution was carried out with 30% acetonitrile and eulates were then combined. Differentially TMT labelled peptides were then mixed together dried with a vacuum concentrator, before being fractionated via Pierce™ basic pH reverse-phase fractionation kit into 7 fractions. Each fraction was dried again with vacuum centrifugation before resuspending in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1 µg of each TMT labelled peptide mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 35,000 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) software was used for database search and isobaric quantifications (see mqpar.xml file for Maxquant setting details). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). Please note that in addition to the two experiments described here, two additional experiments were also searched together with these runs, but these are not included as part of this upload (see the READ ME file accompanying this upload).   All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1), using the corrected reporter ion intensity values from the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protrusion; cell-body; spatial proteomics; tmt; mesenchymal-like migration; orbitrap

### Affiliations
qmul
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology,  Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology,  Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London,  Charterhouse square,  London EC1M 6BQ,  The United Kingdom.


