### Accession
PXD040038

### Title
High throughput plasma proteomics profiling reveals metabolic and immunologic differences between anorexia nervosa subtypes

### Description
Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a severe psychiatric disorder of an unknown aetiology with a mortality rate of 5% per year, making it one of the most deadly of all psychiatric illnesses. Despite extensive research efforts in recent years, the underlying pathophysiology of AN remains poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to identify novel protein biomarkers for AN by performing a proteomics analysis of plasma samples from 77 females with AN  (56  restrictive and 21 binge-purge type) and 70 healthy controls. Using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics technology in conjunction with  an advanced bioinformatics pipeline, we quantify more than 500 plasma proteins. Our differential expression analysis and correlation of proteomics data with clinical parameters led to identification of a panel of novel protein biomarkers with potential pathophysiological significance for AN. Our findings demonstrate evidence of  a humoral immune system response, altered lipid metabolism and potential dysregulation of plasma cells in AN patients. Additionally, we stratified AN patients based on the quantified proteins and suggest  potential auto-immune nature of disease in restrictive subtype. In summary, this study provides a comprehensive map of plasma proteins that may have utility in further understanding the pathophysiology of AN.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, 1 uL blood plasma was boiled (10 min, 99 oC) in 100 uL of 100 mM Tris buffer pH 8.5 (SigmaAldrich, 10708976001) to denature proteins. Approximately 80 ug of protein were digested with 1:250 enzyme-to-protein ratio of Lys-C (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1h at pH 1.5, 37°C, followed by an overnight digestion with 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio of Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), at pH 1.5, 37°C. Digestion reaction was quenched by 1:10 acidification with 10% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich, T6508-500ML). All samples were spun down for 5 min at 17000×g and peptide concentration was determined with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo, Wilmington, DE, USA), followed by loading ~ 500 ng of material on Evosep C18 cartridges (Evotips) (Evosep  Biosystems,  Denmark). Evotips were washed with 35% ACN and peptides were loaded directly on the Evosep One 37 LC system (Evosep  Biosystems,  Denmark)  for further separation and analysis.

### Data Protocol
BoxCar/DIA raw data were analysed with Spectronaut v15 using an in-house generated spectra library of human plasma containing 15 790 peptides and 2 212 protein groups (reviewed Homo sapiens UniProt/Swiss-Prot+TReMBL proteome (proteome ID: UP000005640) with 96 464 entries (canonical fasta only), downloaded 2021-06-25).  The  default  settings  were used  unless  otherwise  noted.  Data  filtering  was  set  to “Qvalue”. False  discovery  rate  (FDR) was  set  to  1% at peptide  precursor  level and  1% at protein level. The downstream data analysis was performed using an in-house developed R script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Anorexia nervosa

### Affiliations
Assoc. Prof. at Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Diana Samodova-Sommer

### Lab Head
Dr Atul Shahaji Deshmukh
Assoc. Prof. at Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


