### Accession
PXD030887

### Title
Omics-characterization of tebufenpyrad effects on human primary hepatocytes

### Description
The biological effects of the pesticide and complex I inhibitor tebufenpyrad (TEBU) on liver cells were investigated by proteomic approaches. Cellular contents and culture media were analyzed in dose-response experiments on human primary hepatocytes (PHHs).

### Sample Protocol
For PHHs, TEBU was incubated in triplicates at 2 µM in medium supplemented with DMSO 1%. A solvent control containing 1% DMSO without TEBU was also performed in triplicates. Cells were treated during 24 hours at 37°C. Media were collected and frozen to -80°C until further analysis by proteomics. Cells were washed 2 times in 0.9% NaCl and lysed in 100 µL of lysis buffer (Pierce IP lysis buffer, Thermo Scientific) composed of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% dNP-40 and 5% glycerol and supplemented in 50mM NaF, 0.1 M sodium orthovanadate (both from Sigma Aldrich) and protease inhibitors (Complete mini EDTA-free, Roche Life Sciences). After a centrifugation of 10 min at 15.000g, the supernatants (protein lysates) were kept at -80°C for proteomic experiments. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific). Protein extracts (100 µg for cells extracts and equivalent to 500 µL of medium for secretome analyses) were precipitated with acetone at -20°C. Protein pellets were resuspended in a denaturant buffer composed of 7M Urea and 25mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP during 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide during 20 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted 4 times in 25mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were digested by trypsin (12,5 µg/mL, Thermo Scientific) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Resulting peptides were purified and desalted using Pierce C18 tips (100 µL bed, Thermo Scientific). Solvent was evaporated by a nitrogen evaporator and samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.6.17). The precursor ions mass tolerance was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm for respectively first and main searches. A fragment tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. The following modifications were used in variable modifications: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), acetylation (protein N-term) and carbamidomethylation (C) in fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was limited to two. MS/MS data were analysed with extracted databases (2021) from Uniprot with the Homo sapiens taxonomy. Peptide and protein identifications were validated by using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01. Peptides and proteins abundance variations were measured by using the fast LFQ algorithm with a minimal ratio count of 2, a classic data normalization and the match between run option. Unmodified unique and razor peptides were used for each protein quantification. Statistical analyses of proteomic experiments were done by Perseus (version 1.6.15) software. Proteins were set if 1 to 3 abundances valid values were reported. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a down shift parameter of 1.8. Protein global abundances variations were validated if corresponding calculated Anova p-values were below 0.05. For each comparisons of two experimental conditions, a Student t-test was applied. For each tests, a permutation-based FDR threshold and a number of randomizations were set to respectively 0.05 and 250.

### Publication Abstract
The biological effects of the pesticide and mitochondrial complex I inhibitor tebufenpyrad (TEBU) on liver cells were investigated by combining proteomics and metabolomics. Both cell culture media and cellular lysates were analyzed in dose-response and kinetic experiments on the HepaRG cell line. Responses were compared with those obtained on primary human and rat hepatocytes. A multitude of phase I and II metabolites (&gt;80) mainly common to HepaRG cells and primary hepatocytes and an increase in metabolization enzymes were observed. Synthesis of mitochondrion and oxidative phosphorylation complex constituents, fatty acid oxidation, and cellular uptake of lipids were induced to compensate for complex I inhibition and the decrease in ATP intracellular contents caused by TEBU. Secretion of the 20&#xa0;S circulating proteasome and overall inhibition of acute inflammation followed by IL-6 secretion in later stages were observed in HepaRG cells. These effects were associated with a decrease in STAT1 and STAT3 transcription factor abundances, but with different kinetics. Based on identified TEBU targets, docking experiments, and nuclear receptor reporter assays, we concluded that liver cell response to TEBU is mediated by its interaction with the PPAR&#x3b3; transcription factor.

### Keywords
Toxicology, Pesticide, Liver, Primary hepatocytes, Proteomics, Secretome, Metabolism, Tebufenpyrad

### Affiliations
French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety (ANSES)
Toxicology of Contaminants Unit, Fougères Laboratory, French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety (ANSES), 35306 Fougères CEDEX, France.

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Valerie Fessard
Toxicology of Contaminants Unit, Fougères Laboratory, French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety (ANSES), 35306 Fougères CEDEX, France.


