### Accession
PXD041749

### Title
UBR5 Forms Ligand-Dependent Complexes on Chromatin to Regulate Nuclear Hormone Receptor Stability

### Description
Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are ligand-binding transcription factors that are widely targeted therapeutically. Hormone binding triggers NR activation and their subsequent proteasomal degradation through unknown ligand-dependent ubiquitin ligase machinery. NR degradation is therapeutically relevant. Efficacy of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia requires degradation of the oncogenic fusion between the Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein (PML) with the Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA). Here we use CRISPR-based screens to identify the HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase UBR5 as a ligase for PML-RARA and RARA and observe an agonist-dependent association between RARA and UBR5, which occurs directly on chromatin to regulate transcription. We present the cryo-EM structure of full-length human UBR5 and identify a Leu-X-X-Leu-Leu (LxxLL) binding motif that associates with a conserved degron in RARA. A high-resolution crystal structure of the RARA ligand binding domain in complex with this LxxLL motif shows how UBR5 binding is mutually exclusive with nuclear co-activator engagement. We demonstrate that UBR5 utilizes this conserved degron to additionally regulate hormone dependent protein stability for the glucocorticoid, progesterone, and vitamin D receptors. Our work establishes UBR5-driven NR degradation as an integral regulator of transcriptional signaling by nuclear hormones.

### Sample Protocol
For IP-MS experiments, immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed as described above. After the washing step, samples were eluted using Glycine-HCl buffer (0.2 M, pH 2.4) and re-buffered to pH 8. The IP eluates were reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 min at room temperature, and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT. Proteins were isolated by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The protein pellets were dried and then resuspended in 50 μL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. The resuspended protein samples were digested with 2 μg LysC overnight at room temperature followed by the addition of 0.5 μg Trypsin for 6 h at 37°C. Protein digests were dried, resuspended in 100 μL 1% formic acid, and desalted using 10-layer C18 stage-tips before being analyzed by LC-MS. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled with a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Peptides were separated on an Aurora 25 cm x 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (IonOpticks), and using a 60 min linear gradient of 5 - 25% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Each analysis used a TopN data-dependent method. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 350 – 1200, resolution 60,000, AGC target 3 × 106, auto maximum injection time, dynamic exclusion of 15 sec, and charge states of 2-6. TopN 20 data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired with a scan range starting at m/z 110, resolution 15,000, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 30%, AGC target 1 x 105 and the automatic maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (January 2021) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). Peptides were quantified using the MS1 Intensity, and peptide abundance values were summed to yield the protein abundance values. Resulting data was filtered to only include proteins that had a minimum of 2 abundance counts in at least two runs. Abundances were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework. Missing values in the dataset were imputed by random selection from a gaussian distribution centered around the mean of the existing data and with the mean relative standard deviation of the dataset. Significant changes comparing the relative protein abundance between samples were assessed by moderated t test as implemented in the limma package within the R framework.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are ligand-binding transcription factors that are widely targeted therapeutically. Agonist binding triggers NR activation and subsequent degradation by unknown ligand-dependent ubiquitin ligase machinery. NR degradation is critical for therapeutic efficacy in malignancies that are driven by retinoic acid and estrogen receptors. Here, we demonstrate the ubiquitin ligase UBR5 drives degradation of multiple agonist-bound NRs, including the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA), retinoid x receptor alpha (RXRA), glucocorticoid, estrogen, liver-X, progesterone, and vitamin D receptors. We present the high-resolution cryo-EMstructure of full-length human UBR5 and a negative stain model representing its interaction with RARA/RXRA. Agonist ligands induce sequential, mutually exclusive recruitment of nuclear coactivators (NCOAs) and UBR5 to chromatin to regulate transcriptional networks. Other pharmacological ligands such as selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) degrade their receptors through differential recruitment of UBR5 or RNF111. We establish the UBR5 transcriptional regulatory hub as a common mediator and regulator of NR-induced transcription.

### Keywords
Degradation, Chromatin, Ubr5, Hormones, Nuclear receptors

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


