### Accession
PXD021970

### Title
Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium falciparum LC-MS/MS

### Description
Previously published data indicated that PgCHT2 forms a high molecular weight (HMW), reduction-sensitive complex; data suggested that the binding partner is the ookinete-produced von Willebrand A-domain-containing protein, WARP. To test the hypothesis that transgenic P.berghei ookinete-produced PfCHT1 could form a high molecular homo-multimer or, alternatively, could interact with P. berghei ookinete-produced proteins to produce a HMW hetero-multimer, we created a chimeric P. berghei parasites expressing PfCHT1 to replace PbCHT1, allowing production of large numbers of PfCHT1-expressing ookinetes.Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on the chitin affinity pulled down proteins from the Pb-PfCHT1(r) ookinete culture supernatant.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was washed four times; first with 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1%TFA and then with 5% acetic acid, then with 50% H2O/50% acetonitrile followed by 50% CH3CN/ 50 mM NH4HCO3. A final wash with 50% CH3CN/10 mM NH4HCO3  was given and gel pieces were completely dryed prior to removal of wash solution. The trypsin digestion was carried out by incubating the sample at 37 ºC for 18 hours.  Sample is then stored at -20 ºC until analysis. (Debashis Ghosh et al, 2019; Biochem J (2019) 476 (21): 3313–3331).

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur “.raw” acquired data was processed through Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for MS and MS/MS peak picking; and the generated “.mgf” (Mascot generic file) was utilized for the database searching.  The “.mgf” files were searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm (Hirosawa et al, 1993, version 2.2.0) for un-interpreted MS/MS spectra.  Using the Mascot database search algorithm, proteins were considered identified when Mascot lists it as significant and more than 2 unique peptides match the same protein.  The Mascot significance score match is based on a MOWSE score and relies on multiple matches to more than one peptide from the same protein.Protein search results from MASCOT were upload to Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc.) for results dissemination and visualization. (Hirosawa et al, 1993, version 2.2.0)

### Publication Abstract
Malaria parasites are transmitted by&#xa0;<i>Anopheles</i>&#xa0;mosquitoes. During its life cycle in the mosquito vector the <i>Plasmodium</i> ookinete escapes the proteolytic milieu of the post-blood meal midgut by traversing the midgut wall. This process requires penetration of the chitin-containing peritrophic matrix lining the midgut epithelium, which depends in part on ookinete-secreted chitinases. <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> ookinetes have one chitinase (PfCHT1), whereas ookinetes of the avian-infecting parasite, <i>P. gallinaceum</i>, have two, a long and a short form, PgCHT1 and PgCHT2, respectively. Published data indicates that PgCHT2 forms a high molecular weight (HMW) reduction-sensitive complex; and one binding partner is the ookinete-produced von Willebrand A-domain-containing protein, WARP. Size exclusion chromatography data reported here show that <i>P. gallinaceum</i> PgCHT2 and its ortholog, <i>P. falciparum</i> PfCHT1 are covalently-linked components of a HMW chitinase-containing complex (&gt; 1,300 kDa). Mass spectrometry of ookinete-secreted proteins isolated using a new chitin bead pull-down method identified chitinase-associated proteins in <i>P. falciparum</i> and <i>P. gallinaceum</i> ookinete-conditioned culture media. Mass spectrometry of this complex showed the presence of several micronemal proteins including von Willebrand factor A domain-related protein (WARP), ookinete surface enolase, and secreted ookinete adhesive protein (SOAP). To test the hypothesis that ookinete-produced PfCHT1 can form a high molecular homo-multimer or, alternatively, interacts with <i>P. berghei</i> ookinete-produced proteins to produce an HMW hetero-multimer, we created chimeric <i>P. berghei</i> parasites expressing <i>PfCHT1</i> to replace <i>PbCHT</i>1, enabling the production of large numbers of PfCHT1-expressing ookinetes. We show that chimeric <i>P. berghei</i> ookinetes express monomeric PfCHT1, but a HMW complex containing <i>PfCHT1</i> is not present. A better understanding of the chitinase-containing HMW complex may enhance development of next-generation vaccines or drugs that target malaria transmission stages.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei and plasmodium falciparum, Q-exactive plus (thermo fisher scientific) lc ms/ms system

### Affiliations
MD, FACP, FIDSA, FASTMH, BS,
Professor of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Anthropology,
Yale University
MD, FACP, FIDSA, FASTMH, BS Professor of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Anthropology, Yale University

### Submitter
Joseph Vinetz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jospeh M. Vinetz
MD, FACP, FIDSA, FASTMH, BS Professor of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Anthropology, Yale University


