### Accession
PXD031262

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation and other post-translational modifications in the central C4-C5 domains of murine cardiac myosin binding protein C

### Description
Cardiac myosin binding protein C (cMyBPC) is a critical multidomain protein that modulates myosin cross bridge behavior and cardiac contractility. cMyBPC is principally regulated by phosphorylation of the residues within the M-domain of its N-terminus. However, not much is known about the phosphorylation or other post-translational modification (PTM) landscape of the central C4C5 domains. In this study, the presence of phosphorylation outside the M-domain was confirmed in vivo using mouse models expressing cMyBPC with nonphosphorylatable serine (S) to alanine substitutions. Purified recombinant mouse C4C5 domain constructs were incubated with 13 different kinases, and samples from the 6 strongest kinases were chosen for mass spectrometry analysis. A total of 26 unique phosphorylated peptides were found, representing 13 different phosphorylation sites including 10 novel sites. Parallel reaction monitoring and subsequent mutagenesis experiments revealed that the S690 site (UniProtKB O70468) was the predominant target of PKA and PKG1. We also report 6 acetylation and 7 ubiquitination sites not previously described in the literature. These PTMs demonstrate the possibility of additional layers of regulation and potential importance of the central domains of cMyBPC in cardiac health and disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD031262

### Sample Protocol
For the protein digestion, the bands were cut to minimize excess polyacrylamide, divided into a number of smaller pieces. The gel pieces washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel by adding Trypsin or chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight digestion at room temperature. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using either a data dependent acquisition (DDA) or a targeted MS method using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). The DDA method uses the multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive MS/MS instrument scans. The targeted PRM method performs MS/MS only on the selects the precursors of interest.

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed utilizing Sequest which is bundled into Proteome Discoverer v2.3. The CID spectra from the tryptic data was searched against the E. coli BL21 SwissProtKB database (downloaded on April 2021, 4156 entries) and the data from all digests were searched specifically against the sequence of MYBPC3.  The parameters for these searches include 10 ppm MS1 mass tolerance, 0.5 Da MS/MS mass tolerance, full and semi-protease specificity for trypsin and chymotrypsin respectively, with 3 and 4 missed cleavages for trypsin and chymotrypsin respectively.  For all searches carbamidomethylation was considered a static modification and oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at S, T, Y, were considered as variable modifications.  For ecoli database searches peptide and protein identifications were filtered using the Percolator node in proteome discoverer to a 1% FDR rate and two peptides were required for protein identification.  For the MYPBC3 specific searches, the Fixed Value PSM validator node was used and all modified peptides were  manual inspected to have a monoistopic mass <5ppm of theoretical mass, a majority of major ions mapped to either y or b ions, and these ions are consistent with the identified modification.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac myosin binding protein C (cMyBPC) is a critical multidomain protein that modulates myosin cross bridge behavior and cardiac contractility. cMyBPC is principally regulated by phosphorylation of the residues within the M-domain of its N-terminus. However, not much is known about the phosphorylation or other post-translational modification (PTM) landscape of the central C4C5 domains. In this study, the presence of phosphorylation outside the M-domain was confirmed in vivo using mouse models expressing cMyBPC with nonphosphorylatable serine (S) to alanine substitutions. Purified recombinant mouse C4C5 domain constructs were incubated with 13 different kinases, and samples from the 6 strongest kinases were chosen for mass spectrometry analysis. A total of 26 unique phosphorylated peptides were found, representing 13 different phosphorylation sites including 10 novel sites. Parallel reaction monitoring and subsequent mutagenesis experiments revealed that the S690 site (UniProtKB O70468) was the predominant target of PKA and PKG1. We also report 6 acetylation and 7 ubiquitination sites not previously described in the literature. These PTMs demonstrate the possibility of additional layers of regulation and potential importance of the central domains of cMyBPC in cardiac health and disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD031262.

### Keywords
Cardiac myosin binding protein c, Mass spectrometry, Post translational modification

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Julian E. Stelzer
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA


