### Accession
PXD006053

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of β-catenin oncogenic networks

### Description
We used interaction and expression proteomic techniques in conjunction with RNA-Seq transcriptomic analysis to analyse how a β-catenin stabilizing mutation alters molecular networks in colorectal cancer cells. Integrated computational analyses of allowed us to identify significantly altered sub-networks linked to β-catenin oncogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of the expression proteome, cell extracts were fractionated using the NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction kit (Pierce), each fraction separated using SDS-PAGE and then fractionated in 2 fractions per sample/lane after Coomassie blue staining prior to tryptic digestion. Each sample combination (e.g. Mutant/nuclear, Mutant/cytosolic) was replicated twice. Standard in-gel tryptic digestion was performed according to the published method (Jiménez, Huang, Qiu, & Burlingame, 2001). The combined elution fractions were lyophilized in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Electron Corporation, Milford, MA), resuspended in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid and further cleaned up by reverse phase chromatography using C18 column (Harvard, Southborough, MA). The final volume was reduced to 10μL by vacuum centrifugation and addition of 0.1% formic acid.Tryptic peptides were separated by online reverse phase nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nano-LC, Dionex Ultimate 3000 series HPLC system) coupled to electoral spray injection (ESI) tandem mass spectrometer (MS−MS) with octopole collision cell (Thermo-Finnegan LTQ Orbitrap). Loaded peptides were eluted on nano-LC with 90 min gradients ranging from 6 to 73% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data dependent acquisition was performed on the LTQ-Orbitrap using Xcalibur software (version2.0.6, Thermo Scientific) in the positive ion mode with a resolution of 60 000 at m/z range of 325.0−1800.0, and using 35% normalized collision energy, up to five most intensive multiple charged ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented and further analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using Mascot version 2.2.0 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The sequence database was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. The raw data were searched against the human International Protein Index database (74,017 protein sequences) with fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification oxidation (M). The five fractions for each sample were combined as a single search in Mascot. Peptides were filtered at a significance threshold of P < 0.05 (Mascot). Raw mass spectrometry chromatograms were processed and analyzed using Xcalibur Qual Browser software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. Version 2.0.7) and then manually annotated and verified. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA; version 3.00.04) was used to analyze LC-MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications(Searle, 2010).Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein quantitation was performed using spectral counts (Normalized Spectral Abundance Factors) (Florens et al., 2006) and ion peak intensity measurement (Rosetta Elucidator software). Proteins were excluded from AP-MS results if frequency in control experiments from HCT116 cells was > 0.33 (Song et al, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
The dysregulation of Wnt signaling is a frequent occurrence in many different cancers. Oncogenic mutations of CTNNB1/&#x3b2;-catenin, the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signaling, lead to the accumulation and stabilization of &#x3b2;-catenin protein with diverse effects in cancer cells. Although the transcriptional response to Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling activation has been widely studied, an integrated understanding of the effects of oncogenic &#x3b2;-catenin on molecular networks is lacking. We used affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS), label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and RNA-Seq to compare protein-protein interactions, protein expression, and gene expression in colorectal cancer cells expressing mutant (oncogenic) or wild-type &#x3b2;-catenin. We generate an integrated molecular network and use it to identify novel protein modules that are associated with mutant or wild-type &#x3b2;-catenin. We identify a DNA methyltransferase I associated subnetwork that is enriched in cells with mutant &#x3b2;-catenin and a subnetwork enriched in wild-type cells associated with the CDKN2A tumor suppressor, linking these processes to the transformation of colorectal cancer cells through oncogenic &#x3b2;-catenin signaling. In summary, multiomics analysis of a defined colorectal cancer cell model provides a significantly more comprehensive identification of functional molecular networks associated with oncogenic &#x3b2;-catenin signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal cancer, Hct116

### Affiliations
Univ Southampton
Biological Sciences, University of Southampton

### Submitter
Rob Ewing

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Ewing
Biological Sciences, University of Southampton


