### Accession
PXD014095

### Title
Proteomic characterization and comparison of spermatozoa proteomes between ram (Ovis. aries) and buck (Capra. hircus) using a data-independent acquisition-mass spectrometry (DIA-MS)

### Description
Artificial insemination in small ruminants is most commonly performed using fresh semen due to the low fertility rates typically achieved with frozen spermatozoa. Usually, when developing and applying assisted reproductive technologies, sheep and goats are often lumped together as one specie. In order to optimize sperm cryopreservation protocols in sheep and goat, differences in sperm proteomics between ram and buck are necessary to detect, which may contribute to differences in sperm function and fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Semen from rams (n = 9 males; Hu-sheep; Ovis aries) and bucks (n = 9 males; Anhui white goat; Capra hircus) were collected by artificial vagina (April 2017) in the presence of a teaser ewe after 3-5 d of sex abstinence, respectively. Ejaculates were immediately assessed for motility (data not shown) by computer-assisted sperm analysis, and only accepted if motility > 80%. Ejaculates from each animal were pooled together. Semen samples were divided randomly into 3 groups with equal volume for experimental replication (n = 3).

### Data Protocol
High pH Reverse-phase separation The combined sample (100 μg) was re-dissolved in 2 mL buffer A (5% acetonitrile (ACN); pH 9.8) and fractionated by an LC-20AB system (Shimadzu, Japan) connected to a reverse-phase Gemini C18 column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm, Phenomenex, CA, American). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient with Buffer B (95% ACN; pH 9.8) at a flow rate of 1mL/min. Peptides were eluted from 5% (v/v) buffer B for 10min, 5-35% (v/v) buffer B for 40 min, 35 - 95% (v/v) buffer B for 4 min, held at 5% (v/v) buffer B for10 min. The sample fractions were collected every 1 min. Then, these samples were combined into 10 fractions, and dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step.   Data dependent acquisition (DDA)-MS  DDA fractions and DIA samples analysis were both performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were re-dissolved with buffer C (2% ACN; 0.1% formic acid (v/v)), and centrifuged (20,000 × g; 10 min; 4°C). The supernatant was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm) by an auto-sampler and subsequently separated by UltiMate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) using a C18 column (150 μm × 25 cm, 1.8 μm, homemade) with a set gradient, from in 5% (v/v) buffer D (98% CAN; 0.1%formic acid (v/v)) for 5 min, 5-35% (v/v) buffer D for 155 min, 35-80% (v/v) buffer D for 10 min, 80% (v/v) buffer D for 5 min, and 5% (v/v) buffer D for 4 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min with the column temperature of 40°C. The electrospray voltage of 1.6 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. For the spectral library generation, the instrument was operated in DDA mode. The parameters were: (1) MS: scan range (m/z) = 350-1,500; Resolution=60,000; AGC target=3,000,000; Maximum injection time (MIT) =50 ms; Loop count=30; (2) HCD-MS/MS: resolution=30,000; AGC target=1e5; MIT =100 ms; Include charge states=2-7; Filter Dynamic Exclusion: exclusion duration=30s.  Database search Raw Data of DDA were processed and analyzed were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). The database is an in-house Uniprot database of sheep and goat with 27,533 and 2,859 entries, respectively (03-2018). The search parameters and settings were as follows: (i) Enzyme was selected as trypsin; (ii) the minimal peptide length was set as 7; (iii) the fixed modifications were set as a Carbamidomethyl (C); (iv) the variable modifications were set as oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). The decoy database pattern was set as the reverse of the target database. The false discovery rates of peptides and proteins were set as no more than 1%.   DIA-MS  For DIA analysis, the same nano-LC system and gradient was used as DDA analysis. The mass spectrometer was run under data-independent acquisition mode, and automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. The parameters were set as below: (1) MS: Scan range (m/z) = 350-1,500; Resolution=120,000; AGC target=3,000,000; Automatic MIT; (2) HCD-MS/MS: Resolution=30,000; AGC target=100,000; Filter dynamic exclusion: Exclusion duration=30s;  DIA data analysis  Raw data of DIA were processed and analyzed by Spectronaut Pulsar 11.0 (Biognosys AG) with default parameters (BGS Factory Settings (default)). After Student’s t-Test, different expressed protein (DEP) was considered as significant if their Q-value < 0.05 and fold changes ≥ 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Fresh semen is most commonly used in an artificial insemination of small ruminants, because of low fertility rates of frozen sperm. Generally, when developing and applying assisted reproductive technologies, sheep and goats are classified as one species. In order to optimize sperm cryopreservation protocols in sheep and goat, differences in sperm proteomes between ram and buck are necessary to investigate, which may contribute to differences in function and fertility of spermatozoa. In the current work, a data-independent acquisition-mass spectrometry proteomic approach was used to characterize and make a comparison of ram (Ovis aries) and buck (Capra hircus) sperm proteomes. A total of 2,109 proteins were identified in ram and buck spermatozoa, with 238 differentially abundant proteins. Proteins identified in ram and buck spermatozoa are mainly involved in metabolic pathways for generation of energy and diminishing oxidative stress. Specifically, there are greater abundance of spermatozoa proteins related to the immune protective and capacity activities in ram, while protein that inhibit sperm capacitation shows greater abundance in buck. Our results not only provide novel insights into the characteristics and potential activities of spermatozoa proteins, but also expand the potential direction for sperm cryopreservation in ram and buck.

### Keywords
Buck, Spermatozoa protein, Proteomics, Data-independent acquisition, Ram

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, P. R. China.
Anhui Agricultural  University

### Submitter
Wen Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhu Wen
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, P. R. China.


