### Accession
PXD017710

### Title
Proteome and Translatome of SARS-CoV-2 infected cells

### Description
Cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 and profiled for translatome and proteome after 2,6,10 and 24 hours

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described1. Briefly, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 8M Urea/10mM EPPS pH 8.2. Isolated proteins were digested with 1:50 wt/wt LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 wt/wt Trypsin (Promega, Sequencing grade) overnight at 37°C after dilution to a final Urea concentration of 1M. Digests then were acidified (pH 2-3) using TFA. Peptides were purified using C18 (50mg) SepPak columns (Waters) as previously described. Desalted peptides were dried and 25µg of peptides were resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (200mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile). Peptides were subjected to TMT labelling with 1:2 Peptide TMT ratio (wt/wt) for one hour at RT. Labelling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at RT for additional 15min. Labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to High pH Reverse Phase fractionation with the HpH RP Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturers instructions. All multiplexes were mixed with a bridge channel, that consists of control sample labelled in one reaction and split to all multiplexes in equimolar amounts.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database, SARS-CoV-2 database (Uniprot pre-release) and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. One search node was set up to search with TMT6 (K) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to search for light peptides and one search node was set up with TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to identify heavy peptides. Searches were performed using Sequest HT. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5.

### Publication Abstract
A new coronavirus was recently discovered and named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Infection with SARS-CoV-2 in humans causes coronavirus disease&#xa0;2019 (COVID-19) and has been rapidly spreading around the globe<sup>1,2</sup>. SARS-CoV-2 shows some similarities to other coronaviruses; however, treatment options and an understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 infects cells are lacking. Here we identify the host cell pathways that are modulated by SARS-CoV-2 and show that inhibition of these pathways prevents viral replication in human cells. We established a human cell-culture model for infection with a clinical isolate of SARS-CoV-2. Using this cell-culture system, we determined the infection profile of SARS-CoV-2 by translatome<sup>3</sup> and proteome proteomics at different times after infection. These analyses revealed that SARS-CoV-2 reshapes central cellular pathways such as translation, splicing, carbon metabolism, protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and nucleic acid metabolism. Small-molecule inhibitors that target these pathways prevented viral replication in cells. Our results reveal the cellular infection profile of SARS-CoV-2 and have enabled the identification of drugs that inhibit viral replication. We anticipate that our results will guide efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie the modulation of host cells after infection with SARS-CoV-2. Furthermore, our findings provide insights for the development of therapies for the treatment of COVID-19.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Translatome, Proteome

### Affiliations
1Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 2Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 3Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
1Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 2Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 3Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


