### Accession
PXD005091

### Title
Comprehensive proteome profiling in Aedes albopictus to decipher Wolbachia-virus interference phenomenon

### Description
Cellular models have provided significant advances on molecular bases of bipartite interactions between either an arbovirus or a bacterial symbiont with a given arthropod vector. However, although an interference phenomenon was evidenced in tripartite interaction arbovirus-symbiont-mosquito vector very little is known regarding the mechanisms involved. Using large-scale proteome profiling, we characterized proteins differentially expressed in Aedes albopictus cells infected by the symbiotic bacterium Wolbachia and the Chikungunya virus (CHIKV). These proteins were mostly related to cellular processes involved in glycolysis process, protein metabolism, translation and amino acid metabolism. The presence of Wolbachia impacted significantly the protein profiles, including sequestration of proteins such as structural polyprotein and capsid viral proteins that may affect replication and assembly of CHIKV in cellulo. This study provides insights into the molecular pathways involved in the tripartite interaction mosquito-Wolbachia-virus and may help in defining targets for the better implementation of Wolbachia-based strategy for disease transmission control.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated on 2D-gel. Each spot band was cut and samples were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature and shrunken in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunken in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µL of trypsin (T6567, Sigma-Aldrich) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5 % ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 25 μL of 0.1% formic acid before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten μL of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 48 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.0 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-2000) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 120 ms and a resolution of R = 35000. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 25% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mascot, MS Amanda and Sequest algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a merged database from http://www.uniprot.org/ website: Aedes (taxon identifier : [7158], 24 927 entries, release 2015_04) + Wolbachia (taxon identifier : [952], 24 150 entries, release 2015_04) + Chikungunya virus (taxon identifier : [37124], 2041 entries, release 2015_04) + Dengue virus (taxon identifier [12637], 13 782 entries, release 2015_04). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Target Decoy PSM Validator and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Aedes albopictus, Quantitative proteomics, Wolbachia, Chikungunya virus

### Affiliations
Groupe de Recherche "Dynamique microbienne et Transmission virale" UMR CNRS 5557 - Ecologie Microbienne Bâtiment Lwoff 10, rue Rafael Dubois 69100 Villeurbanne Cedex France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Mavingui
Groupe de Recherche "Dynamique microbienne et Transmission virale" UMR CNRS 5557 - Ecologie Microbienne Bâtiment Lwoff 10, rue Rafael Dubois 69100 Villeurbanne Cedex France


