### Accession
PXD028136

### Title
Evaluation of disposable-trap column nanoLC-FAIMS-MS/MS for the proteomic analysis of FFPE tissue

### Description
Proteomic biomarker discovery using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue requires robust workflows to support the analysis of large cohorts of patient samples. It also requires finding a reasonable balance between achieving high proteomic depth and limiting overall analysis time. To this end, we evaluated the merits of online coupling of disposable trap column nano-flow liquid chromatography, high-field asymmetric-waveform ion-mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) and tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-FAIMS-MS/MS). The data shows that ≤ 600 ng of peptide digest should be loaded onto the chromatographic part of the system. Careful characterization of the FAIMS settings enabled the choice of optimal combinations of compensation voltages (CV) as a function of the employed LC gradient time. We found nLC-FAIMS-MS/MS to be on par with stage tip-based off-line high pH reversed phase fractionation in terms of proteomic depth and reproducibility of protein quantification (coefficient of variation ≤ 15% for 90 % of all proteins) but requiring 50% less sample and substantially reducing sample handling. Using FFPE material from lymph node, lung and prostate tissue as examples, we show that nLC-FAIMS-MS/MS can identify 5-6,000 proteins from the respective tissue within a total of 3 hours of analysis time.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, archived FFPE tissue blocks are cut into slices using a microtome (10 um), deparaffinized and the area of interest is micro-dissected with a scalpel. For protein extraction and de-crosslinking, the tissue is boiled in SDS at alkaline pH (buffer composition: 4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 500 mM TRIS\HCl, pH 9), followed by detergent removal and protein digestion using the SP3 method. Tryptic peptides are loaded onto disposable Evotips for desalting and interfacing to the nanoLC system. Each sample is analyzed twice (2x 88 min (15 SPD), each 600 ng) to accommodate extensive gas-phase fractionation by FAIMS prior to tandem mass spectrometry (2x5CVs; Set1: -30|-40|-50|-60|-70 V, Set2: -35|-45|-55|-65|-75 V). In detail the LC-FAIMS-MS/MS methods for the Evosep-FAIMS-Exploris480 trio set up were as follows. For LC-separation the EvoTip-loaded peptides were sequentially eluted off the tips, the preformed off-set gradient was stored in the sample loop and the peptides were refocused on a Evosep C18 analytical column (8 cm, 3 um particle size, 100 um ID for the 22 min and 15 cm, 1.9 um particle size, 150 um ID for the 44 and 88 min gradient) using one of the predefined gradients offered by the system as stated in the respective plot in the Results section. Of these the 22 min (60 SPD), 44 min (30 SPD) and 88 min (15 SPD) gradient with flowrates of 1000, 500 and 220 nl/min, respectively, were used. The spray voltage of the ion source was set to 2100 V without and to 2300 V with FAIMS. For all experiments the mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra with a fixed cycle time. The cycle time was chosen for the three used gradients based on the respective peak width to guarantee enough data points (>10) across each peak for robust MS1 based label-free quantification, resulting in 1, 2 and 3 sec for the 21, 44 and 88 min gradient, respectively. If more than one internal CV was used, independent experiments were specified for the different CVs in the Tune method with the exact same settings except for the different CV value (The used CV values can either be read directly from the figures or can be found in the supplemental tables and additionally the raw file names). This leads to the MS looping through the specified experiments of the method, switching after each MS cycle (MS1 scan + MS2 scans). Therefore, to keep the data points and thus quantification quality stable, the cycle time stated above was divided by the number of used internal CVs. For all experiments, MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 100% (=1e6). Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) filter was activated and set to peptide mode. The charge state filter was set to 2-6. For MS2, precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 Th, collected using a standard maxIT of 25 ms and a normalized AGC value of 100 % (= 1e5), fragmented by HCD at 28 % normalized collision energy (NCE) and spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a standard resolution of 15,000. MS2 settings only differed for the acquisition of the sensitivity test in Fig. S3E, here the MS2 resolution was ramped along with its matching maxIT (15k|22ms, 30k|54ms, 45k|86ms, 60k|118ms, and 120k|246ms), all other parameters were left at the standard specified above. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was gradient dependent and set to 30, 45 and 90 s for the 21, 44 and 88 min gradient, respectively.  Data in Figure 2 was acquired on a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC coupled online to an Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, packed in house with Reprosil-Gold C18 ODS-3 5 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) and washed with 2 % nano-solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in nano-solvent A (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 10 min. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (75 µm x 40 cm, packed in house with Reprosil-Gold C18 3 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) using a 60 min gradient ranging from 4-32 %  nano-solvent B in nano-solvent A at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra. MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using a maximum injection time of 45 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. Up to 18 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation width of 1.3 m/z, maximum injection time of 25 ms, AGC value of 1e5), fragmented by HCD using 26 % normalized collision energy (NCE) and analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was set to 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were processed with MaxQuant (MQ) v1.6.17.0 using the integrated Andromeda Search engine and searched against a canonical human reference database (downloaded from Uniprot 15/03/2021; 75776 entries). Raw files from runs with multiple internal FAIMS CVs had to split into separate files based on CV values prior to MQ searches. These separate file were specified as different fractions, as for the bRP fractions, of the same experiment in MQ. Multiple injections of the same sample were specified as the same experiment. Standard MQ search parameters were used. Trypsin/P was specified as protease, allowing for up to a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm, with a standard LFQ min. ratio count setting of 2, as well as the iBAQ algorithm, with log fit, was switched on where needed. Where used, the Match-Between-Runs (MBR) algorithm was switched on with default settings (0.7 min and 5 min for matching and retention time alignment window, respectively). The False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on protein and PSM level. For Prosit rescoring, the MQ searches were reprocessed (partial processing from: “reading search engine results”) with a 100% FDR cut-off at protein and PSM level. The respective MQ msms.txt files were submitted and rescored by Prosit. Peptides with q-values ≤ 0.01 were retained and proteins were grouped based on the picked FDR method. For both MQ and Prosit output, proteins for which no unique peptide was found and thus where not distinguishable were aggregated to protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Ffpe, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (faims), Clinical proteomics, Lc-faims-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
1 Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany 2 German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner-site Munich and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 3 Bavarian Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Center (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Eckert

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
1 Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany 2 German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner-site Munich and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 3 Bavarian Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Center (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


