### Accession
PXD016218

### Title
WNK1-specific phosphorylation sites in TBC1D1 and TBC1D4 modulate cell surface expression of GLUT1

### Description
Glucose uptake by mammalian cells is a key mechanism to maintain cell and tissue homeostasis and relies mostly on plasma membrane-localized glucose transporter proteins (GLUTs). Two main cellular mechanisms regulate GLUT proteins in the cell: first, expression of GLUT genes is under dynamic transcriptional control and is used by cancer cells to increase glucose availability. Second, GLUT proteins are regulated by membrane traffic from storage vesicles to the plasma membrane (PM). This latter process is triggered by signaling mechanisms and well-studied in case of insulin-responsive cells, which activate protein kinase AKT to phosphorylate TBC1D4, a RAB-GAP involved in membrane traffic regulation. Previously, we identified protein kinase WNK1 as another kinase able to phosphorylate TBC1D4 and regulate the surface expression of the constitutive glucose transporter GLUT1. Here we describe that downregulation of WNK1 through RNA interference in HEK293 cells led to a 2-fold decrease in PM GLUT1 expression, concomitant with a 60% decrease in glucose uptake. By mass spectrometry, we identified serine (S) 704 in TBC1D4 as a WNK1-specific phosphorylation site, and also S565 in the paralogue TBC1D1. Transfection of the respective phosphomimetic or unphosphorylatable TBC1D mutants into cells revealed that both affected the cell surface abundance of GLUT1. The results reinforce a regulatory role for WNK1 in cell metabolism and have potential impact for the understanding of cancer cell metabolism or therapeutic options in type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
The above protein kinase assays were repeated under non-radioactive conditions using in vitro phosphorylation of 0.5 µg recombinant substrate with 0.5 µg recombinant kinase in duplicate, standard 20 µL-reactions for 1 h at 30˚C. Then, 20 µl iodoacetamide (IAA) for cysteine alkylation were added for 1 h at 21˚C (protected from light), followed by quenching of remaining IAA with 20 µL DTT for 15 min at 21˚C. Duplicates were incubated with either trypsin (cuts after arginine or lysine) or enteropeptidase (cuts only after lysine) and digested overnight at 37˚C. Digested peptides were purified by retention on C12 hydrophobic reverse phase porous resin filled into previously activated and washed small columns. Resin columns were then shipped for mass spectrometry (MS) to the CIC bioGUNE center in Derio, Spain. Peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) on-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm, Waters).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were converted to mgf files using RawConverter [He, L., Diedrich, J. K., Chu, Y. Y., & Yates, J. R. (2015). Extracting Accurate Precursor Information for Tandem Mass Spectra by RawConverter. Analytical chemistry]. The mgf files were then searched using X!TANDEM against human proteins from UniProt 3AUP000005640 [TANDEM: matching proteins with mass spectra, Robertson Craig and Ronald C. Beavis, Bioinformatics, 2004, 20, 1466-7.]. The sequences in 3AUP000005640 were reversed by maintaining lysine and arginine in place as previously described [Comparing Peptide Spectra Matches Across Search Engines, R Matthiesen, G Prieto, HC Beck, Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis in Proteomics, 133-143]. The settings used were 10 ppm for parent ions, 0.5 Da for fragment ions, 2 missed cleavages were allowed and cleavage specificity was set to trypsin. Fix modification was set to iodoacetamide and variable modifications to N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of S, T and Y. Peptides and proteins were filtered on a 1% FDR value. The data were searched in two runs: first assuming CID and then ETD fragments ions. The identified phospho peptides were summarized in table S1. The raw MSMS spectra were annotated for all the phospho peptides identified with a 1% FDR cut off.

### Publication Abstract
Glucose uptake by mammalian cells is a key mechanism to maintain cell and tissue homeostasis and relies mostly on plasma membrane-localized glucose transporter proteins (GLUTs). Two main cellular mechanisms regulate GLUT proteins in the cell: first, expression of GLUT genes is under dynamic transcriptional control and is used by cancer cells to increase glucose availability. Second, GLUT proteins are regulated by membrane traffic from storage vesicles to the plasma membrane (PM). This latter process is triggered by signaling mechanisms and well-studied in the case of insulin-responsive cells, which activate protein kinase AKT to phosphorylate TBC1D4, a RAB-GTPase activating protein involved in membrane traffic regulation. Previously, we identified protein kinase WNK1 as another kinase able to phosphorylate TBC1D4 and regulate the surface expression of the constitutive glucose transporter GLUT1. Here we describe that downregulation of WNK1 through RNA interference in HEK293&#xa0;cells led to a 2-fold decrease in PM GLUT1 expression, concomitant with a 60% decrease in glucose uptake. By mass spectrometry, we identified serine (S) 704 in TBC1D4 as a WNK1-regulated phosphorylation site, and also S565 in the paralogue TBC1D1. Transfection of the respective phosphomimetic or unphosphorylatable TBC1D mutants into cells revealed that both affected the cell surface abundance of GLUT1. The results reinforce a regulatory role for WNK1 in cell metabolism and have potential impact for the understanding of cancer cell metabolism and therapeutic options in type 2 diabetes.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
CEDOC, NMS, Lisbon, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
CEDOC, NMS, Lisbon, Portugal


