### Accession
PXD047268

### Title
Probing the trypanosome nuclear pore by TurboID proximity labelling

### Description
Previous BioID experiments targeting the nucleoporin (NUP) NUP158 and the nuclear transport factor MEX67 indicated (PMID: 36410438; PXD031245) that proximity labelling delivers highly specific interactome data in the confined localisation of the nuclear pore, with a labelling radius well below the size of the nuclear pore. Here we extended this approach to target NUPs NUP110, NUP76 and NUP96 with a TurboID-HA tandem tag fused to both, the N and C-terminus of each respective target protein. While the central NUP96 biotinylated most nuclear pore proteins with the marked exception of the nuclear basket, NUP158, NUP110 and NUP76 caused biotinylation of specific sub-complexes of the pore and Mex67 labelled NUPs lining the pore channel.

### Sample Protocol
Trypanosome nucleoporin (NUP) fusion proteins were expressed from the endogenous locus, by modifying one allele via a PCR-based approach reliant on a (modified) version of the pPOT vector system (PMID: 25567099). Procyclic form (PCF) cells were maintained at a density of 1×10^6 to 1×10^7 cells per ml and harvesting was done at a cell density of about 5x10^6 cells per ml. A total 5x10^8 cells were used in each replicate. Cells were harvested at 1,400 g, washed once with serum-free medium and pellets rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  For isolation of biotinylated proteins, each cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (0.5% octylphenoxypolyethoxyethanol (IGEPAL), 0.1 M piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES)-NaOH pH 6.9, 2 mM ethylene glycol-bis(β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  (EDTA), cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in an orbital mixer. The soluble and non-soluble fractions were separated by centrifugation (14,000 g, 5 min, 4°C) and the soluble fraction incubated with 100 μl streptavidin-linked Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1, Thermofisher) for 1 hour at 4°C under gentle mixing.  Beads were washed twice in 1 ml buffer 1 (2% (w/v) SDS in water) once in 1 ml buffer 2 (0.1% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 500 mM NaCl), once in 1ml buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% IGEPAL, 0.5% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1) and once in 1 ml buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl); each washing step was 8 minutes at room temperature (RT) under orbital shaking. Beads were then prepared for tryptic digestion by washing three times in 500 µl ice-cold 50 mM NH4HCO3, resuspension in 40 µl of the same buffer supplemented with 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubation in a thermomixer at RT for 1h. Iodoacetamide was added to a concentration of 20 mM, followed by incubation in the dark at RT for 30 min. Finally, 5 μg/ml proteomics-grade trypsin (SOLu-Trypsin, Sigma) and 1 mM biotin was added to the beads. The digest was done overnight at 30°C in a thermomixer (1000 rpm). After removal of the first eluate, beads were resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 5 μg/ml trypsin and incubated in a thermomixer at 37°C for 1h. The eulate was combined with the first eluate and both were dried in a speed-vac. LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) were used throughout. BioID eluted peptides were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and passed over C18 stage tip columns as described (PMID: 17703201), then analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant version 2.1.3.0 (PMID: 19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database (release 64) from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). False discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
The characterization of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is of high value for understanding protein function. Two strategies are popular for identification of PPIs direct from the cellular environment: affinity capture (pulldown) isolates the protein of interest with an immobilized matrix that specifically captures the target and potential partners, whereas in BioID, genetic fusion of biotin ligase facilitates proximity biotinylation, and labeled proteins are isolated with streptavidin. Whilst both methods provide valuable insights, they can reveal distinct PPIs, but the basis for these differences is less obvious. Here, we compare both methods using four different trypanosome proteins as baits: poly(A)-binding proteins PABP1 and PABP2, mRNA export receptor MEX67, and the nucleoporin NUP158. With BioID, we found that the population of candidate interacting proteins decreases with more confined bait protein localization, but the candidate population is less variable with affinity capture. BioID returned more likely false positives, in particular for proteins with less confined localization, and identified low molecular weight proteins less efficiently. Surprisingly, BioID for MEX67 identified exclusively proteins lining the inner channel of the nuclear pore complex (NPC), consistent with the function of MEX67, whereas the entire NPC was isolated by pulldown. Similarly, for NUP158, BioID returned surprisingly few PPIs within NPC outer rings that were by contrast detected with pulldown but instead returned a larger cohort of nuclear proteins. These rather significant differences highlight a clear issue with reliance on a single method to identify PPIs and suggest that BioID and affinity capture are complementary rather than alternative approaches.

### Keywords
Bioid, Nuclear pore, Porin, Trypanosoma brucei, Nuclear transport

### Affiliations
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation  Charles University in Prague,  BIOCEV Průmyslová 595  252 50 Vestec  Czech Republic  phone: +420 325 873 966
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Zoltner
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation  Charles University in Prague,  BIOCEV Průmyslová 595  252 50 Vestec  Czech Republic  phone: +420 325 873 966


