### Accession
PXD009212

### Title
Proteome profiling in aging rat brain by LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study investigated proteome profile in the hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and striatum of 14, 18, 23, and 27 months old rats in order to see the effect of aging on proteins in these regions. Using ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography coupled with Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry, we identified 1074 proteins in the hippocampus, 871 proteins in the mPFC, and 241 proteins the striatum. Ninety-seven, 25, and 5 of these proteins were differentially expressed with age in the hippocampus, mPFC, and striatum, respectively. Overall, aging causes divergent protein changes in specific brain regions, with the most prominent changes observed in the late-aged.

### Sample Protocol
The hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and striatum were collected from each rat brain. Then, the brain tissue was homogenized using ultrasonicator. The extracted protein was mixed with sample buffer and resolved in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Protein bands were excised from the gel and fractionated into 6 fractions. In-gel digestion procedure was carried out. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled with Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using a MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.3.30 and searched by the Andromeda search engine against the rat UniProt sequence database. The spectra search included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as a specific enzymatic digestion with the maximum of two missed cleavages. Peptides with the minimum of seven amino acid length were considered. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Orbitrap was set as the instrument type. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein identification were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per group. Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) was used to perform the bioinformatic and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Decrease in multiple functions occurs in the brain with aging, all of which can contribute to age-related cognitive and locomotor impairments. Brain atrophy specifically in hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and striatum, can contribute to this age-associated decline in function. Our recent metabolomics analysis showed age-related changes in these brain regions. To further understand the aging processes, analysis using a proteomics approach was carried out. This study was conducted to identify proteome profiles in the hippocampus, mPFC, and striatum of 14-, 18-, 23-, and 27-month-old rats. Proteomics analysis using ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography coupled with Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry identified 1074 proteins in the hippocampus, 871 proteins in the mPFC, and 241 proteins in the striatum. Of these proteins, 97 in the hippocampus, 25 in mPFC, and 5 in striatum were differentially expressed with age. The altered proteins were classified into three ontologies (cellular component, molecular function, and biological process) containing 44, 38, and 35 functional groups in the hippocampus, mPFC, and striatum, respectively. Most of these altered proteins participate in oxidative phosphorylation (e.g. cytochrome c oxidase and ATP synthase), glutathione metabolism (e.g. peroxiredoxins), or calcium signaling pathway (e.g. protein S100B and calmodulin). The most prominent changes were observed in the oldest animals. These results suggest that alterations in oxidative phosphorylation, glutathione metabolism, and calcium signaling pathway are involved in cognitive and locomotor impairments in aging.

### Keywords
Brain, Rat, Proteomics, Aging

### Affiliations
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, 
Shiga University of Medical Science
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center,  Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan

### Submitter
Hamizah Shahirah Hamezah

### Lab Head
Dr Ikuo Tooyama
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center,  Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan


