### Accession
PXD020820

### Title
Full geroprotection from brief rapamycin treatment by persistently increased intestinal autophagy

### Description
The licensed drug rapamycin has potential to be repurposed for geroprotection. A key challenge is to avoid the adverse side-effects of clinical dosing regimes. Here we show a profound memory effect of brief rapamycin treatment. Brief, early adult treatment extended lifespan in Drosophila to the same degree as lifelong dosing. Lasting memory of earlier rapamycin treatment was mediated by elevated autophagy in enterocytes of the gut, accompanied by increased intestinal spermidine levels and improved structure and function of the ageing intestine. Brief elevation of autophagy itself induced a long-term increase in autophagy. In mice, short-term, 3-month treatment also induced a full memory effect, with enhanced autophagy in Paneth cells, improved Paneth cell architecture and gut barrier function at levels induced by chronic treatment, even 6 months after rapamycin was withdrawn. Past rapamycin treatment also enhanced the regenerative potential of aged intestine in intestinal organoids. Full geroprotective effects of chronic rapamycin treatment can thus be obtained with a brief pulse of the drug.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide generation and TMT-labeling 20 µL of lysis buffer (6 M GuCl, 2.5 mM TCEP,10 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl) was added to 25 guts and tissues were homogenized using a hand-homogenizer. Homogenates were heated at 19 95°C for 10 min and subsequently sonicated using the Bioruptor (10 cycles, 30 sec sonication/30 sec break, high performance). Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 2000x g and supernatant was diluted 10-fold in 20 mM Tris. Protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using a NanoDrop and 1:200 (w/w) of trypsin (Promega, Mass Spectrometry grade) was added to 200 µg of sample. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight 1 at 37°C and stopped by the addition of 50% of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1 %. Peptide clean-up was carried out using an OASIS HLB Plate. Wetting of the wells was performed by the addition of 200 µl of 60 % acetonitrile/0.1 % FA and equilibration adding 400 µl of 0.1 % FA. The sample and 100 µl of 0.1 % FA were loaded into the wells and peptides eluted by the addition of 80 µl of 60 % ACN/0.1 % FA. Peptides were air-dried by using the SpeedVac and the pellet resuspended in 60 µl of 0.1% FA. 15 µg of peptides was dried in SpeedVac and used for tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling. The pellet was dissolved in 17 µl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile was added. Samples were incubated for 10 min at RT with occasional vortexing, followed by the addition of 8 µl of TMT label and subsequent incubation for 1 h at RT. The labelling reaction was stopped by the addition of 8 µl of 5 % hydroxylamine and incubation for 15 min. Samples were air-dried in SpeedVac, resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1 % FA and cleaned with an OASIS HLB Plate as previously described. 4 replicates per condition and 25 intestines per replicate were used for peptide generation and TMT-labelling for proteomics analysis.  High-pH fractionation Pooled TMT labeled peptides were separated on a 150 mm, 300 µm OD, 2 µm C18, Acclaim PepMap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) column using an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 30°C. Buffer A was 5 % acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B was 80 % acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate. Separation was performed using a segmented gradient from 1 % to 50 % buffer B, for 85min and 50 % to 95 % for 20 min with a flow of 4 µL. Fractions were collected every 150 sec and combined into nine fractions by pooling every ninth fraction. Pooled fractions were dried in a Concentrator plus (Eppendorf), resuspended in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid from which 2 µL was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides from each of the nine high-pH fractions were separated on a 25 cm, 75 µm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1 % formic acid in water and 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 120 min and from 31v% to 50 % buffer B for 10 min at 200 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in TMT-SPS mode. Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range with an AGC target of 1e6. Precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for CID fragmentation using 35 % collision energy and an isolation window width of 0.7. The m/z values of the peptide fragments, MS/MS, were measured in the IonTrap at a “Rapid” scan rate, a minimum AGC target of 1e4 and 100 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec. The top ten most intense MS/MS peaks were subjected to multi-notch isolation with an AGC target of 5e4 and 86 ms maximum injection time and further fragmented using HCD with 65 % collision energy. The m/z values of the fragments, MS3, were measured in the Orbitrap at 50 K resolution. The cycle time was set to two seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.848 using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the Drosophila melanogaster reference proteome (proteome ID UP000000803, downloaded September 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at peptide spectrum quantification type was set to “Reporter ion MS3” and “10-plex TMT”. Prior to the analysis, the TMT correction factors were updated based on the values provided by the manufacturer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fly, Drosophila, Tmt, Rapamycin, Autophagy, Lifespan

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany. Institute of Healthy Ageing, and Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL, London, UK.
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Partridge
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany. Institute of Healthy Ageing, and Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL, London, UK.


