### Accession
PXD005048

### Title
Proteomic characterization of exosomes derived from malaria-infected reticulocytes, in a murine malaria model

### Description
Reticulocyte-derived exosomes (rex) are 30-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin released during the maturation of reticulocytes to erythrocytes upon fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane. We previously found that immunization of mice with rex from BALB/c mice infected with the reticulocyte-prone non-lethal P. yoelii 17X malaria strain (rexPy) in combination with CpG-ODN promoted survival and long lasting protection of mice subsequently challenged with a lethal strain. Here, we show that rexPy-mediated protection is completely lost in splenectomized animals and such protection is achieved after passive transfer of splenocytes obtained from animals immunized with rexPy+CpG. Notably, rexPy immunization of mice induced non-exhausted memory T cell expansion with effector phenotype. Proteomics analysis of rexPy confirmed their reticulocyte origin and demonstrated the presence of parasite antigens. Our studies thus prove, for what we believe is the first time, that rex from reticulocyte-prone malarial infections are able to induce non-exhausted splenic long-lasting memory responses. In order to translate these results to humans, in vitro experiments with spleen cells of human transplantation donors were performed. Human splenocytes were able to actively capture plasma45 derived exosomes from patients infected with Plasmodium vivax (exPv) and stimulation of spleen cells with exPv for 72h lead to an increase in the number of T cells. All together, these data further support the value of reticulocyte-derived exosomes as a potential novel vaccine and platform against malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Reticulocytes were obtained from mice blood collected in EDTA. Blood from mice infected with P. yoelii 17X strain at 20-30% parasitemia was obtained by intracardiac puncture and passed through a CF11 cellulose filter to remove the leukocyte population. Reticulocytes were purified by layering them on top of a Percoll/NaCl gradient (1.058 g/mL- 1.096 g/mL). After 250xg centrifugation for 30 minutes at 4oC, reticulocytes were collected from the interface of the two Percoll layers. Purified reticulocytes were washed twice and cultured for 24 h at 37°C in DMEM, supplemented with 5 mM glutamine, 5% fetal calf serum, 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 g/mL streptomycin at 1-3 % hematocrit. To remove exogenous exosomes in the culture medium, the fetal calf serum was pre-centrifuged (100,000xg overnight). Exosomes from supernatant of reticulocyte cultures were purified by sequential centrifugations at 500xg for 30 min, 20,000xg for 45 min and 100,000xg for 2 h at 4°C. The final pellet was resuspended in PBS, filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane, and centrifuged at 100,000xg for 2 h at 4°C. Liquid Chromatography (nanoLCULTRA-EKSIGENT) followed by mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) were performed on a LTQ OrbitrapVelos (Thermo Fisher). Samples of isolated vesicles (rexPy) were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, precipitated by 10% TCA, washed with 100% acetone and reconstituted in 2 μL of 8M urea. Samples were brought to a concentration of 1.6 M urea, 1 μg of trypsin (Sus scrofa) was added and digestion was carried overnight at 37oC. The reaction was stopped with 1% formic acid. Trypsinized samples were injected into a precolumn (C18PepMap-100-Thermoscientific-5mm-ID300um-5um- 100A) before being flushed into the analytical column (AcclaimPepMap100- Thermoscientific-15cm-ID75um-3um-100A-C18) and eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a mobile phase gradient: 0-40% of solvent B in solvent A in the first 80-90 minutes and then 40-100% of solvent B in solvent A until the finish of the run at 110- 120 minutes (A: 3% Acetonitrile 0.1% Formic acid in water, B: 97% Acetonitrile 0.1% Formic acid in water). The eluate was applied to the nanospray source of the Orbitrap spectrometer and a full scan was acquired for all spectra within the 400-1500 m/z range with a 30.000 resolution and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. The MS/MS was performed in the LTQ and the top 20 most intense peptides were isolated and fragmented by low energy CID, 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data from Xcalibur™ (Thermo Scientific, v2.1) was searched against a custom database totaling 81382 proteins. The search was done with the Sequest HT algorithm on the Proteome Discoverer™Software version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). Searches were performed with the following parameters: digestion by trypsin, 2 missed cleavage sites allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, oxidation of methionine as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as the fixed modification. The Signal-to-Noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5. Percolator was used for PSM validation at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level. High confidence peptides (1% FDR) were further filtered at ΔCn ≤ 0.1 and Xcorr greater than 1.5, 2.0, 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.2 and 3.4 for charge states 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and > 7 respectively. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were grouped under one master protein entry.

### Publication Abstract
Reticulocyte-derived exosomes (<i>rex</i>) are 30-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin released during the maturation of reticulocytes to erythrocytes upon fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane. Combination of CpG-ODN with rex obtained from BALB/c mice infected with the reticulocyte-prone non-lethal <i>P. yoelii</i> 17X malaria strain (<i>rexPy</i>), had been shown to induce survival and long lasting protection. Here, we show that splenectomized mice are not protected upon <i>rexPy</i>+CpG inmunizations and that protection is restored upon passive transfer of splenocytes obtained from animals immunized with <i>rexPy</i>+CpG. Notably, <i>rexPy</i> immunization of mice induced changes in PD1<sup>-</sup> memory T cells with effector phenotype. Proteomics analysis of <i>rexPy</i> confirmed their reticulocyte origin and demonstrated the presence of parasite antigens. Our studies thus prove, for what we believe is the first time, that <i>rex</i> from reticulocyte-prone malarial infections are associated with splenic long-lasting memory responses. To try extrapolating these data to human infections, <i>in vitro</i> experiments with spleen cells of human transplantation donors were performed. Plasma-derived exosomes from vivax malaria patients (<i>exPv</i>) were actively uptaken by human splenocytes and stimulated spleen cells leading to changes in T cell subsets.

### Keywords
Spleen, Malaria, Reticulocytes, Exosomes

### Affiliations
CPqRR-FIOCRUZ
ICREA at ISGlobal Institute for Glbal Health, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain and IGTP Institut d'Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain

### Submitter
Armando Neto

### Lab Head
Dr Hernando Antonio del Portillo
ICREA at ISGlobal Institute for Glbal Health, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain and IGTP Institut d'Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain


