### Accession
PXD006528

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Withaferin A-targeted protein networks for the treatment of monoclonal myeloma gammopathies

### Description
Withaferin A (WA), a natural steroid lactone from the plant Withania Somnifera, has been used for many years in traditional Ayurveda medicine to treat inflammation-related conditions, such as ulcers and rheumatism. Today, WA is most often studied because of its antitumor properties. Although many in vitro and in vivo studies have been performed, the identification of Withaferin A protein targets and of its mechanism of antitumor action remains incomplete. Here, we used quantitative chemoproteomics and differential protein expression analysis to characterize the WA antitumor effects on a multiple myeloma cell model. Identified relevant targets were further validated by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and Western Blot. Canonical pathway analysis revealed targeting of the ubiquitination pathway as a main strategy for WA-induced cell death. Further data suggested that WA targets protein networks that are specific for monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) and other closely related disorders, such as multiple myeloma (MM) and Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM). Moreover, 16 of 20 proteins influenced by WA potentially counteract disease progression, suggesting WA can be used as an effective treatment for MGUS and other closely related disorders.

### Sample Protocol
1) Differential expression analysis Multiple myeloma (MM1R) cells were SILAC labeled (13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl and 13C6 L-Arginine-HCl) and treated with Withaferin A. Proteins were digested by trypsin and peptides separated in a first dimension by RP C18 (high pH) and  a second dimension RP C18 (low pH). Analysis was performed by MALDI-TOF/TOF and Oritrap Velos 2) Quantitaive chemoproteomics Multiple myeloma (MM1R) cells were SILAC labeled (13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl and 13C6 L-Arginine-HCl) and treated with biotinylated withaferin A. Proteins were incubated with streptavidin beads to enrich the biotinylated Withaferin A bound proteins. On bead tryptic digestion was performed and peptides were separated in a first dimension by RP C18 (high pH) and  a second dimension RP C18 (low pH). Analysis was performed by MALDI-TOF/TOF and Oritrap Velos

### Data Protocol
MALDI – TOF/TOF Screening of the raw MS/MS data was performed with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.1.03) against the Homo sapiens database (UniProt ID proteome ID UP000005640). Database searches were performed using the digestion enzyme trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylated cysteines were denoted as fixed modifications and oxidized methionine’s as well as R6 and K6 heavy isotopes were denoted as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were set to 200 ppm and 0,2 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined by Mascot according to 38. A protein FDR < 5% was considered relevant. Additionally, peptide and protein identifications were further validated for their probability rates at ≥ 95% protein – and peptide confidence using Scaffold Q+ (Scaffold 4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, Oregon) with the stringent protein prophet algorithm. After lowering the peptide threshold to 50%, WA target identifications that were based on 1 peptide underwent further quality control. They were tolerated when no counterpart light or heavy peptides (see figure 4C) were assigned at the lower (50%) peptide confidence. SILAC differential expression ratios were calculated with ProteinPilot (ProteinPilot Software 4.0, Applied Biosystems, Nieuwerkerk aan den Ijssel, Netherlands) according to the Paragon Algorithm with an additional FDR calculated via a nonlinear fitting method 39. A global FDR of 1% and a local FDR of 5% was used. Only proteins with a ≥ 2-fold threshold change ratio were considered differentially regulated. Because of Scaffold stringency, only proteins that were identified in Scaffold were subsequently quantified in ProteinPilot. Orbitrap Velos LTQ Raw data were converted by the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, California) and screened against the Homo sapiens database (UniProt ID proteome ID UP000005640) using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.1.03). Database searches were performed similarly to the MALDI analysis, except mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0,5 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. SILAC differential expression ratios were calculated with PEAKS 7 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and proteins were only accepted if the fold change ratio was ≥ 2 and the standard deviation (SD) ≠ 0. An additional FDR curve was estimated with the decoy fusion method. All ≥ 2 fold differential expressed proteins have a -10lgP value > 40, corresponding with a protein false discovery rate (FDR) < 2,5%. Because of Scaffold stringency, only proteins that were identified in Scaffold were subsequently quantified in PEAKS DB.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Withaferin a, Quantitative chemoproteomics, Quantitative differential expression analysis, Multiple myeloma

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signalling (PPES), Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp (UA), Belgium

### Submitter
martin dom

### Lab Head
Dr Xaveer Van Ostade
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signalling (PPES), Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp (UA), Belgium


