### Accession
PXD027044

### Title
proteomic analysis of leukocytes upon Plekhm1-KO

### Description
Leukemia cells instruct their surrounding bone marrow microenvironment (BMM) rendering it hospitable to leukemia cell survival. Conversely, how cells of the BMM influence leukemia progression is less well understood. Pleckstrin homology domain family M member 1 (PLEKHM1) serves as a hub between fusion and secretion of intracellular vesicles. Here, we performed TMT-based quantitative proteomics to investigate the proteome of BMM-derived leucocytesfrom mice lacking Plekhm1 compared to wild-type animals, which have been transplanted withBCR-ABL1-expressing bone marrow cells.

### Sample Protocol
Leukaemic mice were sacrificed at day 20 after transplantation and bone marrow cells were harvested and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes. 80% of the total leukocytes were positive for both GFP and BP-1 in both mice groups. Cell pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer (2%SDS, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 50mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 10 minutes at 95°C followed by 2 minutes of sonication and another 5 minutes of boiling at 95°C. Proteins were precipitated using 4 volumes of ice-cold methanol, 1 volume Chloroform and 3 volumes ddH2O. After centrifugation at 14,000g for 45min at 4°C, the upper aqueous phase was aspirated and 3 volumes of ice-cold methanol were added. Samples were mixed and proteins pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and pellets washed one additional time with ice-cold methanol. Protein pellets were dried at RT for further use. Proteins were resuspended in 8M Urea, 50mM Tris pH 8.2 and protein concentration determined using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). 50µg of protein from each sample were diluted to 4M urea using digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.2) and incubated with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 3 hours at 37°C and then further diluted to 1M Urea using digestion buffer and incubated at a 1:100 (w/w) ratio of Trypsin (Promega, V5113) overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified using trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) to 0.5% and peptides purified using SepPak tC18 columns (Waters, WAT054955) according to the manufacturers protocol. Eluted peptides were dried, resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (0.2M EPPS pH 8.2, 20% Acetonitrile) and peptide concentration determined by micro BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23235). Peptides were mixed with TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111, A37724, 90061) in 1:2 (w/w) ratio (2µg TMT reagent per 1µg peptide). Reactions were incubated for one hour at RT and subsequently quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% at RT for 15min. After verification of labelling efficiency (>99%) and mixing ratios for equal mixing by liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry (LC-MS), all samples were pooled, dried in a vacuum concentrator and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reverse-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868) into 8 fractions according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide fractions were evaporated to dryness and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis, for which they were resuspended in LC-MS grade water containing 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA.  Tryptic peptides derived from leukemia cells were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). A synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Approximately 1 µg of individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 6 to 32% ACN over 150 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 80% ACN in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) Acquired spectra were searched against the mouse reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 10090) downloaded from UniProt (10-12-2018; 62309 sequences including isoforms) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries from MaxQuant`s “contaminants.fasta”) using SequestHT. In addition to standard dynamic (Oxidation on methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini) and static (Carbamidomethylation on cysteins) modifications, TMT-labelling of N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. Only PSMs with a signal-to-noise above 10 and a co-isolation below 50% derived from unique and razor peptides we`re used for protein quantification after total intensity normalization. Filtering and statistical analysis of the Proteome Discoverer output (“Proteins” table) was performed in Perseus (v 1.6.15.0). Only proteins quantified in all replicates in both experimental groups (WT and KO) with at least 2 unique peptides were used for statistical analysis. Significant proteins were defined after a Welch`s t-test applying a p-value cut-off (<0.05) and fold-change threshold (log2ratio larger than +-0.58).

### Publication Abstract
Leukemia cells reciprocally interact with their surrounding bone marrow microenvironment (BMM), rendering it hospitable to leukemia cell survival, for instance through the release of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs). In contrast, we show here that BMM deficiency of pleckstrin homology domain family M member 1 (PLEKHM1), which serves as a hub between fusion and secretion of intracellular vesicles and is important for vesicular secretion in osteoclasts, accelerates murine BCR-ABL1+ B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) via regulation of the cargo of sEVs released by BMM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). PLEKHM1-deficient MSCs and their sEVs carry increased amounts of syntenin and syndecan-1, resulting in a more immature B-cell phenotype and an increased number/function of leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) via focal adhesion kinase and AKT signaling in B-ALL cells. Ex&#xa0;vivo pretreatment of LICs with sEVs derived from PLEKHM1-deficient MSCs led to a strong trend toward acceleration of murine and human BCR-ABL1+ B-ALL. In turn, inflammatory mediators such as recombinant or B-ALL cell-derived tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1; or interleukin-1&#x3b2; condition murine and human MSCs in&#xa0;vitro, decreasing PLEKHM1, while increasing syntenin and syndecan-1 in MSCs, thereby perpetuating the sEV-associated circuit. Consistently, human trephine biopsies of patients with B-ALL showed a reduced percentage of PLEKHM1+ MSCs. In summary, our data reveal an important role of BMM-derived sEVs for driving specifically BCR-ABL1+ B-ALL, possibly contributing to its worse prognosis compared with BCR-ABL1- B-ALL, and suggest that secretion of inflammatory cytokines by cancer cells in general may similarly modulate the tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Mouse, Orbitrap lumos, Sps-ms3, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Tmt

### Affiliations
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Krause
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY


