### Accession
PXD001968

### Title
Bacterial persistence -  Bacterial persistence is an active σS stress response to metabolic flux limitation

### Description
Bacterial persistence, found in dormant and starved cells, is a health threat due to transient antibiotic tolerance. Harnessing a novel method for persister generation, we determined the proteome, metabolite levels and the physiology of E.coli persisters in and during entry into dormancy and starvation. In contrast to starved persisters, dormant persisters present in nutrient-rich conditions produced energy and grew, while both types had extremely low metabolite pools. The proteome of dormant cells governed by starvation response reached a unique state characterized by diminished anabolism, stress response and preservation of central metabolism protein levels. While starved cells approaches the same proteome, the limited carbon and energy source did not allow them to reach it, which caused their higher sensitivity to certain antibiotics. We present a conceptual model in which depleted metabolite pools resulting from initial persistence triggers provide a primitive, feed-forward starvation signal that sustains the growing persistent phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
1.5x109 growing, dormant or starved cells were centrifuged (1’, 16000 g, 4 °C), washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and the cell pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed in 50 l lysis buffer (2% sodiumdoxycholate, 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate) and disrupted by two cycles of sonication for 20 seconds (Hielscher Ultrasonicator). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 15 min at 95°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature and quenched with 12.5 mM N-acetyl-cysteine. Samples were diluted with 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate  solution to a final concentration of 1% sodiumdoxycholate before digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1). After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and HCl to a final concentration of 50 mM. Precipitated sodiumdoxycholate was removed by centrifugation (15 minutes at 4°C at 14,000 rpm). Then, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further processing. 1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described recently (Glatter et al., 2012) with a few modifications. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 45 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 ms (MS) and 50 ms (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 4.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis LC-MS in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from E. coli (Uniprot, download date: 15/6/2012, total of 10,388 entries) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis and the protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. The final protein lists containing the summed peak areas of all identified peptides for each protein, respectively, were exported from Progenesis LC-MS and further statically analyzed using an in-house developed R script (SafeQuant) (Glatter et al., 2012).

### Publication Abstract
While persisters are a health threat due to their transient antibiotic tolerance, little is known about their phenotype and what actually causes persistence. Using a new method for persister generation and high-throughput methods, we comprehensively mapped the molecular phenotype of Escherichia coli during the entry and in the state of persistence in nutrient-rich conditions. The persister proteome is characterized by &#x3c3;(S)-mediated stress response and a shift to catabolism, a proteome that starved cells tried to but could not reach due to absence of a carbon and energy source. Metabolism of persisters is geared toward energy production, with depleted metabolite pools. We developed and experimentally verified a model, in which persistence is established through a system-level feedback: Strong perturbations of metabolic homeostasis cause metabolic fluxes to collapse, prohibiting adjustments toward restoring homeostasis. This vicious cycle is stabilized and modulated by high ppGpp levels, toxin/anti-toxin systems, and the &#x3c3;(S)-mediated stress response. Our system-level model consistently integrates past findings with our new data, thereby providing an important basis for future research on persisters.

### Keywords
Antibiotic resistance, E. coli

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


