### Accession
PXD019849

### Title
Nerv. System Specific Yme1l KO (NYKO) Mice Retina Samples (30-31wks old)

### Description
Cytosolic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) elicits a type I interferon response, but signals triggering the release of mtDNA from mitochondria remain enigmatic. We found that mtDNA-dependent immune signalling via the cGAS-STING pathway is under metabolic control and induced by cellular nucleotide deficiency. The mitochondrial protease YME1L preserves nucleotide pools by supporting de novo nucleotide synthesis and by proteolysis of the pyrimidine nucleotide carrier SLC25A33, limiting mitochondrial nucleotide transport and accumulation of mtDNA. Deficiency of YME1L or of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) drives an mtDNA-dependent inflammatory response, which depends on SLC25A33 and is suppressed upon replenishment of cellular nucleotide pools. Depletion of cytosolic nucleotides upon starvation or downregulation of de novo nucleotide synthesis triggers mtDNA-dependent immune responses. Our results thus identify mtDNA release and innate immune signalling as a metabolic response, offering new therapeutic opportunities in disease.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse breeding and tissue collection All animal procedures were carried out in accordance with European, national and institutional guidelines and were approved by local authorities (Landesamt für Natur, Umwelt, und Verbraucherschutz Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany; approval number: 84-02.04.2014.A418. Nervous system-specific Yme1l knockout mice were described previously 1. Groups included male and female C57BL/6 animals. Samples for protein and RNA extraction were taken after cervical dislocation and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Protein Digestion for proteomics (Retina) Mouse retinas were lysed and in-solution digested with trypsin according to the method established in our facility with Guanidinium chloride buffer 2. Before loading to LC/MS, the resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 StageTips.   Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) (Retina) The peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Nano-electrospray ion source, coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) UHPLC.  A 25 cm long reversed-phase C18 column with 75μm inner diameter (PicoFrit, LC Packings) was used for separating peptides. The LC runs lasted 140 min with a concentration of 6% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) increasing to 31% over 120 min and further to 50% over 10 min. The column was subsequently washed and re-equilibrated. The flow rate was 200 nl/min.  MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner with a top speed method. For MS, the mass range was set to 350−1800 m/z and resolution to 60K at 200m/z. The AGC target of MS was set to 1e6, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. Peptides were fragmented with HCD with collision energy of 25. The resolution was set to 30 K. The AGC target of MS/MS was 2e5 and the maximum injection time was 55 ms.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics and data analysis proteomics MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 3 with integrated Andromeda search engine 4 was used for analyzing the LC/MS/MS raw data. The raw data were searched against the mouse proteome from UniProt (knowledgebase 2017_01). Following parameters were used for data analysis: for ‘’fixed modification’’: cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation; for ‘’variable modification’’: methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; for ‘’digestion’’ specific with Trypsin/P, Max. missed cleavages 2; for label-free quantification, match between runs is selected. Other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retina, Nyko

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


