### Accession
PXD004013

### Title
Analysis of the cultured podocyte phosphoproteome

### Description
The renal filtration barrier is critically maintained by the renal podocyte, a postmitotic, neuron-like epithelial cell type. Cultured podocyte cell lines – both in the differentiated and undifferentiated state - are a widely utilized tool to estimate cytoskeletal rearrangement processes in vitro. Here, we mapped the podocyte proteome at a depth of more than 7000 proteins. The data dissects the dynamic range of the podocyte proteome during differentiation. The data also demonstrates an absolute quantitative analysis of proteins mutated in forms of hereditary disease and demonstrates expression of several proteins not expressed in other, standard cell lines. We validated differentially regulated proteins using immunoblot and functional assays estimating lysosomal and proteasomal function. Comparison with deep mapping RNAseq data from the native podocyte, preliminary fingerprint data from the native proteome and staining intensities from the human protein atlas was performed to estimate similiarities between the cultured and native podocyte proteome, unravelling that at least 26 high-abundant native, podocyte-specific proteins, were not identified in the dataset.  Notably, this data detected general perturbations in proteostatic mechanisms as a key alteration during podocyte differentiation, with increased proteasome activity in the undifferentiated state and markedly increased expression of lysosomal proteins in the differentiated state. We also performed a comparative phosphoproteomic analysis with published data from the native glomerul. These data also suggests a preference of phosphorylation of actin associated proteins in the differentiated state. The dataset obtained here, a valuable resource, warrants and provides the means for deep mapping of the native podocyte proteome and phosphoproteome in a similar manner.

### Sample Protocol
Podocytes were solubilized in urea, and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w). Then, proteins were fractionated using offline SCX and peptides were cleaned up using stage tips.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant v 1.3.0.5 as indicated in the methods section of the respective paper.

### Publication Abstract
The renal filtration barrier is maintained by the renal podocyte, an epithelial postmitotic cell. Immortalized mouse podocyte cell lines-both in the differentiated and undifferentiated state-are widely utilized tools to estimate podocyte injury and cytoskeletal rearrangement processes in vitro. Here, we mapped the cultured podocyte proteome at a depth of more than 8,800 proteins and quantified 7,240 proteins. Copy numbers of proteins mutated in forms of hereditary nephrotic syndrome or focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) were assessed. We found that cultured podocytes express abundant copy numbers of endogenous receptors, such as tyrosine kinase membrane receptors, the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), NPR3 (ANP receptor), and several poorly characterized GPCRs. The data set was correlated with deep mapping mRNA sequencing ("mRNAseq") data from the native mouse podocyte, the native mouse podocyte proteome and staining intensities from the human protein atlas. The generated data set was similar to these previously published resources, but several native and high-abundant podocyte-specific proteins were not identified in the data set. Notably, this data set detected general perturbations in proteostatic mechanisms as a dominant alteration during podocyte differentiation, with high proteasome activity in the undifferentiated state and markedly increased expression of lysosomal proteins in the differentiated state. Phosphoproteomics analysis of mouse podocytes at a resolution of more than 3,000 sites suggested a preference of phosphorylation of actin filament-associated proteins in the differentiated state. The data set obtained here provides a resource and provides the means for deep mapping of the native podocyte proteome and phosphoproteome in a similar manner.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Cell culture, Mouse, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


