### Accession
PXD026340

### Title
Modulation of Early Neutrophil Granulation: The Circulating Tumor Cell-Extravesicular Connection in Pancreatic Ductal  Adenocarcinoma

### Description
Tumor cells dissociate from the primary site and enter into systemic circulation (circulating tu-mor cells, CTCs) either alone or Tumor cells dissociate from the primary site and enter into systemic circulation (circulating tu-mor cells, CTCs) either alone or as tumor microemboli (clusters); the latter having an increased predisposition towards forming distal metastases than single CTCs. The formation of clusters is, in part, created by contacts between cell–cell junction proteins and/or cytokine receptor pairs with other cells such as neutrophils, platelets, fibroblasts, etc. In the present study, we provide evidence for an extravesicular (EV) mode of communication between pancreatic cancer CTCs and neutrophils. Our results suggest that the EV proteome of CTCs contain signaling proteins that can modulate degranulation and granule mobilization in neutrophils and, also, contain tis-sue plasminogen activator and other proteins that can regulate cluster formation. By exposing naïve neutrophils to EVs isolated from CTCs, we further show how these changes are modulated in a dynamic fashion indicating evidence for a deeper EV based remodulatory effect on com-panion cells in clusters.as tumor microemboli (clusters); the latter having an increased predisposition towards forming distal metastases than single CTCs. The formation of clusters is, in part, created by contacts between cell–cell junction proteins and/or cytokine receptor pairs with other cells such as neutrophils, platelets, fibroblasts, etc. In the present study, we provide evidence for an extravesicular (EV) mode of communication between pancreatic cancer CTCs and neutrophils. Our results suggest that the EV proteome of CTCs contain signaling proteins that can modulate degranulation and granule mobilization in neutrophils and, also, contain tis-sue plasminogen activator and other proteins that can regulate cluster formation. By exposing naïve neutrophils to EVs isolated from CTCs, we further show how these changes are modulated in a dynamic fashion indicating evidence for a deeper EV based remodulatory effect on com-panion cells in clusters.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Samples for LC-MS The immunoprecipitated samples were processed by Tymora Analytical Operations (West Lafayette, USA). The proteins were incubated at 37 °C for 15 min to reduce the Cys residues, and alkylated by incubation in 100 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. The samples were diluted 3-fold with 50 mM triethylammonium bi-carbonate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and digested with Lys-C (Wako, Ginza, Japan) at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37 °C. The samples were further diluted 3-fold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion at 37 °C. After digestion, the sam-ples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) (TFA) to a pH < 3 and desalted using Top-Tip C18 tips (Glygen, Columbia, USA) according to manufac-turer’s instructions. A portion of each sample was used to determine peptide concentra-tion using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). The samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at −80 °C. Based on the concentration, 1.4% of each peptide sample was analyzed by LC-MS.   LC-MS/MS Analysis Dried peptide and phosphopeptide samples were dissolved in 4.8 μL of 0.25% formic acid with 3% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), and 4 μL of each were in-jected into an EasynLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 45-cm in-house packed column (360 μm OD × 75 μm ID) containing C18 resin (2.2 μm, 100 Å) (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 60- or 90-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Easy-nLC 1000 was coupled online with a hybrid high-resolution LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 300 to 1500 with the resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400), followed by MS/MS of the 10 most intense ions (normalized collision energy −30%; automatic gain control (AGC)—3E4, maximum injection time—100 ms; 90 s exclusion).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (Maxquant, Mar-tinsried,Germany) [25]. Peptides were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA data-base using the Andromeda search engine (Maxquant, Martinsried,Germany), inte-grated into MaxQuant. Oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, P/T/S phosphorylations were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethyl was fixed. Trypsin was cho-sen as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Identified peptides had an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 6 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.6 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides (minimum of 7 amino acids) and pro-teins was 1%. A reverse sequence database was used in determining the FDR. For la-bel-free protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered. A contaminant da-tabase provided by the Andromeda search engine was used. All proteins matching the reverse database or labeled as contaminants were filtered out. Label-free protein quantifi-cation (LFQ) values were obtained through MaxQuant quantitative label-free analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells dissociate from the primary site and enter into systemic circulation (circulating tumor cells, CTCs) either alone or as tumor microemboli (clusters); the latter having an increased predisposition towards forming distal metastases than single CTCs. The formation of clusters is, in part, created by contacts between cell-cell junction proteins and/or cytokine receptor pairs with other cells such as neutrophils, platelets, fibroblasts, etc. In the present study, we provide evidence for an extravesicular (EV) mode of communication between pancreatic cancer CTCs and neutrophils. Our results suggest that the EV proteome of CTCs contain signaling proteins that can modulate degranulation and granule mobilization in neutrophils and, also, contain tissue plasminogen activator and other proteins that can regulate cluster formation. By exposing na&#xef;ve neutrophils to EVs isolated from CTCs, we further show how these changes are modulated in a dynamic fashion indicating evidence for a deeper EV based remodulatory effect on companion cells in clusters.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer; extracellular vesicles; neutrophil degranulation; granule mobilization; retep-lase activity; circulating tumor cells; clusters

### Affiliations
University of Miami, Miller SOM
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine

### Submitter
Harrys Kishore Charles Jacob

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Saluja
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine


