### Accession
PXD012548

### Title
Akt1 depletion in murine ovarian granulosa cells reveals known and novel molecular and cellular processes dependent on this kinase

### Description
The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is known to regulate a broad range of cellular processes and it is often altered in several types of cancers. Recently, somatic AKT1 mutations leading to a strong activation of this kinase have been reported in juvenile granulosa cell tumors. However, the molecular role of AKT1 in the ovary is still poorly understood. To get insights into its ovarian function, we depleted Akt1 in murine primary granulosa cells, a supporting cell lineage, and assessed the molecular consequences at both the transcript and protein levels. We were able to corroborate the involvement of AKT1 in metabolism, apoptosis, cell cycle or cytoskeleton regulation in granulosa cells. Consistently, we showed that established granulosa cells depleted for Akt1 exhibited increased velocity and altered directional persistent migration. This study also allowed us to uncover new direct and indirect targets of the kinase. Indeed, a series of proteins involved in intracellular transport and mitochondrial physiology were also significantly affected by Akt1 depletion. Using in silico analyses, we also propose a set of kinases and transcription factors that can mediate the action of AKT1 on the deregulated transcripts and proteins. Taken altogether, our results provide a resource of direct and indirect AKT1 targets in the ovary and may shed light on the molecular events driving tumorigenesis owing to its mutations in granulosa cells.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition: Protein extracts (30 µg) from control cells (control, 3 replicates), and siRNA for Akt1 cells (KD1, KD2, K3, KD4, 2 replicates each) were precipitated with acetone at - 20°C during 3 hours and incubated with 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/mL; Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA) and analyzed in a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 98 minutes, followed by a regeneration column for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3 x106. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2x105, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification: Label-free relative quantification was performed in between subject analysis using Progenesis-Qi software 4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) coupled to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1, London, UK). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (Protein N-term). The SwissProt database (02/2017) with the Mus musculus taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Protein abundance variations were measured according to the Hi-3 label-free quantification method and validated if their Anova p-values were under 0.05. However, 308 proteins were not detected in all the samples. For these cases, we kept the proteins detected in at least 2/3 samples for the control condition, and 5/8 samples for the KD condition. Statistical significance was assessed by an uncorrected Student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is known to regulate a broad range of cellular processes, and it is often altered in several types of cancers. Recently, somatic <i>AKT1</i> mutations leading to a strong activation of this kinase have been reported in juvenile granulosa cell tumors. However, the molecular role of AKT1 in the supporting cell lineage of the ovary is still poorly understood. To get insights into its function in such cells, we depleted <i>Akt1</i> in murine primary granulosa cells and assessed the molecular consequences at both the transcript and protein levels. We were able to corroborate the involvement of AKT1 in the regulation of metabolism, apoptosis, cell cycle, or cytoskeleton dynamics in this ovarian cell type. Consistently, we showed in established granulosa cells that depletion of <i>Akt1</i> provoked altered directional persistent migration and increased its velocity. This study also allowed us to put forward new direct and indirect targets of the kinase. Indeed, a series of proteins involved in intracellular transport and mitochondrial physiology were significantly affected by <i>Akt1</i> depletion. Using <i>in silico</i> analyses, we also propose a set of kinases and transcription factors that can mediate the action of AKT1 on the deregulated transcripts and proteins. Taken altogether, our results provide a resource of direct and indirect AKT1 targets in granulosa cells and may help understand its roles in this ovarian cell type.

### Keywords
Mouse, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Akt1, Granulosa cells, Knock-down

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Professor of Genetics, PrCEx2 Université Paris-Diderot/Paris 7. Team: Molecular Oncology and Ovarian Pathologies Institut Jacques Monod, 15 Rue Hélène Brion, Paris Cedex 13,  France.

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Reiner A. VEITIA
Professor of Genetics, PrCEx2 Université Paris-Diderot/Paris 7. Team: Molecular Oncology and Ovarian Pathologies Institut Jacques Monod, 15 Rue Hélène Brion, Paris Cedex 13,  France.


