### Accession
PXD022843

### Title
TMT-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of proteome changes in seminal plasma extracellular vesicles of azoospermia

### Description
The proteome and phosphoproteomics changes were quantified in seminal plasma extracellular vesicles among healthy individuals with normal sperm, nonobstructive azoospermia and obstructive azoospermia using TMT 10-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The sEV proteins were reduced, trypsin digested, desalted, and labeled by TMT 10-plex labeling reagents. In total, three sets of 10-plex TMT experiments quantifying 9 healthy individuals with normal sperm (NS), 9 nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) and 9 obstructive azoospermia (OA) samples were performed, with each TMT 10-plex labeling containing 3 NS, 3 NOA, 3 OA and a pooled sample as an internal standard. A total of 5% samples is used separately for proteome analysis, the 3 sets of remaining 95% of the samples were pooled for phosphoproteome.  For proteome analysis, labeled peptide mixtures were subjected to fractionation by high-pH reverse phase column using an XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (300μm×150mm, 1.7μm, Waters) with an M-class HPLC system (Waters), 10 fractions were collected using a nonadjacent pooling scheme within a 73 min gradient of 3% buffer B (A: 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10; B: acetonitrile (ACN)) for 14 min, 3%–8% B for 1 min, 8%–29% B for 24 min, 29%–41% B for 4 min, 41%–100% B for 1 min, 100% B for 8 min, and 100%-3% B for 1 min followed by 20 min at 3% B, and were then dried.  For phosphoproteome analysis, 1mg TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using Agilent 1260 system with XBridge BEH300 C18 column (10 × 250 mm, 5 μm; Waters). 5 fractions were collected by using a nonadjacent pooling scheme within a 22 min gradient of 0%–12% buffer B (5 mM ammonium formate/90% ACN, pH 10) for 1.7 min, 12%–32% B for 10.6 min, 32%–37% B for 0.7 min, 37%–48% B for 2.6 min, 48%–70% B for 2.4 min, followed by 4 min at 70% B. The 5 fractions were then dried by vacuum concentration for further enrichment of phosphopeptides.  All fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) and an analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA). A 95 min linear gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 sec, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34min 50sec, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 30% buffer to 100% buffer B for 5sec and 100% buffer B for 8 min) was applied while using the following buffer: 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database using MaxQuant software (1.6.5.0). FDR cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. Enzyme specificity was considered full cleavage by trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine fixed modifications, with TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications for TMT data. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term). TMT reporter intensity corrected was used in TMT-based quantification. A dynamic modification of ＋79.996 Da (phosphorylation) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. The corrected TMT reporter intensities were used for TMT-based quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt; azoospermia; extracellular vesicles; seminal plasma; proteomics

### Affiliations
18351998967
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
Yao liping

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China


