### Accession
PXD019819

### Title
Identification of spliced peptides in pancreatic islets uncovers errors leading to false assignments

### Description
Spliced peptides have been identified in the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptidomes of several tumors and have emerged as novel autoantigens that can stimulate highly specific T cells. A special class of spliced peptides, hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs), bound to histocompatibility class II molecules are potential autoantigens in the development and progression of type 1 diabetes (T1D).  Recently, our laboratory demonstrated that HIPs are formed during insulin granule degradation in crinosomes isolated from nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice. In our current work, we have expanded this study to examine crinosomes from two other nondiabetic mouse strains, B6 and B6.g7, to prove that HIP formation is a consequence of normal insulin granule degradation and is independent of T1D. During the course of this work, we discovered that modified peptides comprise a significant source of false positive HIP assignments in our bioinformatics pipeline and posited that similar factors could explain the high percentage of spliced peptides in recent mass spectrometry-based studies of various tumor immunopeptidomes. Therefore, we re-analyzed data files from two recent studies that reported a large percentage of spliced peptides and demonstrated that both analyses contain many spectra erroneously assigned to spliced peptide sequences.

### Sample Protocol
For all samples, please see previous publications for a detailed description of sample processing.

### Data Protocol
Data files were uploaded into PEAKS X+ (BSI) for processing and database searching. For crinosomes, searches were first performed against a Uniprot-Mouse database; a multi-round search was performed from the PEAKS DB search against an in silico HIP database with parent and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively, with no enzyme specificity, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and trioxidation (C) as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered for 1% FDR at the PSM level. For both HLA datasets, initial searches were performed against a Uniprot-Human database. Subsequent PEAKS PTM and SPIDER searches were performed to identify unexpected modifications and amino acid substitutions. For both, the SPIDER results were filtered at 1% FDR at the PSM level and exported. A second search was performed for each, with the respective spliced peptides from literature reports appended to the Uniprot-Human database. For all HLA searches, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were variable modifications and no enzyme specificity was used. For the human fibroblast data, the parent tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance was 0.02 Da. For the HLA-B*15:02 data, parent mass tolerance was 15 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.100 Da. For all, scan numbers for spectra assigned to spliced peptide sequences were queried against all modified peptides in the respective SPIDER search using the VLOOKUP function in Excel

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomal spliced peptides (PSPs) have been identified in the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptidomes of several tumors and have emerged as novel neoantigens that can stimulate highly specific T cells. Much debate has surrounded the percentage of PSPs in the immunopeptidome; reported numbers have ranged from &lt;1-5% to 12-45%. Recently, our laboratory demonstrated in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice that hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs), a special class of spliced peptides, are formed during insulin granule degradation in crinosomes of the pancreatic &#x3b2; cells and that modified peptides comprised a significant source of false positive HIP assignments. Herein, this study is extended to crinosomes isolated from other mouse strains and to two recent MHC class I studies, to see if modified peptides explained discrepancies in reported percentages of PSPs. This analysis revealed that both MHC-I peptidomes contained many spectra erroneously assigned as PSPs. While many false positive PSPs did arise from modified peptides, others arose from probable data processing errors. Thus, the reported numbers of PSPs in the literature are likely elevated due to errors associated with data processing and analysis.

### Keywords
Mhc-i peptidome, Crinosomes

### Affiliations
Washington University

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl Lichti
Washington University


