### Accession
PXD024763

### Title
Molecular characterisation of the SL1 snRNP and other factors involved in spliced leader trans-splicing in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans using immunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS.

### Description
Spliced leader trans-splicing is an essential RNA processing step that is required for the formation of mRNA in many eukaryotes, including C. elegans.  However, the factors involved in this reaction are not well known. Here we perform a molecular analysis of key components in this reaction by immunoprecipitation of GFP-tagged SNA-1 and SNA-3 proteins from C. elegans embryonic extracts treated with/without RNAseA/T1 followed by the identification of associated proteins using LC-MS/MS and label-free quantification. As control, embryonic extract from wild type N2 animals were also subjected to the same treatment. Note file names (e.g. PE906_SNA1_RNase_IP_anti-GFP_beads) indicate the name of the C. elegans line (PE906_), the name of the protein tagged with GFP (SNA1) and whether samples were treated with RNases A and T1 (RNase), and for raw files whether immunoprecipitation was done with anti-GFP nanobody coupled agarose beads (IP_anti_GFP_beads), or control agarose beads (IP_control_beads), respectively.  Note that SNA-3 protein is only identified by its Uniprot identifier Q9GYR5.

### Sample Protocol
SNA-1 and SNA-3 proteins were GFP-tagged in C. elegans by modification of the endogenous loci using CRISPR/Cas9 genome engineering, leading to the production of animal lines PE906 (sna-1(fe75[GFP^3xFLAG::sna-1]) V) and PE975 (uocIs1 II; sna-3(fe92[sna-3::GFP^3xFLAG]) unc-119(ed3) III) that only express either GFP-tagged SNA-1 or SNA-3 proteins, respectively. Proteins were immunoprecipitated from embryonic extracts prepared from these lines or from N2 wild type animals treated with/without RNAseA/T1 using anti-GFP nanobody coupled beads and for comparison with control agarose beads (GFP-Trap and control agarose beads, ChromoTek GmbH).  Immunoprecipitations were done in triplicates.  Where indicated, extracts were pre-treated with RNases A and T1 to differentiate between RNA-dependent and -independent interactions. As an additional control, embryonic extract prepared from wild type N2 animals was subjected to this immunoprecipitation protocol. After extensive washing, the proteins associated with beads were reduced, S-alkylated and digested with trypsin according to a standard protocol (PRIME-XS). Peptides were desalted using micro-C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore) then analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus/Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Following pre-concentration on a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100), the peptides were reverse-flushed to the nano column (PepMap RSLC C18) and separated using a gradient of acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid. A “Top 10” Full MS/Data-dependent MS2 method was used to acquire mass data during 60 minutes. MS1 scans (375-1750 m/z) had a resolution of 70,000, automatic gain control of 3e6, and max injection time of 50 ms. Ions with charge states of +2 to +5 were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (NCE of 28%). MS2 scans (variable first mass) had a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5e4, and max IT of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 40 s, and peptide ions were preferred.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.5.0) using the standard settings for Orbitrap against a C. elegans protein database (UP000001940_6239, downloaded 11/04/2019).  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed Trypsin/P cleavages was allowed. Label-free quantification was done using standard settings and an LFQ min ratio count of 2. The “proteinGroup.txt” files were analysed using Perseus (v 1.6.5.0). For quantification, three valid LFQ values were required in the immunoprecipitations with anti-GFP nanobody coupled agarose beads. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, the differences between proteins amounts in immunoprecipitations with anti-GFP nanobody beads and protein amounts in the control precipitations with agarose beads were examined using a two-sample t-test with a permutation-based FDR, and visualised using volcano plots with a conservative q-value <0.01 and an S0 value of 2.5 to highlight clearly enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Spliced leader trans-splicing is essential for gene expression in many eukaryotes. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of this process, we characterise the molecules associated with the Caenorhabditis elegans major spliced leader snRNP (SL1 snRNP), which donates the spliced leader that replaces the 5' untranslated region of most pre-mRNAs. Using a GFP-tagged version of the SL1 snRNP protein SNA-1 created by CRISPR-mediated genome engineering, we immunoprecipitate and identify RNAs and protein components by RIP-Seq and mass spectrometry. This reveals the composition of the SL1 snRNP and identifies associations with spliceosome components PRP-8 and PRP-19. Significantly, we identify a novel, nematode-specific protein required for SL1 trans-splicing, which we designate SNA-3. SNA-3 is an essential, nuclear protein with three NADAR domains whose function is unknown. Mutation of key residues in NADAR domains inactivates the protein, indicating that domain function is required for activity. SNA-3 interacts with the CBC-ARS2 complex and other factors involved in RNA metabolism, including SUT-1 protein, through RNA or protein-mediated contacts revealed by yeast two-hybrid assays, localisation studies and immunoprecipitations. Our data are compatible with a role for SNA-3 in coordinating trans-splicing with target pre-mRNA transcription or in the processing of the Y-branch product of the trans-splicing reaction.

### Keywords
Nematode, Rna processing, Small nuclear ribonucleoproteins

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
University of Aberdeen  School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition  Institute of Medical Sciences Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD Scotland, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Berndt Muller

### Lab Head
Dr Berndt Muller
University of Aberdeen  School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition  Institute of Medical Sciences Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD Scotland, United Kingdom


