### Accession
PXD005074

### Title
Comparative Analysis of two Helicobacter pylori Strains using Genomics and Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics

### Description
Helicobacter pylori, a gastroenteric pathogen believed to have co-evolved with humans for 100.000 years, has a high genetic variability that motivates the study of different H. pylori populations and the diseases caused by them in order to find determinants for disease evolution. In this study we utilized both genomic and proteomic tools to compare a H. pylori strain (Nic25_A) from Nicaragua isolated from a patient with intestinal metaplasia with the P12 strain from Europe isolated from a patient with duodenal ulcer. Differences in the protein expression levels between the two strains were determined by both label-free quantification (MaxQuant) and labelling methods (tandem mass tags, TMT), utilizing a lipid-based protein immobilization (LPI™) technique to target surface protein peptides. Using the MaxQuant software, we found 52 proteins significantly differing between the two strains (up-or-down regulated by a factor of 1.5) and with TMT we were able to find 18 proteins with different expression levels between the strains.  The P12 (duodenal ulcer) strain had higher expression of genes belonging to the cagPAI operon, while Nic25_A (intestinal metaplasia) had higher expression of the acid response regulator ArsR, as well as proteins regulated by ArsR; KatA, AmiE, and proteins involved in urease production. The results show that differences in protein expression can be detected by proteomic approaches in H. pylori strains of different pathogenicity, which might have implications for studies of disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Helicobacter pylori strain isolation and cultivation H. pylori strains P12 and Nicaraguan clinical isolate HEALF04731 (Nic25_A) were cultured on Columbia blood agar plates in micro aerobic atmosphere (80% N2, 10% CO2, 10% H2), which is standard for H. pylori29. The strains were replated and cultured for 24 h before the colony biomass were scraped off from the plates and suspended in 500 μL of phosphate buffered saline. The bacterial biomass from each strain was washed with PBS, centrifuged for 8 min at 4000g, and re-suspended in PBS. This procedure was repeated three times before the bacteria were again resuspended in PBS and diluted to an OD600 of approximately 0,5 (NanoDrop-1000 Spectrophotometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The bacterial suspension was immediately loaded into the LPI™ HexaLane FlowCell (Nanoxis Consulting AB, www.nanoxisconsulting.com), as seen in Figure 1, step 1. An excess of bacteria was applied to the flow cell by adding a bacterial suspension (100 µl) to fill the LPITM FlowCell channel, which has a volume of 50 µl. Excess bacterial suspension was removed from the inlet and outlet ports to ensure for equal amount of bacterial material in each flow cell channel. The immobilized bacteria were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, to allow cell attachment, and the channels were subsequently washed with 1.0 mL of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (100 mM) to remove excess, unbound bacteria. Enzymatic digestion of bacterial membrane proteins was performed by injecting 100 μL of trypsin (20 μg/mL) into the LPITM HexaLane FlowCell channels and incubating for 30 min at room temperature. The generated peptides were eluted by injecting TEAB buffer (200 µl, 100 mM) into the channels and collecting the flow-through at the outlet ports, using a pipette. The eluate was incubated over night at 37°C to allow for complete digestion. After that, peptide solutions were frozen at −20°C until analysis by MS. The peptide samples were split into two equal parts and analysed using two different approaches. One part of the samples were first analysed by LC-MS/MS as described previously 8 in order to generate protein lists of each sample. Each sample was analysed by triplicate injections, (figure 1, step 3). In addition to this, relative quantification of peptides was performed on the other part of the samples using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) MS-based quantification, (figure 1, step 4).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was analysed, using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), incorporating Mascot version 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, U. K.). Mascot was configured to search against the custom made database of the Nic25_A and P12 proteomes, in total 3066 entries, with MS peptide tolerance as 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance as 0.5 Da, trypsin digestion allowing 1 missed cleavages with variable modifications; methionine oxidation, and where relevant, fixed modifications N-terminal TMT6-plex label, lysine TMT6-plex label. The detected peptide threshold in the software was set to a confidence using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% (the FDR determined via target-decoy). For quantification, the ratios of TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra (m/z 126.12, 127.13, 128.13, 129.14, 130.14) from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes for common peptides (not unique) that are isoforms or proteins of the same family between the strains. Peptide measurements were not grouped, missing values were replaced and normalisation was used. The ratios were then exported into Excel for manual data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Helicobacter pylori</i>, a gastroenteric pathogen believed to have co-evolved with humans over 100,000 years, shows significant genetic variability. This motivates the study of different <i>H. pylori</i> strains and the diseases they cause in order to identify determinants for disease evolution. In this study, we used proteomics tools to compare two <i>H. pylori</i> strains. Nic25_A was isolated in Nicaragua from a patient with intestinal metaplasia, and P12 was isolated in Europe from a patient with duodenal ulcers. Differences in the abundance of surface proteins between the two strains were determined with two mass spectrometry-based methods, label-free quantification (MaxQuant) or the use of tandem mass tags (TMT). Each approach used a lipid-based protein immobilization (LPI<sup>TM</sup>) technique to enrich peptides of surface proteins. Using the MaxQuant software, we found 52 proteins that differed significantly in abundance between the two strains (up- or downregulated by a factor of 1.5); with TMT, we found 18 proteins that differed in abundance between the strains. Strain P12 had a higher abundance of proteins encoded by the <i>cag</i> pathogenicity island, while levels of the acid response regulator ArsR and its regulatory targets (KatA, AmiE, and proteins involved in urease production) were higher in strain Nic25_A. Our results show that differences in protein abundance between <i>H. pylori</i> strains can be detected with proteomic approaches; this could have important implications for the study of disease progression.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Helicobacter pylori, Genomics, Proteomics, Protein expression, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, Gothenburg University, Sweden

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, Gothenburg University, Sweden


