### Accession
PXD002220

### Title
LPS-stimulated endothelial cells using SILAC

### Description
Severe sepsis and septic shock, which occur with high incidence and are prevalent in the emergency department setting, are among the most common causes of death in hospitalized patients worldwide, and there has been a continuous increase in the incidence of sepsis of approximately 5–10% per year. Endothelial cells constitute an important metabolic organ in the physiological homeostasis of blood vessels and play a pivotal role in orchestrating the inflammatory response triggered by sepsis or endotoxemia. The secretome is defined as the subset of the proteome that contains all the proteins actively exported by a cell following a particular event.

### Sample Protocol
* SILAC experiments EA.hy926 cells were labeled with heavy amino acids by seven passages of growth in SILAC medium consisting of DMEM with 100 mg/L L-lysine-13C6-15N2 and 100 mg/L L-arginine-13C6-15N4 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories; Andover, MA, USA). In addition, EA.hy926 cells were grown in DMEM without isotopes, and then incubated with 1 μg/mL LPS (Sigma; St. Louis, MO, USA) for 12 h or 24 h. Cell lysates were prepared in complete radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (150 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS], and 1% NP-40, pH 7.6) as follows: cells were sonicated three times (5 s per sonication) and then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 min at 4°C. The total amount of protein concentration in the cell lysates was measured using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Protein extracts were prepared as follows: 100 g lysate from the labeled EA.hy926 cells mixed with 100 μg lysate from the LPS-stimulated EA.hy926 cells. Subsequently, trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the mixture to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), and the mixture was stored overnight at 4°C to precipitate the proteins. The mixture was then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 min at 4°C, and the resulting pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  To identify the secreted proteins, samples of the culture media from the labeled and unlabeled LPS-stimulated cells were collected using 50 mL Falcon tubes, and protein precipitation was performed as described above. The medium containing the precipitated proteins was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the protein contents were measured using the BCA assay. Subsequently, we mixed 100 μg medium containing proteins from the labeled cells with 100 μg medium containing proteins from the unlabeled LPS-stimulated cells.   * In-solution trypsin digestion and desalting Trypsin was added to the proteins at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Then 100 μL 15 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the mixture, and it was incubated for 30 min at 56°C to reduce the disulfide bonds in the tryptic peptides. Subsequently, the reduced peptides were alkylated by adding 100 μL 60 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, after which the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, we added 75 mM cysteine (100 μL) to the peptide mixture, and incubated it for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was then added to the peptides at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w), the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 4 h, and the reaction was then terminated with 50% acetonitrile in 5% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the resulting peptides were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to analysis, the tryptic peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific; Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions  * Online 2D LC tandem mass spectrometer system The digested peptides were analyzed using an online 2D-LC-MS/MS system coupled with a nanoscale ACQUITY UPLC System (Waters Corporation; Milford, MA, USA) and a hybrid linear ion trap/Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometer (LTQ FT, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source. For each run, 5 µL peptide solutions were loaded and displaced from the strong cation exchange phase to the C18 phase by a salt gradient. For the first 10 min, the samples were desalted and trapped at a flow rate of 5 μL/min after being introduced through an autosampler loop. For online 2D-LC separation, we performed a six-step salt gradient (5 µL each of 0, 50, 100, 250, and 500 mM ammonium acetate in 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile, and then 9 µL 500 mM ammonium acetate in 0.1% formic acid and 30% acetonitrile) on a strong cation exchange column. The homemade microcapillary column (C18 Aqua; particle size 3 μm) used for separation of trapped peptides was packed into 100 μm silica tubing with an orifice diameter of 5 μm. The mobile phases A and B were 100% water (mass analytical grade) containing 0.1% formic acid, and 100% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The peptides were eluted at 200 nL/min with 5–35% solvent B and 35–95% solvent B for 90 min and 10 min, respectively. In a data-dependent mode of FT-ICR mass spectrometry (MS), the MS data were acquired using the following parameters: five data-dependent collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan with a mass resolution of 100,000; CID scans were acquired using the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy and 3-microscan averaging; the isolation window was set to ±1 Da; excluded time was 60 s for previously fragmented ions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3; Thermo Scientific) connected to Mascot (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). We used the International Protein Index (IPI) human database (version 3.87, which includes 91,464 protein sequences; ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/IPI) to search for proteins with the following search parameters: a precursor mass error of 50 ppm, monoisotopic mass selected, and a fragment ion mass error of 0.8 Da. The digestion enzyme was trypsin with two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da) was searched as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), 13C6-15N2 labeled lysine (8.014 Da), and 13C6-15N4 labeled arginine (10.008 Da) were searched as variable modifications. A decoy search was performed, and peptides were filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 and Mascot scores >20. Positive identification of proteins required a minimum of two unique peptides. For the quantitative analysis of SILAC samples, we used the event detector and precursor ion quantifier algorithms in Proteome Discoverer with a 2 ppm mass variability and a 0.2 min retention time tolerance on precursor ion pairs. Protein ratios were calculated as the ratio of unlabeled LPS-stimulated proteins to labeled proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Sepsis and septic shock, which are conditions triggered by infection, occur with high incidence in emergency departments and are among the most common causes of death in hospitalized patients worldwide. Therefore, the identification of sepsis biomarkers for the rapid diagnosis is a major goal for researchers in the field of critical care. Endothelial cells play a pivotal role in orchestrating the inflammatory response triggered by sepsis. In this study, we used proteomics to investigate the secretome of EA.hy926 endothelial cells following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation with 1 &#x3bc;g/mL LPS for 12 or 24 h. SILAC in cell cultures and an online 2D-LC-MS/MS system were used to analyze the secretome dynamics in response to LPS. We found that 22 of the 77 secreted proteins identified in both the presence and absence of LPS and that 19 of the secreted proteins were quantified more strongly after LPS treatment for 24 h than after treatment for 12 h. By Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway analyses, we found that proteins related to the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton showed the highest secretion response to LPS stimulation. Out of the 19 candidate proteins, we focused on moesin, which is involved in the function of endothelial cells, and confirmed its amount in cellular lysates and media taken from primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells treated with LPS. To our knowledge, this study provides the first in-depth analysis of the LPS-induced secretome in human endothelial cells, and we propose 19 new biomarker candidates for sepsis, including moesin.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Moesin, Sepsis, Silac, Secretome

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea


