### Accession
PXD003052

### Title
yeast membrane proteomics using Leu3 labelling

### Description
The yeast signal peptide peptidase homologue Ypf1 functionally interacts with the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) factors Dfm1 and Doa10 to control the abundance of the zinc transporter Zrt1. Here we report that Ctr1 is another substrate for this degradation mechanism with deletion of Ypf1 leading to an accumulation of Ctr1. We describe in detail the usage of leucine metabolic labelling in yeast in order to monitor quantitative proteome alterations, e.g. upon removal of a protease. Since laboratory yeast strains are typically leucine auxotroph, metabolic labelling with trideuterated leucine (d3-leucine) is a straightforward, cost-effective, and ubiquitously applicable strategy for quantitative proteomic studies similar to the widely used arginine/lysine SILAC method for mammalian cells. We showcase the usage of advanced peptide quantification using the FeatureFinderMultiplex algorithm (part of the OpenMS software package) for robust and reliable quantification. Furthermore, we present an OpenMS bioinformatics data analysis workflow that combines accurate quantification with high proteome coverage. In order to enable visualization, peptide-mapping, and sharing of quantitative proteomic data, especially for membrane-spanning and cell-surface proteins, we further developed the web-application Proteator. Due to its simplicity and robustness, we expect metabolic leucine labelling in yeast to be of great interest to the research community.

### Sample Protocol
The microsome suspension was precipitated by acetone-methanol in order to remove lipids. The protein pellet was re-solubilized in ice-cold 100 mM NaOH using ultrasonication. After adjusting the pH to 8.0 using HEPES, the samples were trypsinized (1:100; sequencing grade trypsin, Worthington; for 16 h at 37 °C), reduced (2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma), one hour at 37 °C), and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at 37 °C for one hour followed by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma), 20 min at 22 °C for quenching). The peptide sample was desalted using C18 solid phase extraction (Waters) according to manufacturer’s instruction and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography as described previously. Following SCX elution, fractions were desalted by STAGE tips prior to liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, which was performed using an Orbitrap XL as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Leu D3 metabolic labelling is a less common labelling technique. Consequently many software packages do not provide an option for the analysis of such experimental data.  Here we employed the OpenMS software framework, which allows for the design of highly modular data analysis workflows that can easily be adapted to non-standard experimental techniques such as Leu D3 labelling. The TOPPAS OpenMS workflow can be downloaded at http://www.mol-med.uni-freiburg.de/mom/schilling/protein_quantification_Leu3_LTQOrbiXL_20150921. Raw files were converted to mzML using ProteoWizard’s msconvert. Peptide-to-sequence matching was performed using MS-GF+ with a Saccharomyces cerevisiae Uniprot database downloaded in July 2015, counting 6721 entries and appended with an equal number of randomized sequences. Search parameters included: high resolution mass spectrometer settings, tryptic cleavage specificity, iodoacetamide protection of cysteine, and variable d3-leucine modification. Peptides were assembled to proteins using Fido. Peptides were quantified using FeatureFinderMultiplex. Peptide mapping was performed using Proteator (http://proteator.appspot.com), a web-based application which encompasses the functionality of the previously published peptide mapping tool Improviser. Proteator maps each peptide to its respective location on the protein and uses Uniprot data for protein sequence and topology.

### Publication Abstract
We describe in detail the usage of leucine metabolic labelling in yeast in order to monitor quantitative proteome alterations, e.g. upon removal of a protease. Since laboratory yeast strains are typically leucine auxotroph, metabolic labelling with trideuterated leucine (d3-leucine) is a straightforward, cost-effective, and ubiquitously applicable strategy for quantitative proteomic studies, similar to the widely used arginine/lysine metabolic labelling method for mammalian cells. We showcase the usage of advanced peptide quantification using the FeatureFinderMultiplex algorithm (part of the OpenMS software package) for robust and reliable quantification. Furthermore, we present an OpenMS bioinformatics data analysis workflow that combines accurate quantification with high proteome coverage. In order to enable visualization, peptide-mapping, and sharing of quantitative proteomic data, especially for membrane-spanning and cell-surface proteins, we further developed the web-application Proteator (http://proteator.appspot.com). Due to its simplicity and robustness, we expect metabolic leucine labelling in yeast to be of great interest to the research community. As an exemplary application, we show the identification of the copper transporter Ctr1 as a putative substrate of the ER-intramembrane protease Ypf1 by yeast membrane proteomics using d3-leucine isotopic labelling.

### Keywords
Erad, Yeast, Proteomics, Leu3 labelling, Membrane

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany
Freiburg University

### Submitter
Lars Nilse

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany


