### Accession
PXD002255

### Title
Enrichment strategy for searching missing protein

### Description
Enrichment strategy for searching missing protein is a project under the guidance of Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). We developed systematical enrichment strategies for revealing the existence of MPs including low molecular weight (LMW), membrane proteins, post-translational modification (PTM), and nucleic acid associated.

### Sample Protocol
LMW Proteins: In order to enrich serum LMW, the serum samples were treated by differential solubilization, in-house Gel-filter system, glycine SDS-PAGE and ProteoMiner methods. Membrane Proteins: For mining more MPs based on membrane proteome, MHCC97L and HCCLM6 cell lines were used through ultra-centrifugation and two phage enrichments. The cell homogenate was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 15 min then the resulting supernatant was further centrifuged for at 120000 g for 80 min at 4℃. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with 0.1 M ice-cold sodium carbonate (pH 11.5, 4℃) for 1 h and centrifuged at 120000 g for 80 min again to get the first enriched membrane protein fraction. Further extraction of membrane proteins were performed with Mem-PER Eukaryotic membrane protein extraction reagents (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc.), following the standard protocol with adjustment. At last the protein fractions were separated on 0.2% SDS-PAGE and trypsinized for LC-MS analysis. Phosphoproteome 1&2: HCCLM6 cell line was prepared for phosphoproteome enrichment analysis. In brief, after in-gel digestion and off-line high pH HPLC separation, the phosphorylated peptides from HCCLM6 cell line sample were enriched using Ni-NTA magnetic agarose beads slurry (IMAC beads, Qiagen). Ubiquitinome: As for ubiquitinome enrichment, an in-house ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD) method was used. DSK2p-drived UBA (a.a. 327-371, DSK2) and RABGEF1-drived A20-ZnF (a.a. 9-73, A20) were cloned by PCR amplification and self-ligated to each other in vitro, generating DSK2-A20 fragment. After construction of tandem repeats22, pGEX-4t-1 vector insertion, overexpression in E. coli and Glutathione-Sepharose 4B (GSH) beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) purification, the purified GST-4(DSK2-A20) were coupled to NHS-activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany) under the guidance of manufacturer’s instructions. The GST-4(DSK2-A20)-conjugated agarose were stored at 4°C in PBS supplemented with 30% glycine. Lysates of MHCC97H cell line were isolated at 100000 g for 30 min, and then incubated with GST-4(DSK2-A20)-conjugated agarose at 4°C for 30 min. After incubation, the beads were washed by native buffer and then eluted by boiled in SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Enriched proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsinized for further experiment. Nuclear Extracts (NE) Proteome: NE of MHCC97L and MHCCLM6 cell lines were prepared by NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). NE samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsinized for further experiment. mRNA binding Proteome: mRNA binding proteins were enriched by comprehensive identification of RNA binding proteins by mass spectrometry (ChIRP-MS).

### Data Protocol
For database searching, 7 MS/MS datasets were processed in parallel using both Mascot (v2.3.2) and MaxQuant (v1.5.0.25). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the overlap queries (20,032 entries, including 2915 MPs) between Swiss-Prot database (release 2014.05) and neXtProt database (release 2015.01), along with 245 common contaminant protein sequences (http://www.maxquant.org/contaminants.zip). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modification. For phosphoproteome datasets and ubiquitinome dataset, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, Tyr residue (STY) and GlyGly tail on lysine were used, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and only fully tryptic peptides with no less than 7 AAs were utilized for protein assembling. Target-decoy based strategy was used to ensure that for each dataset, both PSM- and protein-level FDRs were less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
As part of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) mission, laboratories all over the world have tried to map the entire missing proteins (MPs) since 2012. On the basis of the first and second Chinese Chromosome Proteome Database (CCPD 1.0 and 2.0) studies, we developed systematic enrichment strategies to identify MPs that fell into four classes: (1) low molecular weight (LMW) proteins, (2) membrane proteins, (3) proteins that contained various post-translational modifications (PTMs), and (4) nucleic acid-associated proteins. Of 8845 proteins identified in 7 data sets, 79 proteins were classified as MPs. Among data sets derived from different enrichment strategies, data sets for LMW and PTM yielded the most novel MPs. In addition, we found that some MPs were identified in multiple-data sets, which implied that tandem enrichments methods might improve the ability to identify MPs. Moreover, low expression at the transcription level was the major cause of the "missing" of these MPs; however, MPs with higher expression level also evaded identification, most likely due to other characteristics such as LMW, high hydrophobicity and PTM. By combining a stringent manual check of the MS2 spectra with peptides synthesis verification, we confirmed 30 MPs (neXtProt PE2 &#x223c; PE4) and 6 potential MPs (neXtProt PE5) with authentic MS evidence. By integrating our large-scale data sets of CCPD 2.0, the number of identified proteins has increased considerably beyond simulation saturation. Here, we show that special enrichment strategies can break through the data saturation bottleneck, which could increase the efficiency of MP identification in future C-HPP studies. All 7 data sets have been uploaded to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD002255.

### Keywords
Enrichment strategy, Chpp, Missing protein

### Affiliations
Beijing Proteome Research Center
Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine， 33 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel 0086-10-80727777 EXT 1314

### Submitter
Na Su

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine， 33 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel 0086-10-80727777 EXT 1314


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Homo sapiens
- Characteristics[organism part: membrane proteins, nuclear extracts, liver, not applicable, Blood serum
- Characteristics[cell type: not available, not applicable
- Characteristics[disease: hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), not applicable, normal
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos;AC=MS:1001742
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=S,T,Y;AC=UNIMOD:21, NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21 NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:21, not applicable

