### Accession
PXD046098

### Title
Structural and Metabolic Transitions of C4 Leaf Development and Differentiation Defined by Microscopy and Quantitative Proteomics in Maize

### Description
C4 grasses, such as maize (Zea mays), have high photosynthetic efficiency through combined biochemical and structural adaptations.C4 photosynthesis is established along the developmental axis of the leafblade, leading from an undifferentiated leaf base just above the ligule into highly specialized mesophyll cells (MCs) and bundle sheath cells (BSCs) at the tip. To resolve the kinetics of maize leaf development and C4 differentiation and to obtain a systems-level understanding of maize leaf formation, the accumulation profiles of proteomes of the leaf and the isolated BSCs with their vascular bundle along the developmental gradient were determined using large-scale mass spectrometry. This was complemented by extensive qualitative and quantitative microscopy analysis of structural features (e.g., Kranz anatomy, plasmodesmata, cell wall, and organelles). More than 4300 proteins were identified and functionally annotated. Developmental protein accumulation profiles and hierarchical cluster analysis then determined the kinetics of organelle biogenesis, formation of cellular structures, metabolism, and coexpression patterns. Two main expression clusters were observed, each divided in subclusters, suggesting that a limited number of developmental regulatory networks organize concerted protein accumulation along the leaf gradient. The coexpression with BSC and MC markers provided strong candidates for further analysis of C4 specialization, in particular transporters and biogenesis factors. Based on the integrated information, we describe five developmental transitions that provide a conceptual and practical template for further analysis. An online protein expression viewer is provided through the PlantProteomeDatabase.

### Sample Protocol
Maize (Zea mays) plants (MO16 and B73) were grown for 9 d in a growth chamber (12 h light/12 h dark, 400 mmol photons·m22·s21), 318C (day)/228C (night). The 3rd leaves were harvested and separated from their plant at their ligule, 2 to 3 h after the onset of the light period.  For the total leaf proteome, one individual leaf was selected per biological replicate to maximize the spatial resolution. Each leaf was sectioned into 1-cm segments, and the total cellular proteome was rapidly extracted in presence of SDS and protease inhibitors. For the total BS strand proteome, four sections were cut from the 3rd leaf: 0 to 1.5 cm, 2.5 to 4 cm, 4 to 5 cm, and 12 to 13 cm; sections from;100 leaves were pooled.  BS strands were then isolated, and contamination from MCs was assessed as described by Majeran et al. (2005). Equal amounts of protein extracts for all sections from each leaf or BS strand series were separated by SDS-PAGE gels (one gel per biological replicate) and stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue R 250. For analysis of soluble BS strand proteome as a pilot study, maize inbred W22 was grown in a growth chamber for 12 d (16 h light/8 h dark, 400 mmol photons·m–2·s–1, and constant 288C). For the soluble BS strand proteome, three sections were cut from each 3rd leaf as follows: the first 2 cm from the ligule, followed by a 1.5-cm gap, then the next 2 cm of the greening section, and the fully differentiated last 3 cm of the tip. Soluble proteins of the isolated BS strands were extracted by grinding in liquid nitrogen and the extraction buffer supplemented with a cocktail of protease inhibitors. Membrane and soluble proteins were separated using ultracentrifugation at 55,000 rpm for 20 min. The soluble proteins from the supernatant were then concentrated. For quantitative proteome analysis, equal amounts of proteins (200 mg) from each section were separated by one-dimensional Tricine gels. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R 250.  Each gel lane was then cut in eight slices (leaf), 10 slices (BS strand), or 11 to 14 slices (soluble BS strand). Proteins were digested with trypsin, and the extracted peptides were analyzed by nano LC-LTQ-Orbitrap MS using data dependent acquisition and dynamic exclusion, as described by Friso et al. (2010). The complete analysis was performed in two (leaf and total BS strands) or three (soluble BS strand proteins) independent biological replicates. In total, 293 MS runs were performed, with extensive blanks between each sample analysis to avoid carryover of peptides that could bias quantification.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (mgf format) were generated using DTA supercharge (v1.19) software (http://msquant.sourceforge.net/) and searched with Mascot v2.2 (Matrix Science) against maize genome release 4a.53 (with 53,764 models) from http://www.maizesequence.org/ supplemented with the plastid-encoded proteins (111 protein models) and mitochondrial encoded proteins (165 protein models). Details for calibration and control of false positive rate can be found in Friso et al. (2010). MS based information of all identified proteins was extracted from the Mascot search pages and filtered for significance (e.g., minimum ion scores, etc), ambiguities, and shared spectra as described by Friso et al. (2010). All filtered results were uploaded into the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/; Sun et al., 2009). Identified proteins were further processed and quantified as described by Friso et al. (2010). A summary of the complete workflow is displayed in Figure 3. Expression patterns of all identified proteins can be generated and explored through the protein expression viewer (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/dbsearch/plotgradient.aspx). All MS data (the mgf files reformatted as PRIDE XML files) were uploaded in the Proteomics Identifications database (PRIDE) at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/.

### Publication Abstract
C(4) grasses, such as maize (Zea mays), have high photosynthetic efficiency through combined biochemical and structural adaptations. C(4) photosynthesis is established along the developmental axis of the leaf blade, leading from an undifferentiated leaf base just above the ligule into highly specialized mesophyll cells (MCs) and bundle sheath cells (BSCs) at the tip. To resolve the kinetics of maize leaf development and C(4) differentiation and to obtain a systems-level understanding of maize leaf formation, the accumulation profiles of proteomes of the leaf and the isolated BSCs with their vascular bundle along the developmental gradient were determined using large-scale mass spectrometry. This was complemented by extensive qualitative and quantitative microscopy analysis of structural features (e.g., Kranz anatomy, plasmodesmata, cell wall, and organelles). More than 4300 proteins were identified and functionally annotated. Developmental protein accumulation profiles and hierarchical cluster analysis then determined the kinetics of organelle biogenesis, formation of cellular structures, metabolism, and coexpression patterns. Two main expression clusters were observed, each divided in subclusters, suggesting that a limited number of developmental regulatory networks organize concerted protein accumulation along the leaf gradient. The coexpression with BSC and MC markers provided strong candidates for further analysis of C(4) specialization, in particular transporters and biogenesis factors. Based on the integrated information, we describe five developmental transitions that provide a conceptual and practical template for further analysis. An online protein expression viewer is provided through the Plant Proteome Database.

### Keywords
Bundle sheet, Microscopy, C4 differentiation, Proteomics, Maize, Developmental gradient

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University

### Submitter
Tami Leppert

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University


### SDRF
- organism: Zea mays
- organism part: leaf section - Bundle sheath strands, leaf section total, leaf section - soluble proteome Bundle Sheath
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1000449;NT=LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed

