### Accession
PXD003774

### Title
In-cell isotope-coded labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis probe warfarin inhibition mechanism

### Description
Warfarin targets human vitamin K epoxide reductase (hVKOR), a redox enzyme in the membrane of endoplasmic reticulum (ER), to prevent the formation of blood clots. Although warfarin has been a popular medication since 1954, its mechanism of action is still unclear. A fundamental issue is the controversial orientation of transmembrane helices (TM) in hVKOR. Stable isotope-coded reagents were usedto label VKOR in free, mutated, and warfarin-binding states directly in the cellular environment, followed by LC-MS/MS bottom-up approach to investigate the warfarin binding mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type and mutant hVKORs with an affinity tag were expressed in stable cell lines. The cells were first treated by the membrane-permeable N-ethylmaleimide (d0-NEM) to label the free thiols of proteins. After being purified by immunoprecipitation, the protein was reduced to break the disulfide bonds of cysteines for labeling by deuterated-NEM (d5-NEM). The samples were chymotrypsin digested and analyzed by a LC-MS/MS bottom-up approach on a Eksigent nanoLC and Thermo LTQ Orbitrap instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into mgf files for MASCOT searching against a customer-built database. Variable modifications were NEM derivative of cysteines, methinine oxidation, and mutation of cysteine to analine. Extracted ion chromatograms for the NEM and NEM-d5 labeled cysteine-containing peptide were extracted based on the accurate masses and peak areas were obtained in Xcalibur Qual Browser. The value of the non-free cysteine content was calculated by the peak areas as NEM-d5/(NEM + NEM-d5).

### Publication Abstract
Although warfarin is the most widely used anticoagulant worldwide, the mechanism by which warfarin inhibits its target, human vitamin K epoxide reductase (hVKOR), remains unclear. Here we show that warfarin blocks a dynamic electron-transfer process in hVKOR. A major fraction of cellular hVKOR is in an intermediate redox state containing a Cys51-Cys132 disulfide, a characteristic accommodated by a four-transmembrane-helix structure of hVKOR. Warfarin selectively inhibits this major cellular form of hVKOR, whereas disruption of the Cys51-Cys132 disulfide impairs warfarin binding and causes warfarin resistance. Relying on binding interactions identified by cysteine alkylation footprinting and mass spectrometry coupled with mutagenesis analysis, we conducted structure simulations, which revealed a closed warfarin-binding pocket stabilized by the Cys51-Cys132 linkage. Understanding the selective warfarin inhibition of a specific redox state of hVKOR should enable the rational design of drugs that exploit the redox chemistry and associated conformational changes in hVKOR.

### Keywords
Warfarin, Isotope, N-ethylmeleimide, Human vitamin k epoxide reuctase, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Weidong Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L. Gross
Washington University in Saint Louis


