### Accession
PXD011248

### Title
DT40 whole cell proteome (SILAC)

### Description
SILAC quantitative proteomics was used to compare the whole cell proteomes of the differentially SILAC-labelled wild-type and acentrosomal (stil KO) DT40 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Differentially SILAC-labelled wild-type and acentrosomal (stil KO) DT40 cells (endogenous PCM1 was tagged with GFP in both cell lines) were combined including label-swap replicates. Proteins were digested by trypsin. Peptides were pre-fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography. Concatenated fractions were measured by a Q Exactive or Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). MS/MS mass spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of UniProt G. gallus proteome release 2017_03 (29,733 entries), Avian leukosis virus – RSA (3 entries; retrieved on 27 July 2016 from NCBI), EGFP and the default list of 245 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. The “re-quantify” function was switched on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G. gallus, Silac, Dt40

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni Gergely
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge


