### Accession
PXD031057

### Title
Leishmania braziliensis Protein Arginine Methyltransferases interactomes

### Description
We functionally characterized the five predicted PRMTs in Leishmania braziliensis by gene knockout and endogenous protein HA tagging using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. We report that R-methylation profiles vary among Leishmania species and across L. braziliensis lifecycle stages, with the peak PRMT expression occurring in promastigotes. A list of PRMT-interacting proteins was obtained in a single coimmunoprecipitation assay using HA-tagged PRMTs, suggesting a network of putative targets of PRMTs and cooperation between the R-methylation writers. Knockout of each L. braziliensis PRMT led to significant changes in global arginine methylation patterns without affecting cell viability. Deletion of either PRMT1 or PRMT3 disrupted most type I PRMT activity, resulting in a global increase in monomethyl arginine levels. Using anti-MMA antibodies, we performed an IP experiment to identify MMA proteins in the parental line, single PRMT1 knockout, PRMT1/PRMT7 double knockout and PRMT1-Addback parasites.  The results indicate that R-methylation is modulated across lifecycle stages in L. braziliensis and show possible functional overlap and cooperation among the different PRMTs in targeting proteins. Overall, our data suggest important regulatory roles of these proteins throughout the L. braziliensis life cycle, showing that arginine methylation is important for parasite-host cell interactions. Linked publication: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.22.461376.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis: Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analyses were performed by the Proteomics Platform of the CHU de Québec Research Center (Quebec, Qc, Canada). Bands of interest were extracted from gels and placed in 96-well plates and then washed with water. Proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed using 126nM of modified porcine trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 18h. Digestion products were extracted using 1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile followed by 1% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile. The recovered extracts were pooled, vacuum centrifuge dried and then resuspended into 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and 5 µl were analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry: Samples were analysed by nano LC/MSMS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA,USA). Peptides were trapped at 20 μl/min in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) on a 5mm x 300 μm C18 pepmap cartridge pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) during 5 minutes. Then, the pre-column was switched online with a Pepmap Acclaim column (ThermoFisher) 50 cm x 75µm internal diameter separation column and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40% solvent B (A: 0,1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 200 minutes, at 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent acquisition mode using Thermo XCalibur software version 4.3.73.11. Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap using an AGC target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120 000. Internal calibration using lock mass on the m/z 445.12003 siloxane ion was used. Each MS scan was followed by MSMS fragmentation of the most intense ions for a total cycle time of 3 seconds (top speed mode). The selected ions were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented by Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) with 35% of collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap in rapid scan rate with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50ms.  Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set for a period of 20 sec and a tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Database searching: MGF peak list files were created using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo). MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search a contaminant database and the Uniprot Reference Leishmania Braziliensis database (8153 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, methylation and dimethylation of arginine, oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Criteria for protein identification: Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland/OR, http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89,0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1,0 % by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1,0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm). 1% FDR was also used for dimethyl arginine peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
In trypanosomatids, regulation of gene expression occurs mainly at the posttranscriptional level, and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are key players in determining the fates of transcripts. RBPs are targets of protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs), which posttranslationally regulate the RNA-binding capacity and other RBP interactions by transferring methyl groups to arginine residues (R-methylation). Herein, we functionally characterized the five predicted PRMTs in <i>Leishmania braziliensis</i> by gene knockout and endogenous protein HA tagging using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. We report that R-methylation profiles vary among <i>Leishmania</i> species and across <i>L.&#xa0;braziliensis</i> lifecycle stages, with the peak PRMT expression occurring in promastigotes. A list of PRMT-interacting proteins was obtained in a single coimmunoprecipitation assay using HA-tagged PRMTs, suggesting a network of putative targets of PRMTs and cooperation between the R-methylation writers. Knockout of each <i>L.&#xa0;braziliensis</i> PRMT led to significant changes in global arginine methylation patterns without affecting cell viability. Deletion of either PRMT1 or PRMT3 disrupted most type I PRMT activity, resulting in a global increase in monomethyl arginine levels. Finally, we demonstrate that <i>L.&#xa0;braziliensis</i> PRMT1 and PRMT5 are required for efficient macrophage infection in vitro, and for axenic amastigote proliferation. The results indicate that R-methylation is modulated across lifecycle stages in <i>L.&#xa0;braziliensis</i> and show possible functional overlap and cooperation among the different PRMTs in targeting proteins. Overall, our data suggest important regulatory roles of these proteins throughout the <i>L.&#xa0;braziliensis</i> life cycle, showing that arginine methylation is important for parasite-host cell interactions.

### Keywords
Leishmania braziliensis, Gene knockout, Protein arginine methyltransferase, Crispr/cas9, Prmt

### Affiliations
Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, Cell and Molecular Biology Department, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Lissur Orsine

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Kaysel Cruz
Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, Cell and Molecular Biology Department, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Brazil


