### Accession
PXD009959

### Title
SWI1 in vitro phosphorylation -  SWITCH 1/DYAD is a WINGS APART-LIKE antagonist that maintains sister chromatid cohesion in meiosis

### Description
To verify if CDKA;1 phosphorylates SWI1, recombinant proteins were prepared using E.coli system and in vitro kinase reactions were performed.

### Sample Protocol
The reaction mixtures were denatured by adding same volume of 8M urea in 100mM Tris pH 8.5. After reduction with 5mM DDT, the samples were alkylated in 14mM Chloroacetamide. For tryptic digest, the samples were diluted with 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2 to adjust urea concentration to be 1M . Digestion was performed over night at 37°C. These digested samples were desalted usingStageTips with C18 Empore disk membranes (3 M) (Rappsilber et al, 2003), dried in a vacuum evaporator, and dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed individually using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) {Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.}. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a database containing the respective proteins used for the in vitro reaction and a background E. coli database (E.coli (K12) database, UniProt). Sequences of 244 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Mitosis and meiosis both rely on cohesin, which embraces the sister chromatids and plays a crucial role for the faithful distribution of chromosomes to daughter cells. Prior to the cleavage by Separase at anaphase onset, cohesin is largely removed from chromosomes by the non-proteolytic action of WINGS APART-LIKE (WAPL), a mechanism referred to as the prophase pathway. To prevent the premature loss of sister chromatid cohesion, WAPL is inhibited in early mitosis by Sororin. However, Sororin homologs have only been found to function as WAPL inhibitors during mitosis in vertebrates and Drosophila. Here we show that SWITCH 1/DYAD defines a WAPL antagonist that acts in meiosis of Arabidopsis. Crucially, SWI1 becomes dispensable for sister chromatid cohesion in the absence of WAPL. Despite the lack of any sequence similarities, we found that SWI1 is regulated and functions in a similar manner as Sororin hence likely representing a case of convergent molecular evolution across the eukaryotic kingdom.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis, Swi1

### Affiliations
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research

### Submitter
Hirofumi Nakagami

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research


