### Accession
PXD014251

### Title
STAT3-dependent systems-level analysis reveals PDK4 to be associated with favorable outcome in primary prostate cancer.

### Description
Prostate cancer has a broad spectrum of clinical behavior, hence biomarkers are urgently needed for risk stratification. We previously described the protective effect of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in a prostate cancer mouse model. We now show the importance of STAT3-regulated metabolic functions and explain their influence on aggressive prostate cancer. By utilizing a gene co-expression network in addition to laser microdissected proteomics from human and murine FFPE samples, we established a workflow that facilitates the discovery of new biomarkers. We thereby identified the protective effect of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) in prostate cancer. PDK4 is a key regulator of the citrate cycle and low PDK4 is significantly associated with disease recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
100nl (10mm2 of 10 µm slides) of FFPE material per sample was used for analysis. Lysis of microdissected tissue was carried out in 50% trifluoroethanol (TFE), 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) at 99°C for 45 min. followed by 5 min. sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode). After centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min., the cleared protein lysate was alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. at room temperature.  Upon vacuum centrifugation, digestion was carried out in 5% TFE, 50 mM ABC to which 0.15 µg of LysC and 0.15 µg of trypsin were added for digestion overnight at 37°C. The following day, digestion was arrested by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% and the digestion buffer removed by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and purified on C18 StageTips. Finally, purified peptides were resolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and the entire sample was injected for MS analysis in a single shot measurement.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.5.2, employing the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011b) to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of < 1%. Searches were performed against the Human or Mouse UniProt database (August 2015), with the enzyme specificity set as “Trypsin/P” and 7 as the minimum length required for peptide identification. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled in order to transfer identifications across runs, based on mass and normalized retention times, with a matching time window of 0.7 min. Label-Free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011a; Schaab et al., 2012; Tyanova et al., 2015; Tyanova et al., 2016a) where a minimum peptide ratio count of 1 was required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) has a broad spectrum of clinical behavior; hence, biomarkers are urgently needed for risk stratification. Here, we aim to find potential biomarkers for risk stratification, by utilizing a gene co-expression network of transcriptomics data in addition to laser-microdissected proteomics from human and murine prostate FFPE samples. We show up-regulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in PCa on the transcriptomic level and up-regulation of the TCA cycle/OXPHOS on the proteomic level, which is inversely correlated to STAT3 expression. We hereby identify gene expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), a key regulator of the TCA cycle, as a promising independent prognostic marker in PCa. PDK4 predicts disease recurrence independent of diagnostic risk factors such as grading, staging, and PSA level. Therefore, low PDK4 is a promising marker for PCa with dismal prognosis.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Tca, Transcriptomics, Ffpe-proteomics, Pdk4, Stat3, Oxphos, Gene co-expression network analysis, Prostate cancer, Tcga

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Medizinische Universitat Wien, Vienna, AUSTRIA

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas Kenner
Medizinische Universitat Wien, Vienna, AUSTRIA


