### Accession
PXD006164

### Title
Comparison of control and Elmod1 knockout utricle extracts using tandem mass tagging

### Description
Elmod1 knockout mice develop a severe inner ear defect beginning at early postnatal ages. Cuticular plates of utricle hair cells were initially formed normally, then degenerated after postnatal day 5 (P5). Similarly, hair bundles initially were formed normally, but the cell’s apical membrane subsequently lifted up; fused stereocilia were observed after P5. We used tandem mass tagging to determine whether there were any changes in medium- to high-abundance proteins in mutant animals. No statistically significant differences were seen in any protein quantified with two or more peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Utricle lysates were prepared from P12 heterozygote or Elmod1 knockout mouse inner ear samples. Samples were solubilized with enhanced FASP (eFASP) lysate buffer (without TCEP or ABC), heated at 90°C for 10 minutes, sonicated, and centrifuged. Protein concentration was measured using a micro-BCA assay. Samples of 2 µg were treated with TCEP, digested with trypsin using the eFASP protocol, and peptides were lyophilized. Samples were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol, then aliquots of heterozygote and knockout extracts were pooled and subjected to two-dimensional LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
We used Comet to match peptides to mouse protein database entries from Ensembl (www.ensembl.org, v76, 52,998 protein sequences), to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins. The search results were filtered to a peptide spectral match false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% using the PAW pipeline and the target/decoy method. Protein inference used basic parsimony principles and required a minimum of two distinct peptide sequences per protein. An in-house algorithm was used to further group proteins having highly homologous sets of identified peptides. The list of 2,276 confidently identified protein/protein groups was used to create a custom FASTA database of Ensembl mouse proteins. A single protein sequence was used to represent any protein groups to mimic canonical sequences in UniProt Swiss-Prot. The 2,276 protein custom database had tryptic peptide redundancy of only 1.6%. The custom database was increased in size by the addition of 5,969 E. coli (strain K12) Swiss-Prot sequences before use with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) to identify PSMs and extract their TMT reporter ion signals for the 10-channels from the MS3 scans produced in the multi-notch method available on Thermo Tribrid Orbitrap instruments. The SEQUEST searches in PD 1.4 used the custom protein database and parameters similar to the Comet searches, and the results were validated using Percolator. Results from the PD 1.4 processing were exported as text files, and processed by in-house scripts to create protein-level reporter ion summaries (sum of all protein’s PSM values) to increase the accuracy of the TMT quantification. Only PSMs uniquely matched to single protein database sequences were used for quantification. Statistical testing of the total protein reporter ion intensities was done using the R package edgeR using the exact test for the two-sample comparison. Internal TMM normalization was used and false discovery rates were calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple-testing correction.

### Publication Abstract
Sensory hair cells require control of physical properties of their apical plasma membranes for normal development and function. Members of the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) small GTPase family regulate membrane trafficking and cytoskeletal assembly in many cells. We identified ELMO domain-containing protein 1 (ELMOD1), a guanine nucleoside triphosphatase activating protein (GAP) for ARF6, as the most highly enriched ARF regulator in hair cells. To characterize ELMOD1 control of trafficking, we analyzed mice of both sexes from a strain lacking functional ELMOD1 [roundabout (<i>rda</i>)]. In <i>rda/rda</i> mice, cuticular plates of utricle hair cells initially formed normally, then degenerated after postnatal day 5; large numbers of vesicles invaded the compromised cuticular plate. Hair bundles initially developed normally, but the cell's apical membrane lifted away from the cuticular plate, and stereocilia elongated and fused. Membrane trafficking in type I hair cells, measured by FM1-43 dye labeling, was altered in <i>rda/rda</i> mice. Consistent with the proposed GAP role for ELMOD1, the ARF6 GTP/GDP ratio was significantly elevated in <i>rda/rda</i> utricles compared with controls, and the level of ARF6-GTP was correlated with the severity of the <i>rda/rda</i> phenotype. These results suggest that conversion of ARF6 to its GDP-bound form is necessary for final stabilization of the hair bundle.<b>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</b> Assembly of the mechanically sensitive hair bundle of sensory hair cells requires growth and reorganization of apical actin and membrane structures. Hair bundles and apical membranes in mice with mutations in the <i>Elmod1</i> gene degenerate after formation, suggesting that the ELMOD1 protein stabilizes these structures. We show that ELMOD1 is a GTPase-activating protein in hair cells for the small GTP-binding protein ARF6, known to participate in actin assembly and membrane trafficking. We propose that conversion of ARF6 into the GDP-bound form in the apical domain of hair cells is essential for stabilizing apical actin structures like the hair bundle and ensuring that the apical membrane forms appropriately around the stereocilia.

### Keywords
Actin, Elmod1, Ptprq, Hair cells, Myo6, Arf6, Inner ear, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


