### Accession
PXD033668

### Title
Top-Down proteomics and Bottom-Up terminomics for the Detection of Protein Termini in C. elegans

### Description
Here we investigate how top-down proteomics (TDP) can be of value for the detection of protein termini. Either GELFrEE or solid-phase enrichment was conducted for pre-fraction. To verify the detected N-termini HUNTER (High-efficiency Undecanal-based N Termini EnRichment) was employed. Reductive dimethylation on intact protein level was additionally applied.

### Sample Protocol
Alkylated and reductively dimethylated C. elegans aliquots (500 ug each) were processed into 12 GELFrEE fractions. LC-MS measurements were conducted using an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid with μ-precolumn (C4 PepMap300, 5 μm, 300 Å) and an Accucore C-4 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2.6 μm, 50 Å). CID and EThcD fragmentation were applied. For the detection of smaller proteoforms, solid-phase enrichment was combined with FAIMS-LC-MS using the same instrumental setup. HUNTER was conducted as previously described: Reductive dimethylation on intact protein level was followed by trypsin digestion, labelling with undecanal and depletion via C18 Sep-Pak. 10% of the non-depleted sample was kept as Pre-HUNTER. To increase coverage eight concatenated fractions were pulled using Low-pH-capillary-HPLC. Bottom-up samples were subsequently measured using an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to an Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å).

### Data Protocol
The top-down database search was conducted using ProSightPD 4.0 nodes within the Proteome Discoverer environment. The High/High cRAWler node was employed for the automated generation of experiments in combination with Xtract for deconvolution. C. elegans XML file downloaded via UniProt was used as database. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on cysteine residues. Acetylation of the N-term was treated as a variable modification. The search itself was performed by the Annotated Proteoforms Search (Maximum PrSMs per Precursor: 3, Minimum Matched Fragments: 3, Delta M Mode: False) and Subsequence Search Node (Maximum PrSMs per Precursor: 1, Minimum Matched Fragments: 6) with 10 ppm precursor and fragment mass tolerance. The top-down results were processed in a single multi-consensus step, filtering PrSMs and proteoforms with a 1% false discovery rate cut-off. The dimethylated GELFrEE fractions were analyzed via Informed-Proteomics (https://github.com/PNNL-Comp-Mass-Spec/Informed-Proteomics, version 1.1.8066). EThcD files were analysed as ETD data. The search was limited to single internal cleavage products. Raw files were initially converted to centroided mzML by ProteoWizard MSConvert (Peak picking filter, version: 3.0.19039-a99d81aa2). The mzMLs were subsequently used as input for PBFGen.exe and deconvolution via Promex (charge state: 4-50, mass: 2-30 kDa). The search against the C. elegans fasta file (downloaded from www.uniprot.org) were conducted by MSPathFinder. Carbamidomethyl and dimethylation were set as fixed modification within the sequence. Acetylation, dimethylation and methylation (only at proline) were allowed as variable modification at the peptide N-terminus.  Bottom-up data was processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with searches being conducted by the Sequest HT algorithm. The C. elegans fasta file (reviewed+unreviewed, downloaded from www.uniprot.org) was supplemented with a database containing common contaminants. The enzyme specificity was set to semi-ArgC with two missed cleavages allowed. Peptide length was limited from six to 144 amino acids. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragment). Carbamidomethyl on cysteine and dimethyl on lysine residues were defined as fixed modifications. The following modifications were set as variable: Acetylation (N-terminus), dimethylation (N-terminus), methylation (N-terminus) and oxidation (methionine). Results were filtered with a 1% FDR cut-off by Percolator (v3.0).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics (BUP)-based N-terminomics techniques have become standard to identify protein N-termini. While these methods rely on the identification of N-terminal peptides only, top-down proteomics (TDP) comes with the promise to provide additional information about post-translational modifications and the respective C-termini. To evaluate the potential of TDP for terminomics, two established TDP workflows were employed for the proteome analysis of the nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>. The N-termini of the identified proteoforms were validated using a BUP-based N-terminomics approach. The TDP workflows used here identified 1658 proteoforms, the N-termini of which were verified by BUP in 25% of entities only. Caveats in both the BUP- and TDP-based workflows were shown to contribute to this low overlap. In BUP, the use of trypsin prohibits the detection of arginine-rich or arginine-deficient N-termini, while in TDP, the formation of artificially generated termini was observed in particular in a workflow encompassing sample treatment with high acid concentrations. Furthermore, we demonstrate the applicability of reductive dimethylation in TDP to confirm biological N-termini. Overall, our study shows not only the potential but also current limitations of TDP for terminomics studies and also presents suggestions for future developments, for example, for data quality control, allowing improvement of the detection of protein termini by TDP.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomic, C. elegans, Prosight, Mspathfinder, Orbitrap q exactive plus, Informed proteomics, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Bottom-up proteomics, Gelfree

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany (lab head)

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany (lab head)


