### Accession
PXD019277

### Title
Seasonal serum protein differences in Chinese alligator revealed by iTRAQ

### Description
Many ectotherms hibernate in face of the harsh winter conditions to improve their survival rate. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this process remains unclear. Here, we collected the serum from Chinese alligtor in hinerntion season (winter) and active season (summer) and using iTRAQ to identify seasonal differently expressed proteins in Chinese alligator.

### Sample Protocol
To reduce protein complexity and interference from highly abundant proteins, we used a ProteoMinerTM Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions to deplete high- abundance proteins in the serum samples. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Total protein (100 μg) was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using a protein/trypsin ratio of 30:1 at 37 °C for 16 h. The peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and processed according to the manufacturer’s instruction for 8-plex iTRAQ (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA). The labeled peptide mixtures were then pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were separated by SCX chromatography using a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) and analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by searching against the Chinese alligator database containing 27,500 sequences using the Mascot search engine v. 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We compared pairs of winter and summer samples. Only ratios with p < 0.05 and a fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83 in a least one pair were considered a significantly season-biased differentially expressed protein, and those with a different change trend in any pair were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Many ectotherms hibernate in face of the harsh winter conditions to improve their survival rate. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this process remains unclear. Here, we explored the hibernation mechanism of Chinese alligator using integrative multi-omics analysis. We revealed that (1) the thyroid hormone biosynthesis, nutrition absorption and metabolism, muscle contraction, urinary excretion and immunity function pathways are overall downregulated during hibernation; (2) the fat catabolism is completely suppressed, contrasting with the upregulation of hepatic fatty-acid-transporter CPT1A, suggesting a unique energy-saving strategy that differs from that in hibernating mammals; (3) the hibernation-related genes are not only directly regulated by DNA methylation but also controlled by methylation-dependent transcription networks. In addition, we identified and compared tissue-specific, species-specific, and conserved season-biased miRNAs, demonstrating complex post-transcriptional regulation during hibernation. Our study revealed the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms underlying hibernation in the Chinese alligator and provided molecular insights into the evolution of hibernation regulation.

### Keywords
Hibernation, Serum protein, Chinese alligator, Itraq

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, State Conservation Centre for Gene Resources of Endangered Wildlife, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Sheng-Guo Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Guo Fang
MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, State Conservation Centre for Gene Resources of Endangered Wildlife, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China


