### Accession
PXD046405

### Title
Position-specific N- and O-glycosylation of the reactive centre loop impacts neutrophil elastase-mediated proteolysis of corticosteroid-binding globulin

### Description
Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) delivers anti-inflammatory cortisol to inflamed tissues through the proteolytic cleavage of an exposed reactive centre loop (RCL) by neutrophil elastase (NE). We previously demonstrated that RCL-localised Asn347-linked N-glycans impact NE proteolysis, but a comprehensive structure-function characterisation of the RCL glycosylation is still required to better understand CBG glycobiology. Herein, we firstly performed RCL-centric glycoprofiling of serum-derived CBG to elucidate the Asn347-glycans and then used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to study their impact on NE proteolysis. Importantly, we also identified novel O-glycosylation (di/sialyl T) across four RCL sites (Thr338/Thr342/Thr345/Ser350) of serum CBG close to the NE-targeted Val344-Thr345 cleavage site. A restricted N- and O-glycan co-occurrence pattern on the RCL involving exclusively Asn347 and Thr338 sites was experimentally observed and supported in silico by modelling of a CBG-GalNAc-transferase (GalNAc-T) complex with various RCL glycans. GalNAc-T2 and -T3 abundantly expressed by liver and gallbladder, respectively, showed in vitro a capacity to transfer GalNAc (Tn) to multiple RCL sites suggesting their involvement in RCL O-glycosylation. Recombinant CBG (rCBG) was then used to determine roles of RCL O-glycosylation through longitudinal NE-centric proteolysis experiments, which demonstrated that both sialo- (disialyl T) and asialo-glycans (T) decorating Thr345 inhibit NE proteolysis. Synthetic RCL O-glycopeptides expanded on these findings by showing that Thr345-Tn and Thr342-Tn confer strong and moderate protection against NE cleavage, respectively. MD substantiated that short Thr345-linked O-glycans abrogate NE interactions. In conclusion, we report on strategically-positioned and biologically-relevant CBG RCL glycans, which improve our understanding of mechanisms governing cortisol delivery to inflamed tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of serum CBG glycopeptides and de-N-glycosylated peptides. Serum CBG was reduced using 5 mM aqueous DTT for 45 min at 56°C and then carbamidomethylated using 20 mM IAA (final concentrations stated) for 30 min in dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by the addition of excess DTT. In solution trypsin digestion was performed using a substrate (CBG) / enzyme (trypsin) ratio 20:1 (w/w) overnight in 100 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate, 37°C. Samples were acidified by the addition of 0.1% (v/v) aqueous TFA (final concentration), desalted using home-made reversed-phase C18 SPE micro-columns and dried. An aliquot was resuspended in 18 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and exhaustively de-N-glycosylated using 2 µL PNGase F (20 U) overnight at 37°C. The de-N-glycosylated peptides were desalted using C18 SPE micro-columns and dried for LC-MS/MS analysis. For the RCL glycoprofiling and O-glycosylation site assignment, mixtures of (glyco)peptides and de-N-glycosylated peptides from isolated serum CBG were analysed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Dionex 3500RS UPLC system. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase LC column (75 μm inner diameter x 400 mm column length) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm particle size, Dr. Maisch, Germany). For this, a gradient of 5-45% (v/v) solvent B (80% ACN containing 0.1% (both v/v) aqueous FA) over 61 min in solvent A consisting of 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA was employed at a constant flow rate and temperature of 350 nL/min and 60°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity mode. Full MS1 scans were acquired with a scan range of m/z 550-1,750 at a resolution of 120,000 (FWHM at m/z 200), standard AGC and 100 ms maximum injection time. DDA was used to generate MS/MS data following precursor ion selection and isolation of the 10 most abundant precursors in each MS1 scan using a quadrupole isolation window of m/z 2.0. Higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS was performed at top speed with 30% NCE with fragment ions detected in the Orbitrap using standard AGC, and 200 ms maximum injection time. Re-isolation and two types of orthogonal fragmentation of select precursor ions were triggered by the presence of at least one of three specific diagnostic sugar oxonium ions i.e. m/z 204.0867 (HexNAc), m/z 138.0545 (HexNAc) and m/z 366.1396 (HexHexNAc) among the 10 most intense fragment ions in each HCD-MS/MS spectrum (10 ppm mass tolerance) including 1) electron transfer higher collision dissociation (EThcD)-MS/MS with Orbitrap detection of fragment ions using standard AGC target and a supplemental activation energy of 15% NCE and 2) ion trap CID-MS/MS with standard AGC target and 35% NCE. All MS and MS/MS data except the ion trap CID-MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The (glyco)peptide LC-MS/MS raw data were browsed using Xcalibur v2.2 (Thermo). The HCD- and EThcD-MS/MS data from each sample were searched against the canonical sequence of human CBG (UniProtKB, P08185) or the human proteome (reviewed UniProtKB database, released November, 2021 containing 20,360 entries) using Byonic v3.9.4 (Protein Metrics Inc). Decoy and contaminant databases were enabled. The precursor and product ion mass tolerance thresholds were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Searches were performed with carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification, and strict trypsin specific cleavage (C-terminal to R/K) with a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages per peptide. Searches also included oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da) and Asn/Gln deamidation (+0.9840 Da) that were both considered ‘common’ variable modifications. Searches against N-glycosylation of sequon-localised Asn were performed with a predefined N-glycan database of 309 mammalian N-glycans or glycomics-informed N-glycan database. Searches against O-glycosylation of Thr/Ser were performed with a predefined O-glycan database containing 9 common mammalian O-glycans available within Byonic. Both N- and O-glycans were used as ‘rare’ variable modifications. A maximum of two common and up to six rare variable modifications were allowed per peptide. All searches were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level and 0% at the peptide level. PEP-2D < 0.001 was used as a general confidence threshold. The Byonic-identified glycopeptides were manually checked with support from in silico fragmentation data produced by GPMAW v10.0 (Lighthouse, Odense, Denmark). The relative abundance of observed (glyco)peptides was quantified using AUC measurements based on EICs generated from the monoisotopic precursor ions of all observed glycopeptide species in all detected charge states with assistance from the Skyline software. The relative abundance of each glycoform was determined as the proportion of the AUC of the individual glycopeptide forms relative to the combined AUC of all glycopeptides spanning each glycosylation site, an approach commonly employed in quantitative glycopeptide analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteolysis, Corticosteroid-binding globulin, O-glycosylation, Glycosylation, Cortisol, Neutrophil elastase, N-glycosylation, Reactive centre loop

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
1. School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia 2. Institute for Glyco-core Research (iGCORE), Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan

### Submitter
Anastasia Chernykh

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
1. School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia 2. Institute for Glyco-core Research (iGCORE), Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan


