### Accession
PXD007184

### Title
The proteomic landscape of patient-derived CD4+ T cells in recent-onset type 1 diabetes

### Description
The pathophysiology underlying the autoimmune disease type 1 diabetes (T1D) is poorly understood. Obtaining an accurate proteomic profile of the T helper cell population is essential for understanding the pathogenesis of T1D. Here, we performed in-depth proteomic profiling of peripheral CD4+ T cells in a pediatric cohort in order to identify cellular signatures associated with the onset of T1D. Using only 250,000 CD4+ T cells per patient, isolated from biobanked PBMC samples, we identified nearly 6,000 proteins using deep-proteome profiling with LC-MS/MS data-independent acquisition. Our analysis revealed an inflammatory signature in patients with T1D; this signature is characterized by circulating mediators of neutrophils, platelets, and the complement system. This signature likely reflects the inflammatory extracellular milieu, suggesting that activation of the innate immune system plays an important role in disease onset. Our results emphasize the potential value of using high-resolution LC-MS/MS to investigate limited quantities of biobanked samples in order to identify disease-relevant proteomic patterns.

### Sample Protocol
The CD4+ T cell pellets used in the DIA experiment were lysed in lysis buffer containing 6 M Guanidinium chloride, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), and 1x complete protease inhibitor, boiled briefly, and sonicated. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (ThermoFisher, #23225), and 10 µg total protein lysate was digested with trypsin using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. In brief, protein lysates were adjusted to a volume of 200 µl with ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and reduced by addition of 1 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) with incubation for 30 min at 60°C. The samples were then diluted in urea buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5) to a final concentration of 4 M urea. To alkylate the cysteine residues, 10 µl of freshly prepared 300 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) solution was added, and the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min at RT. After the unreacted IAA was quenched with 2 µl of 1 M DTT, the samples were centrifuged through a 30 kDa cut-off filter (Sartorius, # VN01H23ETO) and washed three time with urea buffer and twice with ABC buffer by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000xg. The proteins were digested with 1 µg Lys-C in 40 µl ABC buffer for 2 hours at RT followed by 1 µg trypsin in 10 µl ABC buffer for 16 hours at 37°C. The peptides were collected by centrifugation for 10 min at 14,000xg, and the filters were washed with 20 µl ABC buffer containing 5% ACN. Finally, the peptides were acidified with 2 µl 100% TFA prior to mass spectrometric analysis. For LC-MS/MS in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled to an RSLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) was used. All samples were spiked with 1 injection unit of the HRM Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland, # Ki-3003) for retention time indexing. Approximately 1 µg of sample was automatically loaded on the HPLC system, which was equipped with a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). After 5 min, the peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using reversed-phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters, Milford, MA) using a gradient of 7‒27% ACN at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over a period of 90 min, followed by a two short gradients of 27‒41% ACN (15 min) and 41‒85% ACN (5 min). After 5 min at 85% ACN, the gradient was set back to 3% ACN over a period of two minutes and allowed to equilibrate for 8 min. All ACN solutions contained 0.1% FA. The DIA method consisted of a full MS scan at 120,000 resolution ranging from 300 to 1650 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3x106 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Subsequently, 37 DIA windows with a variable width spanning from 300 to 1650 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 30,000. Normalized collision energy was set to 28, and the spectra were recorded in profile type.

### Data Protocol
To generate a comprehensive human spectral library, select LC-MS/MS DDA data (acquired on Q Exactive HF) encompassing 312 raw files of various human samples and tissues which were all spiked with the HRM Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland, # Ki-3003) were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific).  To guarantee best coverage of the blood cell proteome, input samples for spectral library generation included PBMC, CD4+ T cells and neutrophils. Proteome Discoverer was used with Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA) as embedded search engine node. Database search identifications were filtered to satisfy the 1% peptide and protein level FDR and combined in a multi-consensus result file maintaining the 1% FDR threshold. The peptide spectral library was generated in Spectronaut15 (Version 10, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings using the Proteome Discoverer combined result file. Spectronaut was equipped with the Swissprot human database (Release 2016.02, 20165 sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a few spiked proteins (e.g., Biognosys iRT peptide sequences). The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 11,403 protein groups and 432,673 peptide precursors. The DIA LC-MS/MS data set was analyzed using Spectronaut (Version 10, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with slightly adapted default settings for the spectral library search. Spectronaut HTRMS converter was used to convert the raw files. In brief, the data and XIC extraction settings were set to dynamic with a correction factor of 1. Automatic calibration mode was chosen with precision iRT enabled for applying the non-linear iRT calibration strategy. Peptide identification was filtered to satisfy a FDR of 1%. Only proteotypic peptides were considered for protein quantification applying summed precursor quantities based on MS2 area quantity. A match between runs was enabled with the data filtering function set to q-value percentile mode applying the 25% setting. This setting means that only peptide precursor signals passing the 1% FDR threshold in at least 25% of all samples, i.e. 15 out of 60 samples, were matched between runs and thus considered for identification and quantification. The q-value percentile 25% mode is a stringent setting aimed at reducing false positive identifications, which resulted in the identification of 5751 proteins. If not stated otherwise, all fold changes reported by Spectronaut in the DIA experiment are based on protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The pathophysiology underlying the autoimmune disease type 1 diabetes (T1D) is poorly understood. Obtaining an accurate proteomic profile of the T helper cell population is essential for understanding the pathogenesis of T1D. Here, we performed in-depth proteomic profiling of peripheral CD4+ T cells in a pediatric cohort to identify cellular signatures associated with the onset of T1D. Using only 250&#x202f;000 CD4+ T cells per patient, isolated from biobanked PBMC samples, we identified nearly 6000 proteins using deep-proteome profiling with LC-MS/MS data-independent acquisition. Our analysis revealed an inflammatory signature in patients with T1D; this signature is characterized by circulating mediators of neutrophils, platelets, and the complement system. This signature likely reflects the inflammatory extracellular milieu, which suggests that activation of the innate immune system plays an important role in disease onset. Our results emphasize the potential value of using high-resolution LC-MS/MS to investigate limited quantities of biobanked samples to identify disease-relevant proteomic patterns. Proteomic profiles of 114 individuals have been deposited in a comprehensive portable repository serving as a unique resource for CD4+ T cell expression in the context of both health and T1D disease.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Type 1 diabetes, Data-independent, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation, Autoimmune, Neutrophil, Cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH)

### Submitter
Marlen Lepper

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


