### Accession
PXD037650

### Title
Quality control in quantitative proteomics: a case study for the human CSF proteome

### Description
Proteome studies using mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantification is a main approach for the discovery of new biomarkers. However, a number of analytical conditions in front and during MS data acquisition can affect the accuracy of the obtained outcome. Therefore, comprehensive quality assessment of the acquired data plays a central role in quantitative proteomics, though due to immense complexity of MS data it is often neglected. Here, we practically address the quality assessment of quantitative MS data describing key steps for the evaluation including the levels: raw data, identification and quantification. With this, four independent datasets from cerebrospinal fluid, an important biofluid for neurodegenerative diseases biomarker studies, were assessed demonstrating that already sample processing-based differences are reflected on all three levels but with a varying impact on the quality of the quantitative data.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation In order to generate independent and different CSF proteome datasets, four different digestion strategies were used: standard and rapid in solution di-gestions as well as standard and rapid filter aided sample preparations (FASP). 25 µg of CSF protein were taken for each of the digestion. Briefly, for the standard in-solution digestion CSF was mixed 1:1 v/v with 0.2% RapiGest (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). Proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiotreitol (DDT) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (Serva) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. The digestion was stopped and RapiGest precipitated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For the Rapid in-solution digestion Rapid Digestion Trypsin kit (Promega, Madison, USA) was used according to the manufacturers’ proto-col. For the standard filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) CSF was mixed with 200 µl of 8 M Urea. After 60 min incubation at 37°C with 10 mM final concentration DTT, proteins were alkylated for 30 min at room temperature in darkness with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Before digestion, samples were applied on to the Vivacon filter (0.5 ml, 10.000 MWCO Sartorius Stedium Lab Ltd, Stoneouse, UK) and centrifuged for 15 min at 12000 x g. Further samples were washed twice with 200 µl of 8 M Urea and 3 times with 200 µl of ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) with the 20 min centrifugation at 12000 xg in between. After washing, each filter was transferred in to a new tube and sample was resuspended with 20 µl of 50 mM Ambic. Proteins were digested by incubation with trypsin (Serva, enzyme to substrate ratio 1:50) at 37°C overnight. Peptide elution was carried out by adding 50 µl of 50 mM Ambic and 15 min centrifugation at 14000 xg at 18°C. Digestion was stopped with 0.5% TFA. For the Rapid FASP samples were reduced and alkylated as it was described above for Rapid in-solution digestion. Before digestion, samples were applied on to the Vivacon filters and centrifuged for 15 min at 12000xg. Further samples were washed 3 times for 5 min with 200 µl of Rapid Digest. After washing, each filter was transferred in to a new tube and sample was re-suspended in 20 µl of Rapid Digest Buffer. Proteins were digested by 1 h incubation with rapid Promega trypsin (enzyme to substrate ratio 1:10) at 70°C. Peptide elution was carried out by adding 50 µl of 50 mM Ambic and 15 min centrifugation at 14000 xg at 18°C. Digestion was stopped by 0.5% TFA. Label-free nanoLC-MS with DDA aquisition  The peptide concentration in the digested samples was determined by amino acid analysis and 500 ng per sample were taken for further nanoLC-MS analysis. Briefly, extracted peptides were first injected and pre-concentrated with an Ulti-Mate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) using trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5–40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA in water; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% Acetonitrile in water; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60°C). Separated peptides were ionized by elec-trospray ionization (ESI) and injected into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The capillary temperature was set to 275°C and the spray voltage to 1500 V. The lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (445.120 m/z) was used for internal recalibration. The instrument was operated in da-ta-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 2 s cycle time, performing HCD fragmentation at 28% NCE. The mass range for MS1 measurements was set to 350–1400 m/z with an orbitrap resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maximum injection time, 1.3 m/z wide isolation window, 30s dynamic exclusion). The fragment analysis was performed in an orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maximum injection time).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v.2.0.3.1, https://maxquant.org/). Spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (UP000005640) of the UniProtKB database (release 2021_11) with the parameters: enzyme = trypsin, maximum missed cleavages = 2. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. Instrument settings were left default. PSM identification was performed using reversed decoy-based false discovery rate of 0.01. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “match between runs” option was disabled. Proteins were quantified with intensities and using MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) with at least one unique peptide at the minimum ratio count of 2. The “classic” normalization was applied to the LFQs.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies using mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantification are a main approach to the discovery of new biomarkers. However, a number of analytical conditions in front and during MS data acquisition can affect the accuracy of the obtained outcome. Therefore, comprehensive quality assessment of the acquired data plays a central role in quantitative proteomics, though, due to the immense complexity of MS data, it is often neglected. Here, we address practically the quality assessment of quantitative MS data, describing key steps for the evaluation, including the levels of raw data, identification and quantification. With this, four independent datasets from cerebrospinal fluid, an important biofluid for neurodegenerative disease biomarker studies, were assessed, demonstrating that sample processing-based differences are already reflected at all three levels but with varying impacts on the quality of the quantitative data. Specifically, we provide guidance to critically interpret the quality of MS data for quantitative proteomics. Moreover, we provide the free and open source quality control tool <i>MaCProQC</i>, enabling systematic, rapid and uncomplicated data comparison of raw data, identification and feature detection levels through defined quality metrics and a step-by-step quality control workflow.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Quality control, Fasp, In-solution digestion, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Bochum Germany Ruhr University Bochum, Center for Protein Diagnostics (ProDi), Medical Proteome Analysis, Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Svitlana Rozanova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Katrin Marcus
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Bochum Germany Ruhr University Bochum, Center for Protein Diagnostics (ProDi), Medical Proteome Analysis, Bochum, Germany


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: cerebrospinal fluid
- cell type: not available
- disease: neurodegenerative disease 
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

