### Accession
PXD022038

### Title
A novel tubulin binding molecule drives differentiation of acute myeloid leukaemia cells

### Description
Here we perform a phenotypic screen and identified novel compounds that can promote differentiation in several AML cell lines. Lead compounds are able to decrease tumour burden and increase survival in vivo. Using multiple complementary target deconvolution approaches (including chemoproteomics), these compounds were revealed to be anti-mitotic tubulin disruptors that cause differentiation by inducing a G2-M mitotic arrest. Together, these results reveal a novel function for tubulin disruptors in causing differentiation of AML cells.

### Sample Protocol
General protocol for treatment and lysis HL-60 cells (2 x 106 cells/mL in serum free RPMI media) were treated for 1 h with the probe 4 or DMSO vehicle at 37 °C. In the case of competition experiments, cells were pre-treated with competitor or DMSO vehicle for 30 min followed by 1 h treatment with probe 4. Treated cells were pelleted and washed with PBS. The resulting pellets were resuspended in PBS and irradiated at 365 nm for 5 min (100 W lamp, VWR 36595-021) on ice. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton –X-100 and 1× EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem set III, 539134) in PBS. Protein concentration of each lysate was determined using a BCA assay (Merck, 71285).  Proteomics HL-60 cells were treated in triplicate and lysed as described above. 400 µL of each lysate (concentrations adjusted to 2.5 µg/µL) was treated with 24 µL of a click chemistry master mix (final concentrations of 100 µM AzRB, 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 100 µM TBTA) for 1 h. The click reaction was quenched by adding 8 µL of 500 mM EDTA (10 mM final concentration). Proteins were precipitated using MeOH/CHCl3 and the resulting pellets washed twice with MeOH. The air-dried pellets were dissolved in 80 µL of 1% SDS in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 by vortexing and sonicating and then diluted to 400 µL with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 (0.2% SDS final concentration). Samples were incubated with 100 µL (1:10 ratio of bead suspension:protein) of NeutrAvidin agarose resin (Thermo Scientific 29201, pre-washed three times with 0.2% SDS in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0) for 2 h. The supernatants were removed and the beads washed three times with 0.2% SDS in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and then twice with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The beads were then resuspended in 150 µL of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and on-bead proteins were reduced with TCEP (5 mM final concentration) and alkylated with CAA (15 mM final concentration) for 10 min with gentle shaking. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with 5 µL of trypsin (20 µg dissolved in 100 µL of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, Promega V5111). The trypsin digestion was quenched by adding 4 µL of 1× EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11873580001). The supernatants were collected and the beads washed with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The second wash was combined with the corresponding supernatant and vacuum-dried. The peptide solutions were desalted on stage-tips according to a published protocol (41). The peptides were eluted from the sorbent (Empore™ SDB-XC solid phase extraction discs, 3M, 2240) with 60% acetonitrile in water (60 μL), dried in a Savant SPD1010 SpeedVac® Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis  Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ Acclaim PepMap C18 column (50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a binary solvent system of 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (Solvent B) in an Easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 μL of peptide solution was loaded using Solvent A onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (2 cm x 75 μm inner diameter), followed by a linear gradient separation of 0-100% Solvent B over 70 mins at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Liquid chromatography was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 to +7 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102. Proteomics database search and data analysis  Processing of LC-MS/MS data was performed in MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the human reference proteome (Uniprot, Taxon ID: 9606, accessed 4th September 2019). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 residues and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ were chosen for protein quantification. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.  Data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.6.0). MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt output files were filtered against contaminants and reverse dataset. Base 2 logarithm was applied to all measurements and the median values within each sample were subtracted. The replicates for each condition were grouped and the proteins with at least two valid values within a group were kept. A t-test (FDR = 0.05; S0 = 0.1) was performed between the active probe samples and each control. The results were plotted using GraphPad Prism.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Tubulin, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus, Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, U.K

### Submitter
Daniel Conole

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Edward Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus, Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, U.K


