### Accession
PXD045769

### Title
Proteome analysis of thyroid hormone transporter Mct8/Oatp1c1 deficient mice reveals novel dysregulated target molecules involved in locomotor function

### Description
Thyroid hormone (TH) transporter MCT8 deficiency causes severe locomotor disabilities likely due to insufficient TH transport across brain barriers and, consequently, compromised neural TH action. As an established animal model for this disease Mct8/Oatp1c1 double knockout (DKO) mice exhibit strong central TH deprivation, locomotor impairments and similar histo-morphological features as seen in MCT8 patients. The pathways that cause these neuro-motor symptoms are poorly understood. Here, we performed proteome analysis of brain sections comprising cortical and striatal areas of 21-day-old WT and DKO mice. We detected over 2900 proteins by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, 67 of which were significantly different between the genotypes. Comparison of the proteomic and published RNA-sequencing data showed a significant overlap between alterations in both datasets. In line with previous observations, DKO animals exhibited decreased myelin-associated protein expression and altered protein levels of well-established neuronal TH regulated targets. As one intriguing new candidate, we unraveled and confirmed reduced protein and mRNA expression of Pde10a, a striatal enzyme critically involved in dopamine receptor signaling, in DKO mice. As altered PDE10A activities are linked to dystonia, reduced basal ganglia PDE10A expression may represent a key pathogenic pathway underlying human MCT8 deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and tryptic digestion PFA-fixed brain samples were dissolved in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and boiled at 95 °C for 1 h for reverse formalin fixation and protein denaturation. Sonication was performed for 6 pulses at 35 Hz to eliminate DNA and RNA. The protein concentration was determined by the Pierce TM BCA Protein assay kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. 20 µg of protein for each sample were used for tryptic digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min, alkylated in presence of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 1:100 (enzyme:protein) and 37 °C overnight. SDC was precipitated by 1% v/v formic acid followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g. The supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C until further use.   High pH fractionation 13 high pH reversed phase chromatography fractions were used for spectral library generation. For fractionation equal amounts of all analyzed samples were dissolved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. In total 50 µg of digested proteins were used for High pH RP-HPLC using a 25 cm ProSwift™ RP-4H capillary monolithic column (Thermo Fisher) on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC (high pressure liquid chromatography) system. A gradient was applied for a total of 45 min with a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min starting at 96.7% eluent A (10 mM NH4HCO3) and 3.3% eluent B (10 mM NH4HCO3 in 90 % acetonitrile (ACN)) for 5 min, rising to 38.5% B in 20 min increasing to 95.0% in 1 min for 10 min and re-equilibrated to 3.3% B for 8 min. 30 fractions were collected on an Äkta prime plus fraction collector, pooled to 13 fractions and dried in the vacuum centrifuge.  LC-MS/MS acquisition Prior to liquid-chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. For LC-MS/MS, 1 µg of tryptic peptides were injected for individual samples and library fractions alike. Measurements were performed on a quadrupole-ion-trap-orbitrap MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher) coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher). Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved with a two-buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN). Attached to the UPLC was a peptide trap (100 μm × 200 mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size, C18, Thermo Fisher) for online desalting and purification followed by a 25 cm C18 reversed-phase column (75 μm × 250 mm, 130 Å pore size, 1.7 μm particle size, Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Peptides were separated using an 80 min gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 30% ACN in 65 min. Eluted peptides were ionized using a nano-electrospray ionization source (nano-ESI) with a spray voltage of 1800 V, transferred into the MS and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 120 ms or until a charge density of 2x105 ions (AGC Target) was reached. Fourier-transformation based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed covering a mass range of 400-1300 m/z with a resolution of 120000 at m/z = 200. Peptides with charge states between 2+ - 5+ above an intensity threshold of 1000 were isolated within a 1.6 m/z isolation window in Top Speed mode for 3 s from each precursor scan and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30% using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS2 scanning was performed, using an ion trap mass analyzer at a rapid scan rate, covering a mass range of 380-1500 m/z, and accumulated for 60 ms or to an AGC target of 1x105 ions. Already fragmented peptides were excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched with the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software (v 2.4.1.15, Thermo Fisher) against a reviewed murine Swissprot database, obtained in October 2020, containing 17053 entries. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for cysteine residues and the oxidation of methionine, and pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus, as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. A maximum number of 2 missing tryptic cleavages was set. Peptides between 6 and 144 amino acids were considered. A strict cutoff (FDR<0.01) was set for peptide and protein identification. Quantification was performed using the Minora Algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer. LC-MS/MS from High pH fractions were searched like the single samples by adding the 13 fractions as a single file set. Afterwards, both result files were used to create a consensus and processed in a consensus workflow. Thereby results were filtered for high confident peptides, with enhanced peptide and protein annotations. Protein abundances for individual samples were exported for subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Thyroid hormone (TH) transporter MCT8 deficiency causes severe locomotor disabilities likely due to insufficient TH transport across brain barriers and, consequently, compromised neural TH action. As an established animal model for this disease, Mct8/Oatp1c1 double knockout (DKO) mice exhibit strong central TH deprivation, locomotor impairments and similar histo-morphological features as seen in MCT8 patients. The pathways that cause these neuro-motor symptoms are poorly understood. In this paper, we performed proteome analysis of brain sections comprising cortical and striatal areas of 21-day-old WT and DKO mice. We detected over 2900 proteins by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, 67 of which were significantly different between the genotypes. The comparison of the proteomic and published RNA-sequencing data showed a significant overlap between alterations in both datasets. In line with previous observations, DKO animals exhibited decreased myelin-associated protein expression and altered protein levels of well-established neuronal TH-regulated targets. As one intriguing new candidate, we unraveled and confirmed the reduced protein and mRNA expression of Pde10a, a striatal enzyme critically involved in dopamine receptor signaling, in DKO mice. As altered PDE10A activities are linked to dystonia, reduced basal ganglia PDE10A expression may represent a key pathogenic pathway underlying human MCT8 deficiency.

### Keywords
T4, Allan-herndon-dudley syndrome, Myelination, Basal ganglia, Cns, Oatp1c1, Slc16a2, Slco1c1, Mct8, T3

### Affiliations
Section for Mass spectrometry and Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
University Duisburg-Essen, Institute for Experimental Immunology and Imaging, Dept. of Immunodynamics

### Submitter
Bente Siebels

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Robert Engel
University Duisburg-Essen, Institute for Experimental Immunology and Imaging, Dept. of Immunodynamics


