### Accession
PXD004801

### Title
Improved plasma membrane proteome coverage with a label-free non-affinity-purified workflow

### Description
The proteins of the cellular plasma membrane perform important functions relating to homeostasis and intercellular communication. Due to its overall low cellular abundance, amphipathic character, and low membrane-to-cytoplasm ratio, the plasma membrane proteome has been challenging to isolate and characterize, and is poorly represented in standard liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses. In this study, we employ a label-free, non-affinity-purified workflow for the enrichment of the plasma membrane proteome and use subsequent bioinformatics tools to select plasma membrane proteins, herein referred to as the surfaceome. Using this methodology, we identified over 2500 cell surface-associated proteins in a human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line. These surface proteins comprised 60% of all detected cellular proteins, a number that substantially exceeds the depth of coverage in previously published studies describing the leukemia surfaceome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol: Enrichment of plasma membrane proteins Fifty or 100 x106 MOLM-14 cells were resuspended in 10 mL homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA and 1x protease inhibitors) and passed three times through an 18-gauge 1.5-inch needle and then three times through a 22-gauge 1.5-inch needle over the course of approximately 20 seconds each passage. The cells were next transferred to a Dounce homogenizer, and the cell suspension was further homogenized with 40 strokes. All steps were performed on ice. Subsequently, the cell homogenate was transferred to a 15 mL conical tube and centrifuged at 1,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The resulting supernatant, containing the post-nuclear cytosol (PNC), was layered onto a 2 mL 60% sucrose cushion in an ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 100,000g for one hour at 4°C to enrich the crude plasma membrane (CPM) fraction [2]. The CPM, concentrated at the phase border, was recovered with a pipette tip. To further purify the CPM fraction and to isolate the enriched plasma membrane (EPM) fraction, the CPM fraction was transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube and sucrose step gradients containing 42.8%, 42.3%, 41.8%, 41%, 39%, and 37% sucrose were carefully layered on top [2]. The sample was next centrifuged at 100,000g for 18 hours at 4°C. The following day, the EPM fraction was recovered from the top of the 37% sucrose gradient and transferred to another ultracentrifuge tube. The tube was filled with HEPES buffer (115 mM NaCl, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 2.4 mM K2HPO4 and 20 mM HEPES) pH 7.4, and the sample was centrifuged at 150,000g for an hour at 4°C. The pelleted plasma membrane fraction was finally dissolved in 300 µL ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 1% sodium deoxycholate [SDC]) by indirect sonication. The complete ULTRA protease inhibitor cocktail was purchased from Roche, all other reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich. In-gel digestion The enriched plasma membrane fraction was acetone precipitated with 5 volumes of ice cold acetone (Fisher Scientific). The pellet was solubilized into 20 µL of 1x reducing NuPAGE LDS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and run into a precast 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1.6 cm. After fixing overnight (25% ethanol, 7% acetic acid) the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie blue dye [5] the following day. Each sample was excised from the gel in 8 (2 x 9mm) slices and each cut into 1 mm3 cubes. The gel pieces were destained in a solution containing 50% methanol and 1.25% acetic acid, reduced with 5 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and alkylated with 40 mM IAA (Sigma-Aldrich). The gel pieces were washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) two times. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (5ng/µL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the dehydrated gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 0.3% TFA (Fisher Scientific), followed by 50% acetonitrile. The volume of the combined extracts was reduced by vacuum centrifugation.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent). Peptides were separated by reversed phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 µm ID × 15 cm Reprosil-pur 3µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in a Nanoflex chip system (Eksigent). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher) and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. The peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/minute with each RP-HPLC run comprising a 90 minute gradient from 10 to 25 % B in 65 min and 25-40% B in 25 minutes. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 240,000 for LTQ Orbitrap Elite) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, with a minimum signal of 1500, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 seconds, exclusion size of 500 and duration of 60 seconds, isolation width of 2.0, normalized collision energy of 33, and waveform injection and dynamic exclusion enabled. The FTMS full scan AGC target value was 1e6, while MSn AGC was 1e4. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 10 milliseconds, while the ion trap MSn fill time was 100 milliseconds; microscans were set at one. FT preview mode; charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.30 for identification of proteins [8]. The peptide MS/MS spectra were searched againt the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Human Reference Proteome database, UP000005640 (retrieved on March 29, 2016), containing 20,191 entries. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da, with full tryptic specificity required and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage sites. Precursor ion tolerance was 7 ppm. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid were used as variable modifications. For the sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin experiments, CAMthiopropanoyl modification on lysine residues and protein N-termini was added as a variable modification with a MS measured mass difference of +87.9983 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The minimal length required for a peptide was seven amino acids. Target-decoy approach was used to control false discovery rate (FDR). A maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide and the protein level was allowed. If no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified, the resulting protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group”. Protein groups containing matches to decoy database or contaminant proteins were discarded. The MaxQuant match-between-runs feature was enabled. We used intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) [9] values as a proxy for protein levels in our samples. The iBAQ value is the sum of peak intensities of all peptides matching to a specific protein, divided by the number of theoretically observable peptides. The lead protein from each protein group was extracted and used to represent the protein group when comparing the lists of proteins across experiments. The MaxQuant output files were viewed and analyzed with the Perseus [10] software package.

### Publication Abstract
The proteins of the cellular plasma membrane (PM) perform important functions relating to homeostasis and intercellular communication. Due to its overall low cellular abundance, amphipathic character, and low membrane-to-cytoplasm ratio, the PM proteome has been challenging to isolate and characterize, and is poorly represented in standard LC-MS/MS analyses. In this study, we employ sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation for the enrichment of the PM proteome, without chemical labeling and affinity purification, together with GeLCMS and use subsequent bioinformatics tools to select proteins associated with the PM/cell surface, herein referred to as the surfaceome. Using this methodology, we identify over 1900 cell surface associated proteins in a human acute myeloid leukemia cell line. These surface proteins comprise almost 50% of all detected cellular proteins, a number that substantially exceeds the depth of coverage in previously published studies describing the leukemia surfaceome.

### Keywords
Label-free; proteomics; plasma membrane; go term; leukemia

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Proteomics Core Facility Philadelphia, PA

### Submitter
Steven Seeholzer

### Lab Head
Dr Steven H. Seeholzer
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Proteomics Core Facility Philadelphia, PA


