### Accession
PXD010726

### Title
Metabolism of host-derived glycolytic products by Mycobacterium tuberculosis requires five metabolic pathways

### Description
Bacterial nutrition is a key aspect of host-pathogen interaction and bacteria must adapt to use nutrients available in the host. Lipid droplets-derived fatty acids are considered the major intracellular carbon source for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), an intracellular pathogen causing Tuberculosis disease. However, many other (and more soluble) substrates are available in vivo and may represent alternative carbon sources. Lactate and pyruvate are rather abundant in human cells and fluids and represent two possible candidates. In this work, we employed a “multi-omics” approach (Transposon Directed Insertion Site Sequencing (TraDIS), RNA-seq transcriptomics, proteomics and stable isotopic labelling coupled with mass spectrometry-based metabolomics) and classic microbial physiology to study Mtb metabolism of lactate and pyruvate. We discovered that Mtb is well adapted to use lactate and pyruvate as sole carbon sources and that it requires gluconeogenesis, Krebs cycle, GABA shunt, glyoxylate shunt and methylcitrate cycle for their metabolism. These latter are traditionally associated with fatty acid metabolism and unexpectedly, we found that methylcitrate cycle operates in reverse. This latter discovery changes the role of this pathway making it a direct route for the biosynthesis of propionyl-CoA, the essential precursor for the biosynthesis of odd-chain fatty acids, abundantly present in Mtb cell envelope.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome was analyzed by mass spectrometry using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling for quantification. The peptides obtained from proteolytic digestion of protein extracts were purified using silica C18 microspin columns (NEST). The columns were conditioned with 50 % acetonitrile and 0.5 % acetic acid; 0.1 % of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was used to desalt the samples (3 washing steps). The samples were eluted in 50 % acetonitrile and 0.5 % acetic acid, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then re-suspended in 100 µL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) / 30 % (v/v) acetonitrile. 10plex TMT label reagents were added in each sample and the mix was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and quenched with 0.5 % hydroxylamine. Prior to mixing, the individual TMT labelling efficiency was checked and found to be >95 %. TMT labelled samples were mixed, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, re-suspended in 300 l 0.1 % TFA and sonicated. The samples were fractionated using a high pH reverse phase fractionation kit (Thermo), dried, resuspended in 1 % TFA and analysed on a Lumos Orbitrap (Thermo, Hemel Hempstead UK) in DDA mode at 120k MS1 resolution, 50k MS2, 3s cycle, TopS, 38 NCE HCD

### Data Protocol
Data analysis (identification and quantification) was performed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.13 . The H37Rv2 database of Mtb sequences concatenated with common contaminants was used for peptide identification. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus v 1.4.0.2 with a Permutation based False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.05 to cater for multiple hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial nutrition is an essential aspect of host-pathogen interaction. For the intracellular pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of tuberculosis in humans, fatty acids derived from lipid droplets are considered the major carbon source. However, many other soluble nutrients are available inside host cells and may be used as alternative carbon sources. Lactate and pyruvate are abundant in human cells and fluids, particularly during inflammation. In this work, we study Mtb metabolism of lactate and pyruvate combining classic microbial physiology with a 'multi-omics' approach consisting of transposon-directed insertion site sequencing (TraDIS), RNA-seq transcriptomics, proteomics and stable isotopic labelling coupled with mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. We discovered that Mtb is well adapted to use both lactate and pyruvate and that their metabolism requires gluconeogenesis, valine metabolism, the Krebs cycle, the GABA shunt, the glyoxylate shunt and the methylcitrate cycle. The last two pathways are traditionally associated with fatty acid metabolism and, unexpectedly, we found that in Mtb the methylcitrate cycle operates in reverse, to allow optimal metabolism of lactate and pyruvate. Our findings reveal a novel function for the methylcitrate cycle as a direct route for the biosynthesis of propionyl-CoA, the essential precursor for the biosynthesis of the odd-chain fatty acids.

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Lc-msms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Tmt, Orbitrap, Bacterial nutrition

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Science Technology Platform, Francis Crick Institute, LONDON NW1 1AT, UK

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Science Technology Platform, Francis Crick Institute, LONDON NW1 1AT, UK


