### Accession
PXD035539

### Title
The Skp1-Cullin1-FBXO1 complex is a pleiotropic regulator required for the formation of gametes and zoites in Plasmodium berghei

### Description
Malaria-causing parasites of the Plasmodium genus undergo multiple developmental phases in the human and the mosquito hosts regulated by various post-translational modifications. While ubiquitination by multi-component E3 ligases is key to regulate a wide range of cellular processes in eukaryotes, little is known about its role in Plasmodium. Here we show that Plasmodium berghei expresses a conserved SKP1/Cullin1/FBXO1 complex showing tightly regulated expression and localisation across multiple developmental stages. It regulates cell division by controlling nucleus segregation during schizogony and centrosome partitioning during microgametogenesis. It additionally controls parasite-specific processes including gamete egress from the host erythrocyte, as well as formation of the merozoite apical complex and the ookinete inner membrane complex (IMC), two structures essential for Plasmodium dissemination, moreover it is critical for zygote to ookinete conversation. Ubiquitinomic surveys reveal a large set of proteins ubiquitinated in an FBXO1-dependent manner including proteins important for egress and IMC organisation. We additionally demonstrate bidirectional interplay between ubiquitination and phosphorylation via calcium-dependent protein kinase 1. Altogether we show that Plasmodium SCFFBXO1 plays conserved roles in cell division and additionally controls parasite-specific processes in the mammalian and mosquito hosts. 

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed and proteins were digested based on the FASP procedure. Peptides were labelled with TMT10plex reagent and phosphopeptides were enriched using High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-Dependant Acquisition (DDA) was performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again a FDR of 1% and using only peptides with high confidence level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Protein and peptides abundances values were based on S/N values of reporter ions. The abundances were normalised on “Total Peptide Amount” and then scaled with “On all Average”. All the protein ratios were calculated from the medians of the summed abundances of replicate groups and associated p-values were calculated with ANOVA test based on the abundances of individual proteins or peptides.Gene Ontologies term enrichment analysis, as well as associated plots, were performed with ClusterProfiler [67, 68] R package, using the EnrichGO function. Enrichment tests were calculated for GOterms, based on hypergeometric distribution. P-value cutoff was set to 0.05. The gofilter function was use prior to cnetplot drawing, to filter results at specific levels. Motif enrichment analysis was done using the motif-x algorithm proposed through the MoMo tool included in the MEME Suite [69]. FASTA files containing flanking sequences of interest were created using the seqRFLP R package. MoMo options were defined as followed: verbosity 1; width 15; eliminate-repeats 15; min-occurrences 5; score-threshold 1.0E-6. Results were exported in MEME Motif format and logo plots were created with motifStack R package. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Lc-msms, Malaria, Tmt, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


