### Accession
PXD031273

### Title
Androgen receptor RIME in prostate cancer cells

### Description
Androgen receptor (AR) is a master transcription factor that drives prostate cancer (PCa) development and progression. Alterations in the expression or activity of AR coregulators significantly impact the disease's outcome. To identify all the essential components of the AR coregulator complex, we utilized a proteomic approach called rapid immunoprecipitation of endogenous proteins (RIME) to systematically identify all coregulator proteins of the AR interactome in PCa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2 × 10e7 LNCaP or VCaP cells cultured in hormone starved conditions for 72 h were treated with 100 nM of DHT for 2 h. The cells were crosslinked with 1% methanol-free formaldehyde (Thermo scientific) for 8 mins at RT. Immunoprecipitation was carried out using 100ul of protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) coated with 10ug of anti-AR or rabbit-IgG antibody. The bound proteins were extracted by heating in 20ul of denaturing buffer (0.02 M Tris/HCl, pH 6.9, 2% SDS, 0.1 M dithiothreitol) for 10 mins. After spinning at 14,000 × g for 30 seconds, the supernatant containing the extracted proteins was subjected to trypsin digestion by undertaking the filter-aided sample preparation approach. The tryptic digest was cleaned up with a C18 ZipTip (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After drying down with a speedvac, the cleaned peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and water 95% with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ LC column 75 µm x 50 cm, 2-µm 100-Å pore size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an ACN gradient from 5% to 35% in 0.1% formic acid over 65 min. Peptides eluting from the column were subjected to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for MS analysis and operated in a data-dependent mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (400-2,500 m/z) were acquired at 70,000 FWHM resolution. The top 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the orbitrap by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) set to 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 FWHM resolution. The LC-MSMS data were searched against the UniProt human protein sequence (reviewed) database using MaxQuant v1.5.3.17 to identify proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides at PSM FDR of 0.01, dependent peptide FDR of 0.01, and protein FDR of 0.01. For label-free quantification, the LFQ intensity of each unique protein was calculated using the intensity data of the unmodified unique peptides and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen receptor (AR) is a master transcription factor that drives prostate cancer (PCa) development and progression. Alterations in the expression or activity of AR coregulators significantly impact the outcome of the disease. Using a proteomics approach, we identified the tripartite motif-containing 33 (TRIM33) as a novel transcriptional coactivator of AR. We demonstrate that TRIM33 facilitates AR chromatin binding to directly regulate a transcription program that promotes PCa progression. TRIM33 further stabilizes AR by protecting it from Skp2-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. We also show that TRIM33 is essential for PCa tumor growth by avoiding cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis, and TRIM33 knockdown sensitizes PCa cells to AR antagonists. In clinical analyses, we find TRIM33 upregulated in multiple PCa patient cohorts. Finally, we uncover an AR-TRIM33-coactivated gene signature highly expressed in PCa tumors and predict disease recurrence. Overall, our results reveal that TRIM33 is an oncogenic AR coactivator in PCa and a potential therapeutic target for PCa treatment.

### Keywords
Androgen receptor, Rime, Prostate cancer, Cofactors

### Affiliations
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China

### Submitter
mi chen

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Chong Wing CHEUNG
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China


