### Accession
PXD013129

### Title
VDAC2 ligands selectively and potently block BAK-mediated apoptosis to allow long-term clonogenic cell survival

### Description
This study aimed to characterise the protein that a novel compound binds to, thus promoting its ability to inhibit BAK apoptotic activity.

### Sample Protocol
Human colorectal cancer cell lines SW480 and LIM2405 (Ludwig Institute, Melbourne) were seeded at a density of 500.000 cells/well in DMEM + 10% FCS and grown to 90% confluency in 6-well plates. The cells were washed with 1 mL PBS and replenished with serum-free DMEM (1 mL) and incubated with 10 μM compound  6 (1 μL from 1000x DMSO stock) or DMSO (1 μL) for 1 h at 37 °C. The cells were placed on ice and irradiated for 10 min with UV light using a 1000 W Hg(Xe) lamp (Oriel Instrument, model 66926) fitted with band-pass filter for irradiation at 355 nm (Oriel instrument, Part no 59810) and with a filter to absorb heat (Oriel instrument, Part no FSQ-KG2). The cells were then harvested with a cell scraper and transferred to a microfuge tube, centrifuged (1,400 g, 2 min, 4 °C), medium was aspirated and the pellet washed with cold PBS (2 x 1 mL).   Biotinylation of proteins crosslinked to compound 6 using Click chemistry Cell pellets were then lysed using 250 μL RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris•HCl pH 7.6, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitors (Roche, Cat. 4693159001) and Benzonase (Sigma, Cat. E1014) for 30 min at 4 °C on an end-over-end rotater. Cellular lysates were then centrifuged (14,000 g, 20 min, 4 °C) and 200 μL of the supernatant containing the labeled proteome was subjected to Click-chemistry: To each sample (200 μL), a total volume of 24 μL of “click” reagents was added: 0.1 mM tris(benzyltriazolylmethyl)amine (TBTA, Sigma Cat. 678937) (12 μL/sample, 1.7 mM in 1:4 DMSO:t-ButOH), 1 mM CuSO4 (4 μL/sample, 50 mM in H2O), 25 mM tetramethylrhodamine(TAMRA)-biotin azide (ClickChemistry Tools Cat. 1048) (4 μL/sample, 1.25 mM in DMSO), and freshly prepared 1 mM TCEP (4 μL/sample, 50 mM in H2O). The click reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 at ambient temperature on an end-over-end rotator.   Capture of biotinylated proteins and preparation for MS analysis To remove excess TAMRA-biotin azide, the obtained samples were submitted to size-exclusion chromatography using a PD MiniTrap desalting column with G25 sephadex resin (GE Healthcare Cat. 28918007) following the manufacturer’s instructions for buffer exchange using the centrifugation protocol to elute the click-labeled proteins in 500 μL RIPA buffer.  The flow through was captured and incubated with 10 μL high-capacity streptavidin-agarose beads (Pierce Cat. 20357) for 1 h at 4 °C to capture the biotin-labeled proteins. The beads were centrifuged (1000 g, 1 min, RT), washed with PBS + 0.5% SDS (3 x 500 μL) and reduced with 100 mM DTT in PBS + 0.5% SDS for 20 min at ambient temperature. Subsequently, the beads were transferred to snap-cap spin columns (Pierce, Cat. 69725)  and washed with UC buffer (6M Urea, 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH8.5) (2 x 300 μL) and incubated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in UC buffer for 20 min in the dark at ambient temperature. This was followed by extensive washing with UC buffer (10 x 300 μL), PBS (4 x 300 μL), and water (3 x 300 μL) using a vacuum manifold. The proteins were then digested on-bead overnight at 37 °C in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (100 μL) using Trypsin Gold (Promega). The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation (1000 g, 1 min), the beads washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 (100 μL), and the tryptic fractions were pooled, acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 1% and frozen at ‒80 °C before lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant for search Custom R pipelines for analysis

### Publication Abstract
Activating the intrinsic apoptosis pathway with small molecules is now a clinically validated approach to cancer therapy. In contrast, blocking apoptosis to prevent the death of healthy cells in disease settings has not been achieved. Caspases have been favored, but they act too late in apoptosis to provide long-term protection. The critical step in committing a cell to death is activation of BAK or BAX, pro-death BCL-2 proteins mediating mitochondrial damage. Apoptosis cannot proceed in their absence. Here we show that WEHI-9625, a novel tricyclic sulfone small molecule, binds to VDAC2 and promotes its ability to inhibit apoptosis driven by mouse BAK. In contrast to caspase inhibitors, WEHI-9625 blocks apoptosis before mitochondrial damage, preserving cellular function and long-term clonogenic potential. Our findings expand on the key role of VDAC2 in regulating apoptosis and demonstrate that blocking apoptosis at an early stage is both advantageous and pharmacologically tractable.

### Keywords
Compound target id

### Affiliations
Advanced Technology Walter & ELiza Hall Institute
WEHI

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Webb
Advanced Technology Walter & ELiza Hall Institute


