### Accession
PXD006198

### Title
R2TP_TAP-MS -  R2TP/Prefoldin-like component RUVBL1/RUVBL2 directly interacts with ZNHIT2 to regulate assembly of U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein

### Description
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex is a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes. Here we use multiple target tandem affinity purification (TAP) coupled to mass spectrometry to map out the interaction network around R2TP/PFDL.

### Sample Protocol
1 gram of cells was lysed in 2.5 ml of lysis buffer A (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 0.34 M sucrose, 3 mM CaCl2, 2 mM Mg acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5 mM AEBSF and complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) using a tissue grinder. Following centrifugation (3500 _g, 15 min, 4 °C), pellet was homogenized in 2.5 ml of lysis buffer B (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM K acetate, 3 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM AEBSF and protease inhibitor cocktail). After centrifugation (15,000 _g , 30 min, 4 °C) the chromatin pellet was set aside and soluble fractions were combined and spun once more (165,000 _g, 1 h30, 4 °C) and dialyzed overnight in 2 L of dialysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM DTT, 0.1 M K acetate and 10% glycerol). The pellet was chopped with a scalpel in 2 ml nuclease incubation buffer (150 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM K acetate, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM AEBSF and protease inhibitor cocktail) and subsequently ground in glass tissue grinder. The chromatin fraction was digested O/N in 150 U/ml benzonase, 50 U/ml RNase A and 10 U/ml DNaseI. Next day, both soluble and chromatin fractions were cleared by centrifugation (20,000 _g, 30 min, 4 °C) and incubated with 25 _l of IgG sepharose beads for 1 h at 4 °C on tube rotator. Resin was washed twice in 250 _l immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol) and transferred to a Micro Bio-Spin Chromatography Column. 2_500 _l TEV buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT) were used to rinse the column which was then sealed with 150 _l of TEV buffer and 15 U of AcTEV protease. After an overnight incubation (at 4 °C on a tube rotator), the eluate was collected into another Micro Bio-Spin Chromatography Column containing 25 _l of calmodulin sepharose 4B beads.  2_300 _l of calmodulin binding buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM imidazole, 1 mM Mg acetate, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 10 mM _-mercaptoethanol) were added to wash out the complexes. The calmodulin column was sealed with 0.8 _l of 1 M CaCl2, and incubated 2 h at 4 °C on tube rotator. The resin was  washed in 2_500 _l calmodulin binding buffer and the proteins were eluted by 100 _l and 150 _l of calmodulin elution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM imidazole, 1 mM Mg acetate, 2 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 10 mM _-mercaptoethanol). TCA protein precipitation was performed. Protein extracts were resolubilized in 10 _l of 6 M urea buffer, reduced with 2.5 _l of reduction buffer (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated by 2.5 _l of alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min at 24 °C in the dark. 20 _l of water and 2.5 _l of the trypsin solution (5 ng/_l of trypsin sequencing grade from Promega, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added. Protein digestion was performed at 37 °C for 18 h and stopped with 5 _l of 5% formic acid. Digests were dried down in speedvac and stored at -20 °C. Protein digests were reolubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 _l of 0.2% formic acid. Cleanup of digests was performed by C18 ZipTip pipette tips. Eluates were dried down in a speedvac, resolubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 _l of 2% ACN/1% formic acid and loaded on 75 _m i.d. _ 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column in Easy-nLC II system.  Chromatography buffers were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with two slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min.  Solvent B increased from 2-40% in 82 min and then 40-80% in 28 min.  The HPLC system was coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer through nano-ESI source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3-1.8 kV and 50 V, capillary temperature to 225 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m /z 360-2000) in profile mode were acquired with resolution of 60,000 and target value at 1e6. 10 most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation in the LTQ with target value at 1e4 (normalized collision energy 35 V, activation Q 0.25 and activation time 10 ms). Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) against the human NCBInr protein database (version July 18, 2012). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The R2TP/Prefoldin-like (R2TP/PFDL) complex has emerged as a cochaperone complex involved in the assembly of a number of critical protein complexes including snoRNPs, nuclear RNA polymerases and PIKK-containing complexes. Here we report on the use of multiple target affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to identify two additional complexes that interact with R2TP/PFDL: the TSC1-TSC2 complex and the U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP). The interaction between R2TP/PFDL and the U5 snRNP is mostly mediated by the previously uncharacterized factor ZNHIT2. A more general function for the zinc-finger HIT domain in binding RUVBL2 is exposed. Disruption of ZNHIT2 and RUVBL2 expression impacts the protein composition of the U5 snRNP suggesting a function for these proteins in promoting the assembly of the ribonucleoprotein. A possible implication of R2TP/PFDL as a major effector of stress-, energy- and nutrient-sensing pathways that regulate anabolic processes through the regulation of its chaperoning activity is discussed.

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Lc-msms, Hek 293

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Translational proteomics


