### Accession
PXD011038

### Title
Detection of SEPs by MS (Second Round)

### Description
Identifying smORFs and SEPs is technically and computationally challenging. Experimentally, techniques as ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq and mass spectroscopy (MS) are used. Ribo-Seq sequences the mRNA and does not provide the translated frame, thus identifying proteins encoded by overlapping ORFs is not feasible. Herein we have used MS to characterize smORFomes of different Mycoplasma species, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. This data is used to corroborate the predictions of a random forest classifier that in silico predicts all the putative SEPs encoded by different bacterial genomes.

### Sample Protocol
2 samples digested with trypsin and LysC, and 1 microgram of each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a 120-min gradient in the Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
As a quality control BSA was digested in parallel and ran between each of your samples to avoid carryover and assess the instrument performance Samples were searched using the algorithm Mascot v2.5.1 (http://www.matrixscience.com/) against the customized databases saureus_6ORFs_BG.fasta and paeruginosa_6ORF_BG.fasta. Peptides have been filtered based on 1% FDR. Find the information of the identified peptides and their corresponding proteins in the excel sheet of the results. Note that Protein Discoverer provides an approximate estimation of protein amount with the parameter “Area”, which is the average peak area of the three most intense unique peptides per protein (not grouped).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seps, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
Design of Biological Systems, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona (Spain)

### Submitter
Samuel Miravet Verde

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Design of Biological Systems, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona (Spain)


