### Accession
PXD043243

### Title
Proteomic analysis in root tip of maize under cadmium and copper exposure

### Description
In this study, the metabolic adjustments performed by maize (Zea mays L) seminal roots exposed to 25 µM Cd2+ or 25 µM Cu2+ at pre-emergence are compared, focusing on the proteomic changes after metal exposure. Root width was increased, and root length was decreased after 72 h of metal treatment. Both metals induced H2O2 accumulation and lipid peroxidation in the root tip. These changes were accompanied by increases in lipoxygenase activity and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal content. NMR spectroscopy revealed that the abundance of 38 water-soluble metabolites was significantly modified by Cd and Cu exposure; this set of metabolites comprised carboxylic acids, amino acids, carbohydrates, and unidentified phenolic compounds. Linoleic acid content significantly decreased in Cu-treated samples. The total amount of proteins detected in maize root apexes was 2,171. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the differentially accumulated proteins was performed to detect pathways probably affected by metal additions. Both metals altered redox homeostasis, up-regulated oxylipins biosynthetic process, and shifted metabolism towards the oxidative pentose-phosphate in the root apexes. However, the methionine salvage pathway appears as a key metabolic module only under Cd stress. The integrative analysis carried out in this study suggests that most molecular features behind the reprogramming of maize root tips to cope with cadmium and copper toxicity are common, but some are not.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared by homogenizing 0.3 mg root tips in 900 µL of extraction medium containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 25 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100, and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride (PMSF) (pH 7.5) at 4 ºC. The homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000xg for 30 min (4 ºC), and the supernatant fraction was used for the proteomic assay. Protein content was estimated according to Bradford (1976) using bovine serum albumin as a standard. Samples (40 µg protein) were loaded into a 1.5 mm thickness, 4% (w/v) stacking 12% (w/v) running SDS-PAGE (Laemmli, 1970). Electrophoresis was performed at 120 volts for a total migration length of 1 cm. Gels were washed briefly with distilled water and fixed in 30% (v/v) ethanol / 2% (v/v) phosphoric acid for 3 h. Then, gels were rinsed three times with distilled water, and subsequently stained overnight in 18% (v/v) methanol / 2% (v/v) phosphoric acid containing 17% (w/v) NH4SO4 with colloidal Coomassie Blue G250. After washed the gels with distilled water, each stained gel lane was manually excised as a single slice and placed in separate vials. Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analysis were performed at the Proteomics Core Facility CEQUIBIEM, Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA-CONICET). Briefly, gel fragments were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at 56 ºC, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark, and digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel cubes with acetonitrile, the supernatant was concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge (Speed Vac) and resuspended in 30 µL 0.1% (w/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TCA). The resulting digested proteins were desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). Peptides were analysed by nano HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer with Orbitrap technology (Q-Exactive with High Collision Dissociation cell and Orbitrap analyzer, Thermo Scientific, Germany). Digest (4 µL) was fractionated using a reverse phase column (75 µm x 250 mm C18, 2µm, 100A column (ThermoScientific EASY-Spray Accucore (P/N ES902) at 35°C. Peptides were eluted with a solvent range from 5% B (5 min) to 95% B (120 min) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptide ionization was performed by electrospray (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY). Mass spectrometer configuration allowed the identification of peptides to be carried out at the same time that they were separated by chromatography, obtaining Full MS and MS/MS. Intact masses were measured at resolution FullMS 70.000 (at m/z 400-2000) in positive mode. The 12 most intense ions in each MS spectrum were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD, and measured in the Orbitrap analyzer. LC-MS/MS experiments were carried out from three biologically independent replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (v 2.2, Thermo Scientific) for identification and area quantitation of each protein. Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation of Met and static modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of Cys. Protein hits were filtered for high-confidence peptide matches with a minimum of two different peptides identified by protein. Protein identities were assigned based on Zea mays (Maize) Uniprot protein database as reference (unique proteome identifier UP000007305, https://beta.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000007305) digested with trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavage per peptide. Freely available Perseus software (v 2.0.7.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, https://maxquant.net/perseus/) (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used to perform comparisons among sample area values and statistical analysis. Inferential statistics were carried out by applying the t-Student test with a significance level of 0.05, to identify data with statistically significant differences between the control and Cd treatment. Venn diagram was constructed using an online server (https://www.bioinformatics.com.cn/). Principal component analysis was performed with the R package “FactoMineR”. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed directly from the home page of the Gene Ontology Consortium (http://geneontology.org/) (Ashburner et al., 2000; Gene Ontology Consortium, 2021). A critical value of False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.05 was used to filter results. The bubble chart of GO enrichment analysis was performed on the bioinformatics platform (http://www.bioinformatics.com.cn/). Predicted gene names were retrieved from the Maize Genetics and Genomics Database (MaizeGDB).

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the metabolic adjustments performed by maize (Zea mays L.) seminal roots exposed to 25&#xa0;&#xb5;M Cd<sup>2+</sup> or 25&#xa0;&#xb5;M Cu<sup>2+</sup> at pre-emergence are compared, focusing on the proteomic changes after metal exposure. Root width was increased, and root length was decreased after 72&#xa0;h of metal treatment. Both metals induced H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> accumulation and lipid peroxidation in the root tip. These changes were accompanied by increases in lipoxygenase activity and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal content. NMR spectroscopy revealed that the abundance of 38 water-soluble metabolites was significantly modified by Cd and Cu exposure; this set of metabolites comprised carboxylic acids, amino acids, carbohydrates, and unidentified phenolic compounds. Linoleic acid content significantly decreased in Cu-treated samples. The total amount of proteins detected in maize root apexes was 2,171. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the differentially accumulated proteins was performed to detect pathways probably affected by metal additions. Both metals altered redox homeostasis, up-regulated oxylipins biosynthetic process, and shifted metabolism towards the oxidative pentose-phosphate in the root apexes. However, the methionine salvage pathway appears as a key metabolic module only under Cd stress. The integrative analysis carried out in this study suggests that most molecular features behind the reprogramming of maize root tips to cope with cadmium and copper toxicity are common, but some are not.

### Keywords
Zea mays, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica
Universidad de Buenos Aires. Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Departamento de Química Biológica. Buenos Aires, Argentina CONICET. Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas (IQUIFIB). Buenos Aires, Argentina

### Submitter
Liliana Pena

### Lab Head
Dr Liliana Beatriz
Universidad de Buenos Aires. Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Departamento de Química Biológica. Buenos Aires, Argentina CONICET. Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica Biológicas (IQUIFIB). Buenos Aires, Argentina


### SDRF
- organism: Zea mays
- organism part: Root tip
- cell type: nan
- disease: Control, Cd stress, Cu stress
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive

