### Accession
PXD017153

### Title
Ex-Vivo Equine Cartilage Explant Osteoarthritis Model - A Metabolomics and Proteomics Study

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is an age-related degenerative musculoskeletal disease characterised by loss of articular cartilage, synovitis, abnormal bone proliferation and subchondral bone sclerosis. The underlying pathogenesis of OA is yet to be fully elucidated with no OA specific biomarkers in clinical use. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (MS) allow identification of the global metabolome and proteome respectively. During this study, ex-vivo equine cartilage explants (n=5) were incubated in TNF-α/IL-1β supplemented culture media for 8 days, with media removed and replaced at 2, 5 and 8 days. Acetonitrile metabolite extractions of 8 day cartilage explants and media samples at all time points underwent 1H NMR metabolic analysis with media samples also undergoing MS proteomic analysis. Within the cartilage, metabolites glucose and lysine were elevated following TNF-α/IL-1β treatment whilst adenosine, alanine, betaine, creatine, myo-inositol and uridine levels decreased. Within the culture media, four, four and six metabolites were identified as being differentially abundant between control and treatment groups for 1-2 day, 3-5 day and 6-8 day time points respectively. Culture media proteomics identified 154, 138 and 72 proteins differentially abundant, with > 2 fold change, between control and treatment groups for 1-2 day, 3-5 day and 6-8 day time points respectively. Nine potential novel OA neopeptides were elevated in treated media. This is the first study to use a multi ‘omics’ approach to simultaneously investigate the metabolomic profile of ex-vivo cartilage and metabolomic/proteomic profiles of culture media using the TNF-α/IL-1β ex-vivo OA cartilage model. This study has identified a panel of metabolites, proteins and extracellular matrix derived neopeptides which are differentially abundant during an early phase of the OA model which may provide further information on underlying disease pathogenesis, allow potential translation for clinical markers and possible novel therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Culture media from equine cartilage explants was thawed over ice and centrifuged for 5 min at 21,000g and 4°C. Media sample concentrations were determined using a Pierce® 660 nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). 50 µg of protein for each sample was diluted with dd H2O, producing a final volume of 1 ml. StrataCleanTM resin (10 µl) (Agilent, Santa Clara, California, USA) was added to each sample, rotated for 15 min, centrifuged at 400g for 1 min and the supernatant removed and discarded. Samples were then washed through the addition of 1 ml of ddH2O, vortexed for 1 min, centrifuged at 400g for 1 min and the supernatant removed and discarded. The wash step was repeated two further times. 160 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka Chemicals Ltd., Gillingham, UK) containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Elstree, Hertfordshire, UK) was added to each sample and heated at 80°C for 10 min. DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to produce a final concentration of 3 mM, incubated at 60°C for 10 min then iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) added (9 mM final concentration) and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. 2 µg of proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample, rotated at 37°C for 16 hr and trypsin treatment then repeated for a 2 hr incubation. Samples were centrifuged at 1,000g for 1 min, digest removed, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) added (0.5% (v/v) final concentration) and rotated at 37°C for 30 min. Finally, digests were centrifuged at 13,000g and 4°C for 15 min and the supernatant removed and stored at 4°C. Tryptic digests were diluted 5-fold in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and analysed individually, in a random order, via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a 60 min liquid chromatography (LC) gradient. A Q ExactiveTM HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) was used for data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses. Digests were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 20 mm x 75 µm) using a loading buffer of 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 3 min at a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® C18, 15 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) with peptide elution carried out using a linear gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid):3.8% B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water:acetonitrile (80:20) (v/v)) to 50% A:50% B over 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1, followed by washing at 1 % A:99% B for 5 min and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions. Sample digests were interspersed with 30 min blanks (97% (v/v) high performance liquid chromatography grade H20 (VWR International), 2.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. The Q ExactiveTM was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode with survey scans between m/z 300-2000 acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 (full width at half maximum) at m/z 200 after accumulation of ions to 1x106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control values from the previous full scan. The 10 most intense precursor ions with charge states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used to fragment peptides using normalised collision energy of 30% with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectral alignment, peak picking, total protein abundance normalisation and peptide/protein quantification were undertaken using Progenesis™ QI 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). The exported top ten spectra for each feature were then searched against the Equus caballus database for peptide and protein identification using PEAKS® Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) software. Search parameters were: precursor mass error tolerance, 10.0 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance, 0.01 Da; precursor mass search type, monoisotopic; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 1; non-specific cleavage, none; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, oxidation or hydroxylation and oxidation (methionine). A filter of a minimum of 2 unique peptides was set for protein identification and quantitation with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis is an age-related degenerative musculoskeletal disease characterized by loss of articular cartilage, synovitis, and subchondral bone sclerosis. Osteoarthritis pathogenesis is yet to be fully elucidated with no osteoarthritis-specific biomarkers in clinical use. <i>Ex vivo</i> equine cartilage explants (<i>n</i> = 5) were incubated in tumor necrosis factor-&#x3b1; (TNF-&#x3b1;)/interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;)-supplemented culture media for 8 days, with the media removed and replaced at 2, 5, and 8 days. Acetonitrile metabolite extractions of 8 day cartilage explants and media samples at all time points underwent one-dimensional (1D) <sup>1</sup>H nuclear magnetic resonance metabolomic analysis, with media samples also undergoing mass spectrometry proteomic analysis. Within the cartilage, glucose and lysine were elevated following TNF-&#x3b1;/IL-1&#x3b2; treatment, while adenosine, alanine, betaine, creatine, myo-inositol, and uridine decreased. Within the culture media, 4, 4, and 6 differentially abundant metabolites and 154, 138, and 72 differentially abundant proteins were identified at 1-2, 3-5, and 6-8 days, respectively, including reduced alanine and increased isoleucine, enolase 1, vimentin, and lamin A/C following treatment. Nine potential novel osteoarthritis neopeptides were elevated in the treated media. Implicated pathways were dominated by those involved in cellular movement. Our innovative study has provided insightful information on early osteoarthritis pathogenesis, enabling potential translation for clinical markers and possible new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Cartilage, Proteomics, Nuclear magnetic resonance, Mass spectrometry, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom

### Submitter
James Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom


