### Accession
PXD022270

### Title
Synaptosome proteomics of tetanus neurotoxin-injected mice

### Description
Network hyperexcitability is manifested as frequent ictal discharges, often caused by unbalanced neurotransmission. We assessed synaptic changes in the hyperexcitable visual cortex of tetanus neurotoxin-injected mice (TeNT). A proteomics analysis of synaptic content revealed Carboxypeptidase E (CPE) up-regulation following TeNT injection. To quantify CPE effect on vesicle clustering, we used an ultrastructural measure of synaptic activity to investigate functional differences at excitatory and inhibitory synapses. We found homeostatic changes in hyperexcitable networks expressed as an early onset lengthening of active zones at inhibitory synapses followed by spatial reorganization at excitatory synapses. Moreover, inhibition of CPE decreases ictal discharges in vivo. This study reveals a complex landscape of homeostatic changes affecting the synaptic release machinery , differentially at inhibitory and excitatory terminals. We propose a novel homeostatic presynaptic mechanism which may impact release timing rather than synaptic strength.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin/LysC mix Mass Spec grade was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). Tandem Mass Tags (TMT 10-plex) kits and microBCA protein assay kit were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Rockford, IL). All other reagents and solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Synaptosome proteome extracts were quantified with a micro BCA protein assay and aliquots of 3.5 μg of protein were diluted to 40 μL with RIPA/Trifluoroethanol (TFE) 50/50. Paramagnetic beads were added to each sample and further processed following a modified SP3 protocol for ultrasensitive proteomics as previously described (Pellegrini et al., 2019). Synaptosome proteins were reduced alkylated and digested with a mixture of trypsin/Lys-C (1:20 enzyme to protein ratio). Digested peptides were then quantified, and labelled with TMT 10-plex: samples were block randomized (www.sealedenvelope.com) over 5 TMT sets. Each TMT set included 2 normalization channels for batch corrections using a pooled sample (containing an aliquot from each synaptosome sample (Plubell et al., 2015)). TMT sets underwent high pH fractionation using an AssayMap Bravo (Agilent technologies) and fractions run on a nano-LC (Easy1000 Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 50 cm EasySpray column and coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion for MS3 analysis (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Experimental details regarding sample fractionation and LC-MS/MS runs were identical to that reported by Pellegrini et al. (Pellegrini et al., Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2019).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer. TMT data were normalized by internal reference scaling (Plubell et al. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2017). Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) for T-tests, volcano plots and hierarchical clustering and Matlab for two-way ANOVA to isolate the two contributions and to confirm deregulated proteins highlighted with the t-test. Differences between three or more groups were evaluated with one-way ANOVA, followed by a Tukey’s or Holm–Sidak test for data normally distributed and with Kruskal–Wallis one-way ANOVA with Dunn’s post hoc test for data non-normally distributed. Normality of distributions was assessed with Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal hyperexcitability often results from an unbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission, but the synaptic alterations leading to enhanced seizure propensity are only partly understood. Taking advantage of a mouse model of neocortical epilepsy, we used a combination of photoconversion and electron microscopy to assess changes in synaptic vesicles pools <i>in vivo</i>. Our analyses reveal that epileptic networks show an early onset lengthening of active zones at inhibitory synapses, together with a delayed spatial reorganization of recycled vesicles at excitatory synapses. Proteomics of synaptic content indicate that specific proteins were increased in epileptic mice. Altogether, our data reveal a complex landscape of nanoscale changes affecting the epileptic synaptic release machinery. In particular, our findings show that an altered positioning of release-competent vesicles represent a novel signature of epileptic networks.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Tetanus neurotoxin, Epilepsy, Tmt

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza

### Submitter
Liam McDonnell

### Lab Head
Dr Liam McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza


