### Accession
PXD022104

### Title
The ER-embedded UBE2J1/RNF26 ubiquitylation complex in spatio-temporal control of the endolysosomal pathwayThe ER-embedded UBE2J1/RNF26 ubiquitylation complex in spatio-temporal control of the endolysosomal pathway

### Description
The endolysosomal system fulfills a wide variety of cellular functions, many of which are modulated through interactions with other organelles. In particular, the ER exerts spatiotemporal constraints on the organization and motility of endosomes and lysosomes. We have recently described the ER transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF26 as a regulator of perinuclear positioning and transport dynamics of the endolysosomal network. We now report that the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UBE2J1, also anchored in the ER membrane, collaborates with RNF26 in this context, and that the cellular activity of this E2/E3 pair, localized in a perinuclear ER subdomain, is supported by transmembrane interactions. Through modification of SQSTM1/p62 on lysine 435, the ER-embedded UBE2J1/RNF26 ubiquitylation complex recruits endosomal adaptors to immobilize their cognate vesicles in the perinuclear region of the cell. The resulting spatiotemporal compartmentalization of the endolysosomal system promotes trafficking of activated EGFR to the late compartments and facilitates cessation of downstream AKT signaling.

### Sample Protocol
HA-SQSTM1 precipitates from HEK293 cells cotransfected with either empty vector (EV), RFP-UBE2J1 or RFP-RNF26. HA pulldown samples were fractionated for 15 min at 150V on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gel using MOPS buffer. Entire lanes were processed by in-gel digestion according to a previously published protocol (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Samples were processed on a EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were fractionated by chromatography using a column with 360 µm um OD, 75 µm um ID, 15 µum tip ID, non-coated, 25 cm length (MS Wil, Aarle-Rixtel, Netherlands); in-house packed with 1.8 μm C18 beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr.Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were fractionated on a 120 min solvent gradient from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the higher-collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 with a resolution of 17,500 using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 60 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 s. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
MS data files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) matching to a Uniprot Human Proteome (Uniprot filtered reviewed H. sapiens proteome downloaded June 22, 2020) and a custom FASTA sequence of 2xHA-SQSTM1 with default settings for FDR and andromeda score filtering, matching to a decoy database and common contaminants. Digestion was set to allow 4 missed cleavages with Trypsin digestion. Normalization was done by LFQ (default settings) with matching between runs enabled. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation (S,T and Y) and GlyGly modification on Lysine were included as variable modifications. Intensity data was plotted from GlyGly (K)Sites.txt output files.

### Publication Abstract
The endolysosomal system fulfills a wide variety of cellular functions, many of which are modulated through interactions with other organelles. In particular, the ER exerts spatiotemporal constraints on the organization and motility of endosomes and lysosomes. We have recently described the ER transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF26 as a regulator of endolysosomal perinuclear positioning and transport dynamics. Here, we report that the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UBE2J1, also anchored in the ER membrane, partners with RNF26 in this context, and that the cellular activity of the resulting E2/E3 pair is localized in a perinuclear ER subdomain and supported by transmembrane interactions. Through modification of SQSTM1/p62 on lysine 435, the ER-embedded UBE2J1/RNF26 ubiquitylation complex recruits endosomal adaptors to immobilize their cognate vesicles in the perinuclear region of the cell. The resulting spatiotemporal compartmentalization promotes the trafficking of activated EGFR to lysosomes and facilitates the termination of EGF-induced AKT signaling.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Rnf26, Endoplasmic reticulum, Egfr, Ube2j1, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology at the Leiden University Medical Center.
LUMC

### Submitter
Fredrik Trulsson

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology at the Leiden University Medical Center.


