### Accession
PXD002525

### Title
Dynamic changes of histone H3 marks during Caenorhabditis elegans lifecycle revealed by middle-down proteomics

### Description
We applied a middle-down proteomics strategy for large scale protein analysis during in vivo development of Caenorhabditis elegans. We characterized post-translational modifications (PTMs) on histone H3 N-terminal tails at eight time points during the C. elegans lifecycle, including embryo, larval stages (L1 to L4), dauer and L1/L4 post dauer. Histones were analyzed by our optimized middle-down protein sequencing platform using high mass accuracy tandem mass spectrometry. This allows quantification of intact histone tails and detailed characterization of distinct histone tails carrying co-occurring PTMs. We measured temporally distinct combinatorial PTM profiles during C. elegans development. We show that the doubly modified form H3K23me3K27me3, which is rare or non-existent in mammals, is the most abundant PTM in all stages of C. elegans lifecycle. The abundance of H3K23me3 increased during development and it was mutually exclusive of the active marks H3K18ac, R26me1 and R40me1, suggesting a role for H3K23me3 in to silent chromatin. We observed distinct PTM profiles for normal L1 larvae and for L1-post dauer larvae, or L4 and L4 post-dauer, suggesting that histone PTMs mediate an epigenetic memory that is transmitted during dauer formation. Collectively, our data describe the dynamics of histone H3 combinatorial code during C. elegans lifecycle and demonstrate the feasibility of using middle-down proteomics to study in vivo development of multicellular organisms.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed individual and combinatorial PTMs of histone H3 extracted from C. elegans in eight different stages of its lifecycle, from embryos to late larvae, including the metabolically arrested dauer stage, and the larval stages after dauer exit (L4 post-dauer and L1 post-dauer). To this end, we used the mutant strain daf-2 (e1370) that carries a single point mutation in the daf-2 gene with temperature-sensitive properties. When grown at 15°C, this allele behaves as the wild type organism. However, at the restrictive temperature of 25°C it enters the dauer phase, adopted in wild type worms only in case of extreme environmental conditions such as prohibitive temperature, lack of nutrition, or high population density. We were interested in the dauer stage as in that phase transcription is highly regulated. Furthermore, different developmental history (e.g. passage or not from the dauer stage) has been reported to lead to different adult phenotypes; thus, we found it highly relevant to characterize histone PTM dynamics of the dauer stage as well as subsequent larval stages. Worms were synchronized by bleaching gravid adults, embryos were hatched overnight and starved as L1s. L1s were plated and grown to the indicated stages using a dissecting microscope and analyzing morphological characteristics and the gonad development.

### Data Protocol
The middle-down mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics strategy allows for the characterization of histone N-terminal tails derived by endoproteinase Glu-C. Briefly, histones were acid extracted from two replicates for each stage and digested using GluC, which cleaves at the C-terminus of glutamic acid generating a histone H3 N-terminal peptide of 50 amino acid residues. Separation was performed by using nanoliter flow liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, part of Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with an analytical column packed with a hybrid weak cation exchange – hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatographic resin (WCX-HILIC PolycatA, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). This resin allowed separation of the most extensively modified (more hydrophobic) histone tail species to the non-modified (more hydrophilic) species. MS detection was by an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in high mass resolution mode in both MS and MS/MS experiments. Fragmentation was performed by using electron transfer dissociation (ETD). Data analysis was performed by using Xtract (Thermo) for spectral deconvolution, Mascot (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) for database searching and IsoScale slim (http://middle-down.github.io/Software) for filtering of confident results and quantification. C. elegans cultures were grown using standard methods on NGM plates seeded with E. coli OP50 at 15 or 25°C.

### Publication Abstract
We applied a middle-down proteomics strategy for large-scale protein analysis during in vivo development of Caenorhabditis elegans. We characterized PTMs on histone H3 N-terminal tails at eight time points during the C. elegans lifecycle, including embryo, larval stages (L1-L4), dauer, and L1/L4 postdauer. Histones were analyzed by our optimized middle-down protein sequencing platform using high mass accuracy MS/MS. This allows quantification of intact histone tails and detailed characterization of distinct histone tails carrying cooccurring PTMs. We measured temporally distinct combinatorial PTM profiles during C. elegans development. We show that the doubly modified form H3K23me3K27me3, which is rare or nonexistent in mammals, is the most abundant PTM in all stages of C. elegans lifecycle. The abundance of H3K23me3 increased during development and it was mutually exclusive of the active marks H3K18ac, R26me1, and R40me1, suggesting a role for H3K23me3 in silent chromatin. We observed distinct PTM profiles for normal L1 larvae and for L1-postdauer larvae, or L4 and L4 postdauer, suggesting that histone PTMs mediate an epigenetic memory that is transmitted during dauer formation. Collectively, our data describe the dynamics of histone H3 combinatorial code during C. elegans lifecycle and demonstrate the feasibility of using middle-down proteomics to study in vivo development of multicellular organisms. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002525 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002525).

### Keywords
C. elegans, Post-translational modifications, Lifecycle, Histones, Middle-down proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, DK
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N. Jensen
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, DK


