### Accession
PXD009998

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis between light and dark-adapted Euglena gracilis

### Description
We sequenced and assembled a detailed transcriptome and draft genome for E. gracilis Z1. To improve annotation and investigate gene expression in E. gracilis, where most transcripts are also trans-spliced, we conducted comparative proteomic and transcriptomic analysis between light and dark-adapted E. gracilis. The analysis revealed that alterations to protein abundance are controlled post-transcriptionally, surprisingly similar to trypanosomatids.

### Sample Protocol
For light and dark adaptation, E. gracilis cells were adapted to Hutner heterotrophic medium (Hutner, 1966) for 16 days prior to the initiation of a light or dark growth period. Cultures were subcultured and dark-adapted cultures were transferred to a light proof box adjacent to the light cultures. Subculturing was done under low light conditions periodically and cultures were maintained for up to two weeks prior to harvesting. Cells were washed with PBS containing Roche complete protease inhibitors, extracted with standard NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (3X), sonicated and lysates containing 10exp7 cells were fractionated on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient polyacrylamide gel under reducing conditions. The sample lane was divided into eight slices that were then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) was performed in house at the University of Dundee, UK. Samples were analyzed on an Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to  an Orbitrap Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at the University of Dundee FingerPrints Proteomics facility.  Sample layout: Dark (replicate1, 8 fractions: D1-D8;  replicate2, 8 fractions: D9-D16; replicate3, 8 fractions: D17-D24) Light (replicate1, 8 fractions: L1-L8;  replicate2, 8 fractions: L9-L16; replicate3, 8 fractions: L17-L24)

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008) searching the predicted E. gracilis proteome (our de novo transcriptome assembly). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein. If the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group. P values were calculated applying t-test based statistics using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). 8661 distinct protein groups were identified in the MaxQuant analysis. For further analyses data were reduced to 4297 protein groups by rejecting those groups not identified at the peptide level in each of the three replicates for one state. Additionally, a cohort of 384 protein groups was extracted that were observed in only one state (232 light and 152 dark).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Euglena gracilis, Plastid, Photosynthesis, Light dark adaption

### Affiliations
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH
Professor of Cell Biology & Parasitology Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Mark C. Field
Professor of Cell Biology & Parasitology Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom


