### Accession
PXD014289

### Title
PROFILING OF PLASMA PROTEINS IN RENAL CELL CARCINOMA

### Description
A comparative analysis of the protein profile of 36 blood plasma samples from patients with kidney cancer and 20 samples of healthy volunteers was carried out using ultra-high resolution panoramic mass spectrometry. The analysis of results of measurements was conducted using OMSSA proteomic search engine, the relative abundance of proteins Normalized Spectrum Abundance Factor (NSAF) in biosamples was evaluated using SearchGUI.

### Sample Protocol
The blood plasma in the volume of 40 µl was then brought to the final volume of 160 µl by adding the solution 15 mM MOPS (4-morpholinepropanesulfonic acid sodium salt), рН 7.4. Minor proteins were supplemented using the method of immunoaffinity chromatography on column MARS® Hu-14 100 mm х 4.6 mm (Agilent) in the gradient of the mobile phase A (15 mM MOPS, рН 7.4) and mobile phase B (15 mM MOPS, 2M urea, pH 3.0). For minor protein supplementation, three successive applications of 40 cl of each sample were made. The minor protein fractions were collected within the range of retention time from 3.9 to 4.6 minutes in the isocratic flow of the mobile phase A at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. fractions of each sample were combined and dried in vacuo at temperature 30оC. The dry residue was restored in 500 µl of 0.1% desoxycholic acid sodium salt, 6% acetonitrile, 75 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, рН 8.5. The protein solution was heated up at 90оC for 10 minutes at intensive shaking (1100 rpm). After equilibration to ambient temperature, 3 mM ТСЕР (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) was added to the denaturated protein solution to restore the sulfhydryl groups of amino-acid residues of cysteine. The reaction was incubated at 45оC for 20 minutes. For alkylation, the denatured protein solution was added with a solution of 0.2% 4-vinylpyridine in 30% propan-2-ol up to a final concentration of 0.02% (V/V). The alkylation reaction was carried out for 30 minutes at normal temperature in the lightproof place. Enzymatic cleavage of proteins was performed using a specific trypsin protease. The protein solution was added with modified (acetylated at primary amino groups of lysine) trypsin at enzyme-to-substrate ratio as 1:50. The reaction was incubated at 42 оC for 4 hours with intermittent mixing for 3 minutes every 15 minutes. After that, the second aliquot of trypsin was added at ration 1:100 and incubated at 37оC continued for additional 12 hours. Upon the time expiry the enzyme reaction was inhibited by adding the formic acid up to the final concentration of 0.5%, which also caused precipitation of insoluble desoxycholeic acid. The obtained suspended solids were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 15оC for 10 minutes. The supernatant (approximately. 550 µl) was collected and applied to Discovery DSC solid-phase columns, which were preliminary equilibrated with the solution of 2% methanol with 0.1% formic acid. After sample application the columns were washed twice with 1 ml of 0.1% formic acid solution, and then peptides were eluted from the carrier using the solution of 70% methanol with 5% formic acid in the volume of 1 ml. The collected Eliot was dried at 30 оC for 45 minutes in a vacuum. The dry residue was restored in 40 µl of 0.5% formic acid solution and transferred into vials of deactivated glass for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA version 2.1.9. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.2.2. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens complement of the UniProtKB (88703 (target) sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin specific with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.05 Da as MS2 tolerances; variable modification Oxidation of Methionine was selected as variable modifications. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.  For statistical analysis only protein with two and more identified peptides were chosen (search output from the comparison experiments was filtered to > 1 peptides). Then NSAF values for each protein were summarized. MARS proteins were excluded from the comparison lists. Statistical analyses were carried out using in-house scripts written in [R] (http://www.R-project.org/). UpSet plot was generated using UpSetR R library. Volcano plot and box plot were generated using plotly package. Cumulative curves for identified proteins were generated using in-house scripts written in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Panoramic mass spectrometry, Postgenomic data, Kidney cancer, Omics, Protein markers, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Biobank group, IBMC

### Submitter
Anna Kaysheva

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kaysheva
Biobank group, IBMC


