### Accession
PXD006691

### Title
Stability of peptide fragmentation patterns

### Description
Our study aims to determine the stability of fragmetnation patterns of peptides upon collision-induced dissociation (CID). Recent studies reported that for a minority of peptides, CID fragmentation leads to non-reproducible fragmentation spectra and therefore impaired identification. In order to study the fragmentation behavior, we first identified peptides that exhibit different fragmentation patterns. In order to reveal the cause, we selected a subset of the peptides and studied the dependency of abundance of distinct fragmentation patterns with collision energy settings and with of the isolation window.

### Sample Protocol
Human cell (HeLa) lysate digested with trypsin was purchased from Pierce - Thermo-Fisher (#88329) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. All data were analyzed on a Sciex 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a Eksigent 425 micro LC with C18 column (YMC) in direct injection mode. Peptide fragmentation patterns from information-dependent acquisition of several runs were analyzed with MaxQuant vs. 1.5.5.1 clustered according to the similarity of their fragmentation patterns. Peptides exhibiting distinct fragmentation pattern clusters were extracted and 20 peptides with multiple clusters and 20 "control" peptides with a single, reproducible fragmentation pattern were selected for MRM fragmentation on a SCIEX 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer. In order to study the influence of collision energy and isolation width, we modified the respective settings as follows. For the colision energy study, optimal collision energy was calculated using the IDA CE calculator of the Analyst software and 5 windows from -3 to +3 V were programmed with 2 replicates per condition. In order to study the effect of the isolation width, we programmed SWATH methods with 40 windows (one for each precursor), optimal fragmentation energy and symmetrical isolation width of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 Da around the precursor mass. Two replicates were measured for each of the isolation width settings.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data were converted into mzXML files using MS Convert. Spectra correlating with the elution time of the peptide were extracted and clustered to reveal distinct fragmentation patterns.

### Publication Abstract
Spectral libraries play a central role in the analysis of data-independent-acquisition (DIA) proteomics experiments. A main assumption in current spectral library tools is that a single characteristic intensity pattern (CIP) suffices to describe the fragmentation of a peptide in a particular charge state (peptide charge pair). However, we find that this is often not the case. We carry out a systematic evaluation of spectral variability over public repositories and in-house data sets. We show that spectral variability is widespread and partly occurs under fixed experimental conditions. Using clustering of preprocessed spectra, we derive a limited number of multiple characteristic intensity patterns (MCIPs) for each peptide charge pair, which allow almost complete coverage of our heterogeneous data set without affecting the false discovery rate. We show that a MCIP library derived from public repositories performs in most cases similar to a "custom-made" spectral library, which has been acquired under identical experimental conditions as the query spectra. We apply the MCIP approach to a DIA data set and observe a significant increase in peptide recognition. We propose the MCIP approach as an easy-to-implement addition to current spectral library search engines and as a new way to utilize the data stored in spectral repositories.

### Keywords
Peptide fragmentation, Peptide identification, Tandem ms, Collision-induced dissociation

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Protein Analysis Unit (ZfP) BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 75420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Protein Analysis Unit (ZfP) BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 75420


