### Accession
PXD029030

### Title
Hsa-miR-31-5p controls a metabolic switch in psoriatic keratinocytes that identifies therapeutic intervention

### Description
Next to genetic alterations, it is being recognized that the cellular environment also acts as a major determinant in onset and progression of disease. In cases where different cell types contribute to the final disease outcome, this imposes environmental challenges as different cell types likely differ in their extracellular dependencies.  A number of skin diseases, including psoriasis is characterized by a combination of keratinocyte hyperproliferation and immune cell activation. Activation of immune cells involves increased glucose consumption thereby intrinsicly limiting glucose availability for other cell types. Thus, these type of skin diseases require metabolic adaptations that enable coexistence between hyperproliferative keratinocytes and activated immune cells in a nutrient-limited environment. Hsa-microRNA-31-5p (miR-31) is highly expressed in keratinocytes within the psoriatic skin. Here we show that miR-31 expression in keratinocytes is induced by limited glucose availability and enables increased survival of keratinocytes under limiting glucose conditions, by increasing glutamine metabolism. In addition, miR-31 induced glutamine metabolism results in secretion of specific metabolites (aspartate and glutamate) but also secretion of immuno-modulatory factors. We show that this miR-31-induced secretory phenotype is sufficient to induce Th17 cell differentiation, a hallmark of psoriasis. Inhibition of glutaminase (GLS) using CB-839 impedes miR31-induced metabolic rewiring and secretion of immuno-modulatory factors. Concordantly, pharmacological targeting of GLS alleviated psoriasis pathology in a mouse model of psoriasis.  Together our data illustrate an emerging concept of metabolic interaction across cell compartments that characterizes disease development, which can be employed to design effective treatment options for disease, as shown here for psoriasis.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling HaCaT cells were cultured in SILAC-labelled DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 10% dialyzed FBS and 1% of penicillin/streptomycin containing L-arginine and L-lysine (light medium) or 13C6-L‐arginine and 3C6-L‐lysine (heavy medium) for at least 14 days to eliminate non labelled arginine and lysine. The day before the transfection, 1.5x105 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate in a final volume of 3mL. On the next day, the medium was changed and the 60-70% confluent cells were transfected with a specific miRNA mimic either for miR-31 mimic or control miRNA mimic at a final concentration of 30nM together with lipofectamine RNAiMAX and Opti-MEM. 48h post transfection cells were harvested by adding lysis buffer containing 8M Urea, 1M ammonium bicarbonate, 10nM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40nM chloroacetamide. Cell lysates were incubated at 95°C for 5 min, sonicated and diluted to 2M Urea with 1M ABC. After protein quantification using the BCA protein assay, cell lysates from miR-130a or miR-708 transfected cells generated from heavy medium and SCR transfected cells from light medium were mixed 1:1 (reverse mode) and vice versa (forward mode).  Proteins were digested overnight with 2% (w/w) trypsin, next peptides were fractionated based on their molecular mass using ultra performance liquid chromatography (UltiMate-3000 system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and finally desalted and acidified on a C-18 cartridge (3M, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA). C18-stagetips were activated with methanol, washed with buffer containing 0.5% formic acid in 80% ACN (buffer B) and then with 0.5% formic acid (buffer A). After loading of the digested sample, stage-tips were washed with buffer A and peptides were eluted with buffer B, dried in a SpeedVac, and dissolved in buffer A. Peptides were electro-sprayed directly into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed in Top Speed data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using Maxquant software. For identification, the human Uniport 2017 was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. Proteins identified were filtered for reverse and decoy hits, standard contaminants and selected to have more than 1 unique or razor peptide by using the Perseus software 1.5.1.6. Heavy/light normalized ratios (ratio reverse and ratio forward) were used to quantify protein expression and were further processed for comparative analysis of differential expression among the conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mir-31metabolism  psoriasis keratinocytes

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



Oncode Institute and Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Boudewijn MT Burgering
Oncode Institute and Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


