### Accession
PXD006489

### Title
Proteogenomic Re-annotation of Coccidioides posadasii strain Silveira

### Description
The aims of this study were to present modifications to the annotations of the genome of C. posadasii, one of two closely related species of Coccidioides, a dimorphic fungal pathogen that causes coccidioidomycosis, also called Valley Fever. Proteins present in lysates and filtrates of in vitro grown mycelia and parasitic phase spherules from C. posadasii strain Silveira were analyzed using a GeLC-MS/MS method.

### Sample Protocol
Mycelial and parasitic phase cultures of C. posadasii strain Silveira were generated as published previously [8, 9]. Briefly, mycelial phase cells were grown by inoculating liquid culture flasks containing Converse medium with mycelia obtained from three-week-old glucose-yeast extract agar plates. Flasks were continually shaken at 120 rpm at room temperature. For the preparation of parasitic phase cells, cultures were initiated by seeding flasks of Converse medium with ~ 1-5 X 105 arthrospores/ml. Parasitic phase cells were maintained in continuous culture at 40°C, 20% CO2, with continuous shaking at 120 rpm in modified Converse medium. At 3 day intervals, the cells from the mycelial and parasitic phase cultures were collected by centrifugation, washed in sterile distilled water, and stored at 4°C in 0.5% formalin. The spent medium was supplemented to 0.5% formalin and was also stored at 4°C until processed, as below.   2.2 Processing of proteins from lysates and spent culture medium   Proteins were extracted from the cultures as previously published [10]. Briefly, the spent medium containing proteins expelled during cellular growth (filtrate fraction) was collected for both mycelial and parasitic phase cultures. Proteins were respectively concentrated using a 10,000 MW ultrafiltration membrane. The remaining mycelia and parasitic phase cells were lysed using mechanical and chemical processes to release intracellular and cell wall proteins (lysate fractions). Parasitic phase cells were lysed by processing in an ice-cooled beadbeater using 0.5 mm glass beads for 5 minutes.  Mycelia were collected and separated from culture filtrate by filtration, collected, and incubated with toluene, at a 3% final concentration in water for 3 days to induce autolysis.  Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (6,000 X g, 10 minutes) and the supernatant was collected, concentrated and lyophilized. The combined filtrate and lysate fractions of the mycelial phase cultures are collectively known as “coccidioidin” and the parasitic phase culture is termed “spherulin.” Both coccidioidin and spherulin were lyophilized and stored at -80°C until use.  2.3 In-gel digestion of fractions  Three 20g technical replicates of coccidioidin and spherulin were heated to 95°C in reducing Laemmli sample buffer (BioRad, Hercules, CA) for 10 minutes prior to separation on 4-20% TGX gels (BioRad). Gels were stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain (BioRad) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample lane of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into six equal size slices and put into polypropylene tubes prior to destaining twice in water and twice in 50% ACN. Proteins were then reduced in 10mM DTT, and alkylated with 2.5mM ioadacetamide (IAA) prior to 37°C overnight digestion with 200ng trypsin in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptides were then extracted from the gel pieces using 5% formic acid (FA) in ACN, dried down in a speed vacuum.   2.4 Proteomic Analysis Protein digests from gel slices were analyzed using LC-MS/MS as previously described [8]. Briefly, each digest was loaded onto a custom made 0.35ul bed OptiPak trap (Optimize Technologies, Oregon City, OR) packed with 5m, 200A° Magic C18 stationary phase. The loaded trap was washed for 4 minutes with an aqueous loading buffer of 0.2% FA and 0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 10uL/min. Following the wash, peptides were transferred onto a 35cmx100m PicoFrit column, self-packed with Agilent (Santa Clara, CA) Poroshell 120S 2.7m EC-C18 stationary phase, using a Dionex UltiMate® 3000 RSLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated using a 400 nL/min LC gradient comprised of 2%-40% B in 0-70 min. Mobile phase A was 2% ACN in water with 0.2% FA and mobile phase B was ACN/isopropanol/water (80/10/10 by volume) with 0.2% FA. Eluting peptides were analyzed using a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher). The instrument was configured to operate in data-dependent mode by collecting MS1 data at 70,000 resolving power (measured at m/z 200) with an AGC value of 1E6 over a m/z range of 360-2000, using lock masses from background polysiloxanes at m/z 371.10123 and 446.12002. Precursors were fragmented with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28, fragments measured at 17,500 resolving power and a fixed first mass of 140. Resulting tandem MS/MS were collected on the top 20 precursor masses present in each MS1 using an AGC value of 1E5, max ion fill time of 50ms, and an isolation window of 1.5 Da.

### Data Protocol
Gene models were confirmed using an annotated protein database generated from the July 14, 2015 release of the C. posadasii strain Silveira genome (www.broadinstitute.org), which is based on WGS data [2, 11]. Proteomic discovery was performed using two additional databases generated using the genome as source material (Figure 1). The first was a six-frame translation of the C. posadasii strain Silveira genome (WGS assembly 5/31/2007, ABAI02000000; www.ebi.ac.uk), created using the program Sixpack (www.emboss.sourceforge.net). The second database was generated by the ab initio gene predictor software AUGUSTUS, configured to use C. immitis RS as a training set [12]. No C. posadasii training set was available and this was deemed unnecessary due to the genomic similarity of the strains and the far superior sequencing coverage of C. immitis RS. Sampling parameters were set at 100 transcripts per locus, exon length at <100 base pairs. For the MS/MS searches, all three databases were combined and reversed protein sequences were appended to the database for estimating peptide and protein identification false discovery rate (FDR). As the genomes of C. posadasii and C. immitis are very similar, protein sequence databases were also derived from EST data of all Coccidioides strains available in the Broad Institute’s Coccidioides Genomes project [2, 11, 13], SwissProt and RefSeq. This EST database was used to validate the peptides and confirm gene models in closely related strains. By considering this EST support from homologous proteins of closely related Coccidioides species, additional proteins that were not annotated for strain Silveira became identifiable.   2.6 Database Searching, Peptide Identification and Location  Raw files were converted into mzML format using ProteoWizard’s MSConvert tool [14] and the MS/MS spectra were identified using the MS-GF+ software [15] (v2016.06.29) configured to use the aforementioned protein sequence databases. MS-GF+ was also configured to use 10ppm m/z tolerance for both precursors and fragments while performing peptide−spectrum matching and restricted to peptides of length between 7 and 30 amino acids. The software derived semitryptic peptides from the sequence database while looking for the following variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.023 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.994 Da), and formation of n-terminal pyroglutamic acid (−17.023 Da). The resulting identifications were filtered using IDPicker [16] (version 3.1.9729) configured to use MS-GF scoring functions when evaluating the quality of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and return PSMs with <1% FDR. Protein identifications with at least two distinct filtered peptide identifications were reported for further processing.   2.7 Data analysis and genome annotation Mass spectral data were searched against all databases above. Peptides that were present in either the six-frame or the AUGUSTUS databases and absent from the annotated Silveira protein database were considered novel peptides. Novel peptides were visually mapped onto the genome using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (Broad Institute) [17], and peptide homology was determined by tblastn (NCBI) [18]. These novel peptides were categorized as intragenic if they overlapped an existing gene model or were within 1000 base pairs of the 5’ or 3’ ends of a gene model, or intergenic if they did not. Intragenic peptides were further categorized based on their location relative to the gene model, in accordance with previously described definitions [4]. Novel peptides were also matched against the EST databases to provide supportive evidence of their existence.

### Publication Abstract
The aims of this study are to provide protein-based evidence upon which to reannotate the genome of Coccidiodes posadasii, one of two closely related species of Coccidioides, a dimorphic fungal pathogen that causes coccidioidomycosis, also called Valley fever. Proteins present in lysates and filtrates of in vitro grown mycelia and parasitic phase spherules from C. posadasii strain Silveira are analyzed using a GeLC-MS/MS method. Acquired spectra are processed with a proteogenomics workflow comprising a Silveira proteome database, a six-frame translation of the Silveira genome and an ab initio gene prediction tool prior to validation against published ESTs. This study provides evidence for 837 genes expressed at the protein level, of which 169 proteins (20.2%) are putative proteins and 103 (12.3%) are not annotated in the Silveira genome. Additionally, 275 novel peptides are derived from intragenic regions of the genome and 13 from intergenic regions, resulting in 172 gene refinements. Additionally, we are the first group to report translationally active retrotransposon elements in a Coccidioides spp. Our study reveals that the currently annotated genome of C. posadasii str. Silveira needs refinement, which is likely to be the case for many nonmodel organisms.

### Keywords
Valley fever, Proteogenomics, Coccidioidomycosis, Genomics, Coccidioides

### Affiliations
PI and Professor
ASU

### Submitter
Natalie Mitchell

### Lab Head
Dr Douglas F Lake
PI and Professor


