### Accession
PXD034491

### Title
TurboID identification of evolutionarily divergent components of the nuclear pore complex in the malaria model Plasmodium berghei

### Description
Twenty years since publication of the Plasmodium falciparum and P. berghei genomes one-third of their protein-coding genes lack functional annotation. In the absence of sequence and structural homology, protein-protein interactions can facilitate functional prediction of such orphan genes by mapping protein complexes in their natural cellular environment. The Plasmodium NPC (nuclear pore complex) is a case in point: it remains poorly defined; its constituents lack conservation with the 30+ proteins described in the NPC of many opisthokonts, a clade of eukaryotes that includes fungi and animals, but not Plasmodium. Here we developed a labeling methodology based on TurboID fusion proteins, which allows visualization of the berghei NPC and facilitates the identification of its components. Following affinity purification and mass spectrometry we identify four known Nups (138, 205, 221, and the bait 313) and verify interaction with the putative FG Nup637; we assign five proteins lacking annotation (and therefore meaningful homology with proteins outside the genus) to the NPC, which is confirmed by GFP tagging. Based on gene deletion attempts, all new Nups  Nup176, 269, 335, 390, and 434  are essential to parasite survival. They lack primary sequence homology with proteins outside the Plasmodium genus; albeit two incorporate short domains with structural homology to human Nup155 and yeast Nup157, and the condensin SMC4. The protocols developed here showcase the power of proximity-labeling for elucidating protein complex composition and annotation in Plasmodium. It opens the door to exploring the function of the Plasmodium NPC and understanding its evolutionary position.

### Sample Protocol
To identify novel nuclear pore components, we carried out streptavidin magnetic bead pull-down followed by mass spectrometry (MS) using protein lysates prepared from the TurboID fusion proteins. In brief, following cardiac puncture of Swiss Webster infected mice, parasites were grown in culture O/N with RPMI 1640 media (Sigma Aldrich) to generate a homogenous schizont population. Parasites were purified using a MACS column to remove uninfected RBCs.  Following elution with RPMI, erythrocytes were lysed with cold 0.05% saponin; parasites were then washed twice with cold 1 x PBS and pelleted at 4000G at 4C. Cells were finally lysed with 8M Urea with 1mM DTT containing Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). The sample was incubated with 50 µl magnetic streptavidin beads at 4C overnight on a rotator to bind biotinylated proteins. The following day, beads were collected using a magnetic column and washed thrice on a rotator at room temperature for 5 min with a buffer containing 8M Urea, 50mM Tris, and 0.01% Triton-X 100. A final wash was done with wash buffer without Triton-X 100 and the beads were diluted in 8M Urea. Mass spectrometric analysis (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the UCLA proteomics facility and ISU protein facility.   The proteins bound to streptavidin beads were reduced and alkylated via sequential 20-minute incubations of 5mM TCEP and 10mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark while being mixed at 1200 rpm in an Eppendorf thermomixer. Proteins were then digested by the addition of 0.1μg Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, 125-05061) and 0.8μg Trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 90057) while shaking 37°C overnight. The digested samples were quenched by addition of formic acid, desalted, and then resuspended in 15μL of 5% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Peptide samples were separated on a 75uM ID x 25cm C18 column and eluted directly into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. MS spectra were acquired by Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA). Database search was performed by using ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) and DTASelect2 (Cociorva et al., 2007; Tabb et al., 2002) implemented in Integrated Proteomics Pipeline IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications) and searched against Plasmodium berghei database available on PlasmoDB. A PSM-level false positive rate was set at less than 1% as estimated by a target-decoy database competition strategy, protein and peptide identifications were filtered by DTASelect2 and a minimum of two unique peptides per protein are required for confident protein identification.

### Data Protocol
All DNA and protein sequences used in bioinformatic analyses were acquired from PlasmoDB (release 51, 16 March 2021 or earlier) (Aurrecoechea et al., 2009). To calculate the enrichment of Nups, a hypergeometric test developed by the Graeber Lab was used (https://systems.crumP.ucla.edu/hypergeometric/index.php). Phyre2 was used with default parameters for function prediction of the proteins by homology modeling (Kelley et al., 2015). The PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) classification system was used to analyze mass spectrometry hits by protein class and biological function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Plasmodium, Nucleoporins, Malaria, Nuclear pore complex, Proximity-labeling, Nup, Turboid

### Affiliations
Iowa State University

### Submitter
Sushma Ambekar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Mair
Iowa State University


