### Accession
PXD028620

### Title
Proteomics insights into the molecular mechanisms of c9, t11-CLA synthesis

### Description
Cis-9, trans-11-conjugated linoleic acid (c9, t11-CLA), a functional fatty acid, is one of the research hotspots in the fields of functional dairy products development because of its multiple beneficial effects in humans and animals. In milk, most c9, t11-CLA is de novo synthesized from trans-11-octadecenoic acid (TVA) and it is confirmed that genes such as stearoyl-coA desaturase 1 (SCD1) play a key role in the synthesis. However, few studies have been reported to deeply elucidate the SCD1-dependent molecular mechanism of cis9, trans11-CLA synthesis and its relationship with the pathways of energy metabolism and lipid metabolism. Therefore, in the present study, MAC-T cells were divided into three groups: CAY group (SCD1-inhibited MAC-T cell model with the addition of CAY, TVA), TVA group (only TVA), and Control group (without CAY, TVA). The relative mRNA expression of SCD1 was measured using real-time PCR, while TVA accumulation and c9, t11 -CLA synthesis were analyzed using gas chromatography (GC). The SCD1-related proteins were firstly screened in MAC-T cells by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics analysis, then their functions were annotated by bioinformatic analysis, and finally their relationships with SCD1 were evaluated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis and small RNA interference. The results showed that the deficiency of SCD1 led by CAY10566 blocked the synthesis of c9, t11-CLA in MAC-T cells. Sixty-one SCD1-associated proteins were screened and found to be mainly involved in the pathways of energy metabolism and lipid metabolism, such as glycolytic pathway, pentose phosphate pathway, fatty acid elongation pathway, and unsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis. Among these genes, 17 proteins were validated under the PRM analysis. PGAM1 (phosphoglycerate mutase 1), TPI1 (triosephosphate isomerase 1), LDHB (lactate dehydrogenase B), and ALDOA (aldolase, fructose-bisphosphate A) were verified to have a negative relationships with SCD1. This study furthered our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of c9, t11-CLA synthesis in the mammary glands of dairy cows.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation and TMT labeling: Using a 4-fold volume of lysis buffer (8mol/L urea, 1% protease inhibitor) to crack the cells (Duan et al., 2020). To obtain the protein sample,the supernatant was collected through centrifuging at 12000 x g for 10min at 4°C, then the protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit.Taking the equal amount protein for enzyme digestion. TCA was slowly added to the sample, then  mixed to precipitate for 2h at 4°C. The sample was centrifuged at 4,500 x g for 5min, and washed precipitate with pre-cooled acetone after discarding the supernatant. dried, TEAB was added after the precipitate was dried, and broken up by sonication and then trypsin was added overnight at a ratio of 1:50 (protease:protein). Dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) were added to a final concentration of 5mM and 11mM, individually (Zhao et al., 2020; Mirzaei et al., 2017). The trypsinized peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 column and freeze-dried (Ma et al., 2019). The peptides were dissolved in 0.5M TEAB, and the peptide was labeled according to the instructions of the tandem mass tags (TMT) kit. The simple operation is as follows: the labeling reagent is thawed and dissolved in acetonitrile, mixed with the peptide and incubated for 2 h at room temperature, the labeled peptide is mixed and desalted, and vacuum freeze-dried.  HPLC HPLC classification: The peptides were graded by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 Extend column C18 (5μm×4.6mm×250mm). The operation is as follows: the peptides have a step gradient of 8%-32% acetonitrile, pH 9, 60 minutes to separate 60 components, then the peptides are combined into 9 components, and the combined components are vacuum freeze-dried for subsequent operations.   LC-MS analysis: The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A (aqueous solution of 0.1% HCOOH + 2% acetonitrile) and separated using an ultra-performance liquid chromatography system. Mobile phase B containing 0.1% HCOOH and 90% acetonitrile (Sun et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2020). The liquid phase gradient were set as follows: 0–38min, 6%–22% B; 38–52min, 22%–32% B; 52–56min, 32%–80%B; 56–60min, 80% B. Flow rate maintained at 500nL/min; ion source voltage: 2.1kV, peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments are detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap, primary mass spectrometry scan range set to 350-1600m/z and the scan resolution was set to 120,000; the secondary mass spectrometry scan range was fixed at 100m/z and the secondary scan resolution was set to 30,000 (Wang et al., 2018). The data acquisition mode uses the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program, that is, the first 20 peptide precursor ions with the highest signal intensity are selected to enter the HCD collision cell and use 28% of the fragmentation energy for fragmentation after the first-level scan. Grade mass spectrometry analysis. In order to improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) is set to 3E6, the signal threshold is set to 8.3E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time is set to 50 ms, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan is set to 30 s. Repeated scanning of ions. PRM validation: To assess the reliability of proteomic differential protein data, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was used to verify the differential proteins related to SCD1. PRM is a method for the selective detection and quantification of target proteins and peptides using ion monitoring technology (Xue et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis: The database search and analysis results of the mass spectrum data give the signal intensity value (Intensity) of each peptide in different samples. According to this information, the relative quantification of the protein is calculated by the following steps: 1. First, the signal intensity value (I) of the peptide in different samples is changed by centralization, and then the relative quantification value (R) of the peptide in different samples is obtained. The calculation formula is as follows: where i represents the sample and j represents the peptide (Rij=Iij/Mean(Ij)). 2. In order to eliminate the systematic error of the sample amount of different samples in the mass spectrometry detection, the relative quantitative value of the peptide needs to be corrected by the median normalization method (NR). Calculated as follows [NRij=Rij/Median(Ri)]. 3. Calculate the relative quantitative value of the protein. The relative quantitative value of the protein is expressed as the median value of the relative quantitative value of the specific peptide corresponding to the protein. The calculation formula is as follows: where k represents the protein, and j represents the specific peptide to which the protein belongs [Rik=Median(NRij,j∈k)]. Sample repeatability inspection: For biological or technical replicate samples, it is necessary to test whether the quantitative results of biological or technical replicate samples are statistically consistent. Here we use Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient, principal component analysis (PCA) and relative standard deviation (RSD) three statistical analysis methods to evaluate protein quantitative repeatability.  Differential protein screening: Protein difference analysis first picks out the samples to be compared, calculates the quantitative average of repeated samples, and finally calculates the comparison group difference multiple (Fold Change, FC). For example, calculate the multiple of protein difference between sample group A and sample group B. The calculation formula is as follows: where R represents the relative quantification of the protein, i represents the sample, and k represents the protein.(FCA/B,k=Mean[Rik,i∈A)/Mean(Rik,i∈B)]. In order to judge the significance of the difference, the relative quantitative value of each protein in the two samples was tested by T-test, and the corresponding P value was calculated as a significant index. The default P value ≤ 0.05. In order to make the test data meet the normal distribution of the T test requirements. Before the test, the relative quantitative value of the protein needs to undergo Log2 logarithmic conversion. Calculated as follows [ Pik=T.test(Log2(Pik,i∈A),Log2(Pik,i∈B))]. Through the above difference analysis, when P value ≤ 0.05, the change in differential expression exceeding 1.3 is taken as the change threshold for a significant up-regulation, and less than 1/1.3 is the change threshold for a significant down-regulation. Gene Ontology (GO) is used to describe the properties of genes and gene products in living organisms, and is divided into biological process, cellular component, and molecular function (Kan et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). GO annotation analysis was performed using the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and the protein sequence-based algorithm software InterProScan, and protein structural domain annotation was performed using the InterProScan software and the corresponding InterPro structural domain database (http://www.ebi.ac. uk/interpro/) for protein domain annotation of identified proteins; KEGG pathway annotation was performed on submitted proteins using the online service tool KAAS. The one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA, SPSS 24.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA) was used for all analyses of significance of differences. Differences were considered significant at P<0.05 and highly significant at P<0.01. TMT labeling and PRM verification results were compared using the GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, USA).

### Publication Abstract
The objective of the study was to elucidate the stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD1)-dependent gene network of c9, t11-CLA biosynthesis in MAC-T cells from an energy metabolism perspective. The cells were divided into the CAY group (firstly incubated with CAY10566, a chemical inhibitor of SCD1, then incubated with trans-11-octadecenoic acid, (TVA)), the TVA group (only TVA), and the control group (without CAY, TVA). The c9, t11-CLA, and TVA contents were determined by gas chromatography. The mRNA levels of SCD1 and candidate genes were analyzed via real-time PCR. Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics, bioinformatic analysis, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), and small RNA interference were used to explore genes involved in the SCD1-dependent c9, t11-CLA biosynthesis. The results showed that the SCD1 deficiency led by CAY10566 blocked the biosynthesis of c9, t11-CLA. In total, 60 SCD1-related proteins mainly involved in energy metabolism pathways were primarily screened by TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis. Moreover, 17 proteins were validated using PRM analysis. Then, 11 genes were verified to have negative relationships with SCD1 after the small RNA interference analysis. Based on the above results, we concluded that genes involved in energy metabolism pathways have an impact on the SCD1-dependent molecular mechanism of c9, t11-CLA biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Cis-9, Trans-11-conjugated linoleic acid; stearoyl-coa desaturase 1; mac-t cells; proteomics; functional fatty acid

### Affiliations
Jilin Agricultural University
College of Animal Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science of Jilin Province, Key Laboratory of Animal Production Product Quality and Security Ministry of Education, Jilin Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
TAO WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Wang
College of Animal Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science of Jilin Province, Key Laboratory of Animal Production Product Quality and Security Ministry of Education, Jilin Agricultural University, China


