### Accession
PXD005238

### Title
Significant and unique changes in phosphorylation levels of nine phosphoproteins of leaves of two apple rootstock genotypes under drought stress

### Description
Drought stress is a major problem around the world and although progress in understanding how vegetable crops and model plants adapt to drought have been made, there is still little information about how fruit crops deal with moderate drought stress. In this study, we investigated the response of two apple genotypes: a drought-sensitive genotype (M26) and a drought-tolerant genotype (MBB). Our results of the morphology, physiology and biochemistry under moderate drought stress, indicated that relative water content (RWC) and leaf area (LA) were not significant changes in two genotypes. However, it had larger leaf mass per area (LMA), and accumulated higher free proline (CFP), soluble sugars (CSS) and malonaldehyde (MDA) in the leaves. Thus, it appears that the MBB genotype could produce more osmosis-regulating substances. Phosphoproteomic was analyzed from leaves of both genotypes under moderate drought stress using the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technology. A total of 595 unique phosphopeptides, 682 phosphorylated sites and 446 phosphoproteins were quantitatively analyzed in the two genotypes. Motif analyses of the phosphorylation sites showed that six motifs including [PxsP], [sP], [sD], [Rxxs], [sxP] and [sxs] were enriched. We identified 12 and 48 PLSC phosphoproteins in M26 and MBB, respectively. Among these, 9 PLSC phosphoproteins were common to both genotypes, perhaps indicating a partial overlaps of the mechanisms to moderate drought stress. Gene ontology analyses revealed that the PLSC phosphoproteins present a unique combination of metabolism, transcription, translation and protein processing, suggesting that the response in apple to moderate drought stress encompasses a new homeostasis of major cellular processes. The basic trend was an increase in protein abundance related to drought and organic substance upon moderate drought stress between two genotypes. These increases were higher in the drought-tolerant genotype (MBB) than in the drought-sensitive genotype (M26). The 23 differentially expressed mRNA encoding phosphoproteins were analysis by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Our study is the first to address the phosphoproteome of a major fruit crop, apple rootstocks, in response to moderate drought stress, and provide insights into the molecular regulation mechanisms of apple rootstock under moderate drought stress.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth and moderate drought treatments The materials of the study were two-year-old apple rootstock genotypes, M26 (a drought sensitive genotype) and MBB (a drought tolerant genotype). Two cuttings were planted in pots (45 cm height × 32 cm diameter) and the medium was composed of peat, vermiculite and composted cow manure at a ratio of 1:1:1. The experiment was conducted in a plastic greenhouse at the Gansu Agricultural University (Lanzhou, China, 36°03′N, 103°40′E) under the local temperature of 5℃ to 35℃ and natural daylight conditions. Watering was done twice a week with tap water and fertilizing with a bio-fertilizer. When the 75-85% field capacity, moderate drought stress was applied by withholding water and the pots were weighed every day until the medium t attained 45-55% field capacity where the plants begin to show wilting symptoms. The control seedlings were well watered to maintain 75-85% field capacity. The leaf samples of the two genotypes were collected from moderate drought-treated (MD) and control (CK) at the end of the experiment, which taken from seedlings situated 5-15 cm from the apex, and then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ until subsequent use. Three biological replicates were used, the replicates of each treatment came from   25 independent seedlings to reduce variations per genotype. The experiment was a 2 x 2 factorial in completely randomized design involving two genotypes (M26 and MBB) and two watering regimes (CK and MD). Protein extraction SDS-PAGE Electrophoresis Protein digestion and 4-plex iTRAQ labeling  Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 microcolumns Liquid Chromatography (LC) - Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Tandem MS (MS/MS) Analysis by Q Exactive. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)

### Data Protocol
The significance evaluations of physiological and mRNA data were analyzed with the student’s t-test in SPSS statistical software (version 22.0). A level of 95% (P< 0.05) indicated a significant difference, which are marked with different letters. The data were presented as the mean ± standard deviation of three biological replicate samples.  MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.) against the NCBI database (320755 sequences, download at January 27th, 2016) and the decoy database. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance  = 0.1 Da, Enzyme = Trypsin, Missed cleavage = 2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4plex (K), iTRAQ4plex (N-term), Variable modification: Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (S/T/Y).  The score threshold for peptide identification set at a 1% FDR and with PhosphoRS site probability cutoffs of 0.75. Student’s T test was used to evaluate the statistical significance, and the false discovery rate (Benjamini-Hochberg) was calculated to correct for multiple comparisons. To state that a phosphopeptide has a significant abundance changes, the following criteria have to be fulfilled: the abundance ratios have to be ≥ 1.2 and ≤ 0.83, the p-value for student’s t test has to be less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apple rootstock, Stress responses, Phosphoproteome, Itraq, Moderate drought stress

### Affiliations
Gansu Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jing Ren

### Lab Head
Dr College of Horticulture,
Gansu Agricultural University


