### Accession
PXD022737

### Title
proteomic changes in aging rats treated with the cognitive enhancer CE-123

### Description
Aging rats with cognitive decline have been behaviourally evaluated and were divided into two groups, treated with CE-123, a dopamine transporter inhibitor, and vehicle. Memory-related brain areas were dissected and following sample preparation run on q-exactive from thermo fisher. Data handling and basic bioinformatics showed interesting differences pointing to several mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were handled and processed analogue to the project: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD001639 from the publication: Šmidák R, Mayer RL, Bileck A, Gerner C, Mechtcheriakova D, Stork O, Lubec G, Li L. Quantitative proteomics reveals protein kinases and phosphatases in the individual phases of contextual fear conditioning in the C57BL/6J mouse. Behav Brain Res. 2016 303:208-217, PubMed: 26748257

### Data Protocol
RAW data were searched using MaxQuant 1.16.7.0 and analyzed using Perseus 1.6.14.0.

### Publication Abstract
The lack of novel cognitive enhancer drugs in the clinic highlights the prediction problems of animal assays. The objective of the current study was to test a putative cognitive enhancer in a rodent cognitive test system with improved translational validity and clinical predictivity. Cognitive profiling was complemented with post mortem proteomic analysis. Twenty-seven male Lister Hooded rats (26&#xa0;months old) having learned several cognitive tasks were subchronically treated with S-CE-123 (CE-123) in a randomized blind experiment. Rats were sacrificed after the last behavioural procedure and plasma and brains were collected. A label-free quantification approach was used to characterize proteomic changes in the synaptosomal fraction of the prefrontal cortex. CE-123 markedly enhanced motivation which resulted in superior performance in a new-to-learn operant discrimination task and in a cooperation assay of social cognition, and mildly increased impulsivity. The compound did not affect attention, spatial and motor learning. Proteomic quantification revealed 182 protein groups significantly different between treatment groups containing several proteins associated with aging and neurodegeneration. Bioinformatic analysis showed the most relevant clusters delineating synaptic vesicle recycling, synapse organisation and antioxidant activity. The cognitive profile of CE-123 mapped by the test system resembles that of modafinil in the clinic showing the translational validity of the test system. The findings of modulated synaptic systems are paralleling behavioral results and are in line with previous evidence for the role of altered synaptosomal protein groups in mechanisms of cognitive function.

### Keywords
Brain, Rat, Aging, Cognitive enhancement

### Affiliations
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria
Paracelsus Private Medical University

### Submitter
Gert Lubec

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria


