### Accession
PXD046554

### Title
Windows Scanning Multiomics: Integrated Metabolomics and Proteomics (Proteomics Section)

### Description
To gain comprehensive and accurate system biological information, we developed a multiomics analytical method that integrated metabolomics and proteomics, named Windows Scanning Multiomics (WSM).

### Sample Protocol
Biological samples were removed from -80 ℃ conditions and immediately thawed at 4 ℃ for serum samples, and biomolecules were directly extracted from frozen samples for cell and tissue samples. The extraction and resuspension solvents were of LC-MS grade and precooled at 4 ℃.

### Data Protocol
For metabolomics data, the raw file format (*.wiff) was converted to general format (*.mzXML) using MSConvertGUI software, and then these sample data were processed with DaDIA.R script. For proteomics data, the raw files (*.wiff) were loaded in DIA-NN (version 1.8) software to identify the proteins and then the result table (*.tsv) was processed with DiaNN R script to remove the redundancy.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolomics and proteomics offer significant advantages in understanding biological mechanisms at two hierarchical levels. However, conventional single omics analysis faces challenges due to the high demand for specimens and the complexity of intrinsic associations. To obtain comprehensive and accurate system biological information, we developed a multiomics analytical method called Windows Scanning Multiomics (WSM). In this method, we performed simultaneous extraction of metabolites and proteins from the same sample, resulting in a 10% increase in the coverage of the identified biomolecules. Both metabolomics and proteomics analyses were conducted by using ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS), eliminating the need for instrument conversions. Additionally, we designed an R-based program (WSM.R) to integrate mathematical and biological correlations between metabolites and proteins into a correlation network. The network created from simultaneously extracted biomolecules was more focused and comprehensive compared to those from separate extractions. Notably, we excluded six pairs of false-positive relationships between metabolites and proteins in the network established using simultaneously extracted biomolecules. In conclusion, this study introduces a novel approach for multiomics analysis and data processing that greatly aids in bioinformation mining from multiomics results. This method is poised to play an indispensable role in systems biology research.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Network analysis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Jiangnan University

### Submitter
Jiachen Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Jiachen Shi
Jiangnan University


