### Accession
PXD012279

### Title
Delineation of the olive pollen proteome: A focus on its allergen families

### Description
The delineation of the olive pollen proteome and its allergogram can improve the clinical management of patients with this pollinosis. We here integrated the recently described wild olive genomic data in a comprehensive proteomic approach to get the annotated olive (Olea europaea) pollen proteome and complete its complex allergogram. Olive pollen proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS using predicted protein sequences from its genome. GO annotation, KEGG Pathway analysis and identification of allergen families were performed by bioinformatics. Recombinant DNA, protein expression and purification, and immunological analyses were used to characterize putative allergens. A total of 1,907 proteins were identified. 60% of the proteins were predicted to possess catalytic activity and be involved in metabolic processes. 203 proteins belonging to 47 allergen families were found, with 37 non-previously described in olive pollen. Of four potential allergens produced in Escherichia coli, a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase -cyclophilin-, masked in the protein extract by the major allergen Ole e 1, was found as a new olive pollen allergen (Ole e 15). 63% of the Ole e 15-sensitized patients were children and showed strong IgE recognition of the allergen. Ole e 15 shared high sequence identity with other plant, animal and fungal cyclophilins and a high IgE cross-reactivity with pollen, plant food and animal extracts. Taken together, the combination of available genomic data with proteomics permitted the profiling of the olive pollen proteome, revealing the spectrum of allergen families and cyclophilin as a new relevant allergen implicated in cross-reactivity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts and antibodies-Commercial olive pollen from Allergon (Batch Nº032509801) collected in California (US) from a controlled set of common olive trees belonging to different cultivars, was used for protein extract preparation for proteomics. Three parallel protein extractions were performed and used later as independent biological replicates. Briefly, for each biological replicate, 300 mg of olive pollen were separately resuspended in 6 mL of extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 mM PMSF) with 1X Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). After homogenization, the resultant emulsion was subjected to mild stirring for 90 minutes at room temperature. Then, it was transferred to 2 mL tubes and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4ºC. The insoluble material was resuspended again in 1.5 mL of extraction buffer and stirred for 1 hour. After centrifugation, both supernatants were pooled together and a sample analyzed by SDS-PAGE.  SDS-PAGE, trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis-Firstly, 40 μg of each extract replicate were separated by 15% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G 250 (Merck). Then, lanes were cut in small pieces and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted using 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, purified using a Zip Tip with 0.6 μL C18 resin (Millipore), and dried. Finally, samples were reconstituted in 5 μL 0.1% formic acid/2% ACN before the analysis by nLC-MS/MS. All peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Scientific). For each analysis, the sample was loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 µm inner diameter and 2 µm particle size (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min using a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5%–35% solvent B for 45 min, 35%-100% solvent B for 5 min, 100% solvent B for 10 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For ionization, 2000 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400–1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energy of 27 eV and MS/MS scans acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100. AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Data processing-MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra raw files were searched against the NCBI Olea europaea var. sylvestris predicted protein database (49,613 RefSeq protein sequence entries) using SEQUEST search engine. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and threonine, tyrosine and serine phosphorylation as a variable modification. Identified peptides were filtered using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01 (High Confidence Filter settings, FDR <1%) (30).   Experimental design and statistical rationale-The experimental design and statistical rationale for each experiment are described in each subsection and depicted in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1. Only proteins containing at least two unique high confidence peptides in one of the replicates, or with one unique high-confidence peptide but detected in the three replicates, were considered in the study. To identify proteins belonging to allergen families, the full sequences of the identified proteins after LC-MS/MS were retrieved using NCBI Batch Entrez. Then, proteins were locally blasted (E-value threshold 1.0E-15 and 1 Blast hit) against the Allergome database (4,331 entries; UniProt release 10/2018) using the Blast2GO 5 PRO software (5.2.4 version) (31). Only those proteins presenting Blast hits meeting the following criteria were considered as potential allergens: matching with an allergen accepted by the WHO/IUIS Allergen Nomenclature Sub-committee (26) with at least 50% similarity; matching directly with proteins belonging to the same allergen families as proteins meeting the previous criteria, with at least 80% similarity; matching with proteins already identified as potential allergens in the Oleaceae family.

### Publication Abstract
Olive pollen is a major allergenic source worldwide due to its extensive cultivation. We have combined available genomics data with a comprehensive proteomics approach to get the annotated olive tree (<i>Olea europaea</i> L.) pollen proteome and define its complex allergenome. A total of 1907 proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS using predicted protein sequences from its genome. Most proteins (60%) were predicted to possess catalytic activity and be involved in metabolic processes. In total, 203 proteins belonging to 47 allergen families were found in olive pollen. A peptidyl-prolyl <i>cis-trans</i> isomerase, cyclophilin, produced in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, was found as a new olive pollen allergen (Ole e 15). Most Ole e 15-sensitized patients were children (63%) and showed strong IgE recognition to the allergen. Ole e 15 shared high sequence identity with other plant, animal, and fungal cyclophilins and presented high IgE cross-reactivity with pollen, plant food, and animal extracts.

### Keywords
Allergen families, Proteome, Olive pollen

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
UFIEC, Chronic Disease Programme, Functional Proteomics Unit, Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Rodrigo Barderas

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
UFIEC, Chronic Disease Programme, Functional Proteomics Unit, Instituto de Salud Carlos III


