### Accession
PXD016292

### Title
Cold Triggered Paralog Rearrangements Indicate Potential Ribosome Specialization in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Plant ribosomes are heterogeneous due to genome duplications that resulted in several paralog genes encoding each ribosomal protein (RP). The mainstream view suggests that heterogeneity provides sufficient ribosomes throughout the Arabidopsis lifespan without any functional implications. Nevertheless, genome duplications are known to produce sub- and neofunctionalization of initially redundant genes. Functional divergence of RP paralogs can be considered ribosome specialization if the diversified functions of these paralogs remain within the context of protein translation, especially if RP divergence should contribute to a preferential or ultimately even rigorous selection of transcripts to be translated by a RP-defined ribosome subpopulation. Here we provide evidence that cold acclimation triggers a reprogramming in structural RPs at the transcriptome and proteome level. The reprogramming alters the abundance of RPs or RP paralogs in non-translational 60S large subunits (LSUs) and translational polysome fractions, a phenomenon known as substoichiometry. Cold triggered substoichiometry of ribosomal complexes differ once Arabidopsis REIL-like mediated late maturation step for the LSU is impaired. Interestingly, remodeling of ribosomes after a cold stimulus appears to be significantly constrained to specific spatial regions of the ribosome. The regions that are significantly changed during cold acclimation as judged by transcriptome or proteome data include the polypeptide exit tunnel and the P-Stalk. Both substructures of the ribosome represent plausible targets of mechanisms that may constrain translation by controlled ribosome heterogeneity. This work represents a step forward towards understanding heterogeneity and potential specialization of plant ribosomal complexes.

### Sample Protocol
DS1: Samples were separated by reverse-phase nano-liquid chromatography in 125 min gradient ramped from 3% ACN to 85% acetonitrile (ACN). The MS was run using a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 10 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z in profile mode. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 150 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. DS2: Samples were separated by reverse-phase nano-liquid chromatography in 132 min gradient ramped from 3% ACN to 85% ACN. The MS was run using a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 15 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target 1e6, maximum injection time 75 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z in profile mode. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 150 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion of 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw (.RAW) tandem MS chromatogram files were processed with the software MaxQuant (Version 1.6.0.16, MPI of Biochemistry, Germany) obtaining LFQ (label-free quantitative) peptide abundances47 across treatments. Peptides were annotated with Arabidopsis thaliana FASTA files obtained in the TAIR database (Version 10, The Arabidopsis Information Resource, www.Arabidopsis.org). All peptides (i.e. unique and redundant) belonging to structural proteins of the cytosolic ribosomes were used for the subsequent analyses. Independent matrices were built for the independent experiments that contained all the biological replication. The matrices were normalized. After normalization, each cell in the matrix is represented by: NXij = Xij/ ∑[RPs]i  Where ∑ [RPs]i represents the sum of abundances of structural ribosomal proteins belonging to the 40S or 60S subunit per sample. The normalization corrected the abundances of 60S large subunit (LSU) proteins by the total amount of 60S and likewise for the 40S small subunit (SSU). Finally, matrices belonging to independent experiments were intersected yielding 149 structural RPs in total. As with the transcript abundances, the distribution of protein abundances was tested and the average was near a normal distribution. Hence, a GLM of the Gaussian family sufficed for statistical testing. Due to the dilution effect associated with pooling the whole plant tissue for proteomics (i.e. diluting newly synthesized ribosomes from 7 days of acclimation with old ribosomes from ~ 21 day old plants), we evaluated the p-values by ranking them and selecting the top candidates as the ones that are worth pursuing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Remodelling, Ribosomal code, Ribosome biogenesis, Ribosome-associated proteins, Substoichiometry, Functional heterogeneity, Paralog subfunctionalization, Stress- specialized ribosomes

### Affiliations
AG Joachim Kopka Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Kopka
AG Joachim Kopka Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany


