### Accession
PXD033507

### Title
Aedes aegypti CLIPB9 activates prophenoloxidase-3 in the presence of CLIPA14 after fungal infection

### Description
Melanization is an integral part of the insect defense system and is often induced by pathogen invasion. Phenoloxidases (POs) are critical enzymes that catalyze melanin formation. PO3 is associated with the antifungal response of the mosquito, Aedes aegypti, but the molecular mechanism of the prophenoloxidase-3 (PPO3) activation is unclear. Here we report that PPO3 cleavage activation is mediated by a clip-domain serine protease, CLIPB9. We purified recombinant CLIPB9 and found that it cleaved PPO3 and increased PO activity in the hemolymph. We then identified CLIPA14 (a serine protease homolog) by co-immunoprecipitation using anti-CLIPB9 antibody. After being cleaved by CLIPB9, Ae. aegypti CLIPA14 acted as a cofactor for PPO3 activation. In addition, dsRNA co-silencing of CLIPB9 and CLIPA14 genes reduced melanization after infection with the entomopathogen, Beauveria bassiana, making the adult mosquitoes more sensitive to fungal infection. These results illustrate the roles of CLIPB9 and CLIPA14 in the PPO activation pathway and revealed the complexity of the upstream serine protease network controlling melanization.

### Sample Protocol
24 h B. bassiana-infected hemolymph and PBS-treated hemolymph were collected. Samples were incubated with 50 μl Protein A-Sepharose (Roche) to remove nonspecific binding. After centrifugation, specific antibodies were added to the supernatant and incubated at 4 ℃ for 1 h. Subsequently, 50 μl of Protein A was added to each sample, which was then shaken at 4 ℃ for at least 3 h, or overnight. The Protein A was separated by centrifugation. The target and its associated proteins were washed at least four times with NP-40 lysis buffer as described in the kit. Equal amounts of protein samples were separated on 4–20% Tris-Glycine gels and visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) stain. Visible bands were excised from the gel and cut into 1-mm3 pieces. The pieces were subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and then digested with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega). The tryptic peptides were extracted with 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, concentrated by drying under vacuum conditions, and dissolved in mobile phase A buffer (0.1% formic acid). The supernatants were then analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and peak area calculations were performed against the Aedes aegypti proteome database downloaded from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Melanization is an integral part of the insect defense system and is often induced by pathogen invasion. Phenoloxidases (POs) are critical enzymes that catalyze melanin formation. PO3 is associated with the antifungal response of the mosquito, <i>Aedes aegypti</i>, but the molecular mechanism of the prophenoloxidase-3 (PPO3) activation is unclear. Here we report that PPO3 cleavage activation is mediated by a clip-domain serine protease, CLIPB9. We purified recombinant CLIPB9 and found that it cleaved PPO3 and increased PO activity in the hemolymph. We then identified CLIPA14 (a serine protease homolog) by co-immunoprecipitation using anti-CLIPB9 antibody. After being cleaved by CLIPB9, <i>Ae. aegypti</i> CLIPA14 acted as a cofactor for PPO3 activation. In addition, dsRNA co-silencing of <i>CLIPB9</i> and <i>CLIPA14</i> genes reduced melanization after infection with the entomopathogen, <i>Beauveria bassiana</i>, making the adult mosquitoes more sensitive to fungal infection. These results illustrate the roles of CLIPB9 and CLIPA14 in the PPO activation pathway and revealed the complexity of the upstream serine protease network controlling melanization.

### Keywords
Prophenoloxidase, Serine protease, Antifungal response, Serine protease homolog, Immune melanization

### Affiliations
Insect Immunity and Development Group, State Key laboratory of Integrated Management of Pest Insects and Rodents, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Institute of Zoology,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yan-Nan Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Zhen Zou
Insect Immunity and Development Group, State Key laboratory of Integrated Management of Pest Insects and Rodents, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China


