### Accession
PXD027621

### Title
Protective effect and mechanism of kinsenoside on alcoholic liver injury

### Description
The mice were fed with Lieber-Decarli alcohol liquid diet and intraperitoneal injection of carbon tetrachloride to induce alcoholic liver fibrosis in mice. The drug group was treated with kinsenoside at the same time to study the protective effect and mechanism of kinsenoside on alcoholic liver injury in mice.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was lysed with SDT (4 % [w/v] SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) to extract protein and the bicinchoninic acid method was used for protein quantification. An appropriate amount of protein from each sample was prepared using the filter-aided sample preparation method for trypsin digestion. The C18 Cartridge was used to desalt the peptides. After the peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, they were reconstituted with 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides (100 μg) from each sample were labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions and then fractionated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer, coupled to Easy nLC, to analyze the peptides

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative analyses were performed by searching the mass spectrometric raw data of each sample using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. Finally, bioinformatics analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinsenoside， alcoholic liver injury

### Affiliations
Biobank, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Biobank, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

### Submitter
Limin Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Ren
Biobank, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.


