### Accession
PXD017055

### Title
Non-coding divergence of the human X and Y chromosomes drove  male-biased expression of dosage-sensitive regulators

### Description
Little is known about how Y-chromosome gene expression directly contributes to differences between XX (female) and XY (male) individuals in non-reproductive tissues. It is often said that Y-chromosome genes show low expression outside the testis. Here, we analyzed quantitative profiles of Y-chromosome gene expression across 36 human tissues from hundreds of individuals and report many instances where a Y-chromosome gene shows upregulated expression in a non-reproductive tissue. A notable example is EIF1AY, which encodes eukaryotic initiation factor 1A (EIF1A), together with its X-linked homolog EIF1AX. Evolutionary loss of a Y-linked microRNA target site enabled upregulation of EIF1AY, but not EIF1AX, in the heart. As a result, this essential translation initiation factor is nearly twice as abundant in male as in female heart tissue at the protein level. Divergence between the X and Y chromosomes in regulatory sequence can therefore lead to tissue-specific, Y-chromosome-driven sex biases in expression of critical, dosage-sensitive regulatory genes.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 33 human heart samples (left ventricle sampled 1 cm above apex), 21 males and 12 females, stored in PAXgene at -80C, were obtained from Gene Expression Tissue (GTEx) Biobank. Samples were rinsed from the PAXgene buffer by ice-cold PBS, pulverized in 1.5ml RIPA lysis buffer with Roche complete protease inhibitors, and sonicated for 2 min using 0.5 pulses.  Heart samples (~40mg) were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30min at 54C followed by alkylation with 20mM Iodoacetamide for 30min at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 15mM DTT for 15min at room temperature in the dark. A 200l sample aliquot was then methanol/chloroform precipitated. The samples were allowed to air dry before being resuspended in 300 ul of 8 M urea buffer supplemented with 50 mM TRIS at pH 8.2. The urea concentration was diluted down to ~1.5M urea   with 50mM Tris. Proteins were quantified using a BCA assay. Protein was then digested using a combination of Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. First, protein was digested overnight with Lys-C followed by 6-h digestion with trypsin all at 37C. Samples were then acidified using formic acid to approximately pH 3. Samples were desalted using a SepPak column, and eluents were dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide pellets were resuspended in 110l of 200mM HEPES buffer, pH 8, and peptides were quantified by a BCA assay. Approximately 70g of peptides (100l of sample +30l of 100% acetonitrile) were then labelled with 15l of 20gl1 of the corresponding TMT 11-plex reagent for 2h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 8l of 5% hydroxylamine for 15min. Peptides were then acidified using 150l of 1% formic acid, each set of 11 samples was mixed and desalted using a SepPak column. In total, 3 TMT 11-plex reactions were performed to analyze all 33 samples. The full labeling scheme for the heart samples is provided in Figure 6source data. Each of the 3 TMT experiments was separated by basic, reversed-phase chromatography. Samples were loaded onto an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5m particles, 4.6mm ID and 220mm in length). Using an Agilent 1100 quaternary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array detector (set at 220- and 280-nm wavelength), peptides were separated using a 50min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, at a flow rate of 0.8ml min1. Peptides were separated into a total of 96 fractions that were consolidated into 24. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 1% formic acid for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) processing. Peptides from every odd fraction (12 fractions total) from basic reverse-phase fractionation were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography unit. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 100m ID microcapillary column packed first with ~0.5cm of 5m Magic C18 resin followed by 40cm of 1.8m GP-C18 resin. Peptides were separated using a 3-h gradient of 630% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ~400nl min1. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (4001,400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2105 resolution setting and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 2105). The subsequent MS2MS3 analysis was conducted with a top 10 setting or a top speed approach using a 2-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting of 4103, an isolation window of 0.5 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 150ms and the rapid ion trap setting. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 40s. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursors were isolated using a 2.5-Da m/z window and fragmented by 35% CID in the ion trap. Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-selected and further fragmented by HCD. Precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2MS3 was conducting using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology. HCD used for the MS3 was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution setting of 60,000, an AGC setting of 50,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Software tools were used to convert mass spectrometric data from raw file to the mzxml format (Huttlin et al. 2015). Erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were corrected as per previous publication (Huttlin et al. 2015). MS/MS spectra assignments were made with the Sequest algorithm (Eng et al. 1994) using an indexed Ensembl database (Ensembl version GRCh37.61). Databases were prepared with forward and reversed sequences concatenated according to the target-decoy strategy(Elias & Gygi 2007). All searches were performed using a static modification for cysteine alkylation (57.0215 Da) and TMT on the peptide N termini and lysines. Methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were searched with trypsin specificity using a precursor ion tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da. Sequest matches were filtered by linear discriminant analysis as described previously, first to a data set level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences(Elias & Gygi 2007). Peptide probabilities were then multiplied to create protein rankings and the data set was again filtered to a final data set level error of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. The final protein-level FDR was less than 1% (~0.22% peptide level).    Peptide quantitation using TMT reporter ions was accomplished as previously published (Ting et al. 2011; McAlister et al. 2014). In brief, a 0.003 Da m/z window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for each of the 11 reporter ions, and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. TMT signals were also corrected for isotope impurities based on the manufacturers instructions. Peptides were only considered quantifiable if the total signal-to-noise for all channels was >200 with an isolation specificity of >0.75.  Within   each 11-plex experiment, raw signal-to-noise values in each of the 11 channels were first normalized (divided) by the summed signal/noise value for all peptides in that channel: y _ij=y_ij/_(pP)y_pj , where y_ij is the raw signal/noise value for peptide i in channel j, y _ij is the channel-normalized signal/noise value, and P is the set of all detected peptides. Among all detected peptides, we then identified those that specifically matched the amino-acid sequence of an X homolog of an XY pair, of a Y homolog of an XY pair, or both X and Y homologs of an XY pair but not the sequence of any other protein. We detected all three classes (X-specific, Y-specific, X-Y-shared) of peptides for RPS4Y1/RPS4X, EIF1AY/EIF1AX, and DDX3Y/DDX3X, the three most highly expressed XY pair genes. (We further detected X-specific peptides for USP9X/USP9Y but no Y-specific or X-Y-shared peptides.) Y-specific peptides showed low but roughly constant signal in female channels, with mean signal/noise = 2.57: we used this value as an estimate of the non-specific background for all peptides and subtracted this value from all peptides in all channels, setting any negative values to 0.   For each of the three XY pairs separately, we then estimated the relative abundance of the X isoform in channel j, a_j^((X)), as the percentage of signal from all X-specific peptides in channel j out of the total signal across all channels, a_j^((X) )=(_(pP_X)y _pj )/(_(k=1)^11_(pP_X)y _pk )*100, where PX is the set of all X-specific peptides for the given XY pair. We repeated this calculation using XY-shared peptides to obtain a_j^((XY)), the relative abundance of the sum of X and Y isoforms in channel j. To obtain the male-to-female expression ratio for the X homolog specifically, _MF^((X)), we pooled the abundance estimates across all three 11-plex experiments and divided its average abundance in male channels by its average abundance in female channels, i.e., _MF^((X))=(1/21 _(jC_M)a_j^((X) ) )/(1/12 _(jC_F)a_j^((X) ) ), where C_M and C_F are the sets of channels from male and female donors, respectively. The male-to-female expression ratio for the sum of X and Y homolog expression, _MF^((XY)), was obtained similarly. p-values for the sex bias in expression were estimated by permuting the sample labels within each 11-plex experiment one million times and calculating the proportion of permutations that yielded more extreme male-to-female expression ratios. Finally, the Y-to-X expression ratio within males was estimated as (_MF^((XY))-_MF^((X) ))/_MF^((X) ).

### Publication Abstract
Little is known about how human Y-Chromosome gene expression directly contributes to differences between XX (female) and XY (male) individuals in nonreproductive tissues. Here, we analyzed quantitative profiles of Y-Chromosome gene expression across 36 human tissues from hundreds of individuals. Although it is often said that Y-Chromosome genes are lowly expressed outside the testis, we report many instances of elevated Y-Chromosome gene expression in a nonreproductive tissue. A notable example is <i>EIF1AY</i>, which encodes eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1A Y-linked, together with its X-linked homolog <i>EIF1AX</i> Evolutionary loss of a Y-linked microRNA target site enabled up-regulation of <i>EIF1AY</i>, but not of <i>EIF1AX</i>, in the heart. Consequently, this essential translation initiation factor is nearly twice as abundant in male as in female heart tissue at the protein level. Divergence between the X and Y Chromosomes in regulatory sequence can therefore lead to tissue-specific Y-Chromosome-driven sex biases in expression of critical, dosage-sensitive regulatory genes.

### Keywords
Orbitrap lumos, Proteomics, Tandem mass tags, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joel Chick

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School


