### Accession
PXD010530

### Title
mIMCD RBPome and Proteome - We characterize the mRNA protein interactome of ciliated kidney tubular epithelial cells and we studied its modulation during hypoxia

### Description
We characterize the mRNA protein interactome of ciliated kidney tubular epithelial cells and we studied its modulation during hypoxia

### Sample Protocol
mRNA interacting proteins were pull down with oligo dT beads after 4SU labeling and UVA crosslinking, according to publisched protocols (Baltz et al., 2012). For both proteome and RBPome, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 µm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with a 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch), using and EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The column was manteinedmaintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were  0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 2% to 5% buffer B for 10 min, from 5% to 20% buffer B for 100 min at 200 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 70000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at 17500 resolution using an AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time and 4.0% underfill ratio. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Data were analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.0.7

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse kidney tubuli cells, Mrna interactome

### Affiliations
Uniklinik Köln
University Hospital of Cologne Department II of Internal Medicine Nephrolab Cologne  CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Francesca Fabretti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
University Hospital of Cologne Department II of Internal Medicine Nephrolab Cologne  CECAD Research Center


