### Accession
PXD025134

### Title
A combined metaproteomics and metabolomics approach for the in vivo analysis of cystic fibrosis sputum focusing on microbial pathogens

### Description
Hallmarks of cystic fibrosis (CF) are increased viscosity of mucus and impaired mucociliary clearance within the airways due to mutations of the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator gene. This paves the way for the colonization by microbial pathogens and the concomitant establishment of chronic infections leading to lung tissue damage, reduced lung function, and to decreased life expectancy. Although microbial infections play a key role during disease progression, only a few studies investigated the pathophysiology of the microbial community in vivo so far. Moreover, no CF study so far applied metaproteomics, a powerful approach to unravel molecular mechanisms of microbial infection, mainly reasoned due to (I) the challenging processability of inhomogeneous, viscous, slimy sputum, and (II) the high number of human proteins masking comparably low abundant microbial proteins. Consequently, we developed a reliable, reproducible and widely applicable protocol for sputum processing, microbial enrichment, and subsequent metaproteomics analyses with a focus on microbial pathogens overcoming the aforementioned challenges. Metaproteomics data were complemented and validated by 16S sequencing, metabolomic as well as microscopic analyses. In total, we processed 21 CF sputum samples and selected three for detailed metaproteome analysis. The number of bacterial proteins/protein groups increased from 199-425 to 392-868. Moreover, our data suggest that the arginine deiminase pathway and multiple proteases and peptidases identified from various bacterial genera are so far underappreciated in their contribution to the CF pathophysiology. By providing a standardized and effective protocol for sputum processing and microbial enrichment, our study represents an important basis for future studies investigating the physiology of microbial pathogens in CF in vivo – an important prerequisite for the development of novel antimicrobial therapies against mucoviscidosis.

### Sample Protocol
Suspensions of enriched microbial cells and the non-enriched control were subjected to mechanical cell disruption as previously described with slight modifications. Due to limited sputum-sample volume and the concomitant small number of microbial cells in the enriched sample, the cell disruption was downscaled using 200 µL of the respective suspensions and 100 µL glass beads (0.1 to 0.11 mm, Sartorius Stedim Biotech) in 0.5 mL cryotubes (Sarstedt) followed by 3 homogenization cycles at 6.5 m/s for 30 s with intermitted cooling on ice for 1 min. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged (15,000 g, 4 °C, 5 min) and the tube content (including glass beads and cell debris) was transferred into a fresh 1.5 mL reaction tube. 200 µL 2x extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.3 M NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 4 % SDS, pH 8.5, adapted from Chourey et al., 2010) were added and the suspension was boiled at 95 °C and 1.200 rpm for 10 min in a thermo-shaker (Eppendorf). Glass beads and cell debris were pelleted by centrifugation at 15,000 g at 4 °C for 5 min and the supernatant, representing the protein extract, was collected. Proteins were concentrated (approx. 4-fold) in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf AG) for 1 h followed by determination of the protein concentration using the BCA-assay microplate procedure (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.40 µg protein per sample were mixed 3:1 with an SDS-sample buffer (15% glycerol, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol, 2.4% SDS, 0.8% Tris, 0.005% bromophenol blue), boiled for 10 min at 95 °C and subsequently separated on a 4-12 % SDS-polyacrylamide gradient gel (Criterion, BioRad). The gel was fixed, washed and stained using Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 as previously described. After the staining procedure, excessive Coomassie stain was removed from the gel using water. Subsequently, gel lanes were fractionated into 20 gel pieces, cut into gel blocks of approx. 1 mm3 and prepared for MS/MS analysis as described by Lassek et al., 2015. Obtained peptides were resolved in 0.1% acetic acid and desalted using ZipTips (C18, Merck Millipore). The desalted peptide mixtures were again vacuum-dried and stored at -80 °C until MS/MS analysis.Purified peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% acetic acid and analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Nano reversed phase LC columns (20 cm length x 100 µm diameter) packed with 3.0 µm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch Entringen, Germany) and heated to 45 °C were used to separate the purified peptides with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) and subsequently eluted by a non-linear gradient from 2% to 99% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid (v/v), 95% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl*min-1 over 91 min. A full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated and fragmented via collision induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were rejected and lock mass correction as well as dynamic exclusion (fragmented precursors were excluded from fragmentation for 30 s) were enabled. Each sample was measured twice, creating two technical replicates per sample.

### Data Protocol
For each patient, a specific database was constructed based on the phylogenetic information derived from community composition analysis by 16S sequencing. In order to keep the databases as small as possible, genera with a relative abundance of less than 0.1% according to sequencing results were not considered. The following protein sequences were added: Homo sapiens, the most common (pathogenic) fungal genera in CF (Aspergillus, Blumeria, Candida, Cladosporium, Cryptococcus, Exophiala, Rasamsonia, Rhodotorula, Saccharomyces, Scedosporium, and Sporobolomyces according to Chotirmall et al. (2014) and Williams et al. (2016), common laboratory contaminants, and DNase I. For this purpose, FASTA protein sequences from bacteria, fungi as well as from Homo sapiens were downloaded from UniProt on September 18, 2018 and redundant entries were removed using the Linux-implemented FASTA tool kit resulting in three patient-specific protein databases, which contained 5.546.037 (A), 4.024.158 (B), and 3.331.936 (C) entries, respectively. Database search was performed using the Mascot software (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) with the following settings: peptide tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.8 Da, up to two missed cleavages allowed, methionine oxidation set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. A second database search was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8.7, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) and the built-in X! Tandem search engine with the same settings as described above, as well as the following settings: protein probability = 95%, peptide probability = 99%, single peptide identifications allowed. Protein quantification was based on normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) as previously described. Taxonomic and functional assignment of identified protein groups was performed using Prophane (version 3.1.4).

### Publication Abstract
Hallmarks of cystic fibrosis (CF) are increased viscosity of mucus and impaired mucociliary clearance within the airways due to mutations of the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator gene. This facilitates the colonization of the lung by microbial pathogens and the concomitant establishment of chronic infections leading to tissue damage, reduced lung function, and decreased life expectancy. Although the interplay between key CF pathogens plays a major role during disease progression, the pathophysiology of the microbial community in CF lungs remains poorly understood. Particular challenges in the analysis of the microbial population present in CF sputum is (I) the inhomogeneous, viscous, and slimy consistence of CF sputum, and (II) the high number of human proteins masking comparably low abundant microbial proteins. To address these challenges, we used 21 CF sputum samples to develop a reliable, reproducible and widely applicable protocol for sputum processing, microbial enrichment, cell disruption, protein extraction and subsequent metaproteomic analyses. As a proof of concept, we selected three sputum samples for detailed metaproteome analyses and complemented and validated metaproteome data by 16S sequencing, metabolomic as well as microscopic analyses. Applying our protocol, the number of bacterial proteins/protein groups increased from 199-425 to 392-868 in enriched samples compared to nonenriched controls. These early microbial metaproteome data suggest that the arginine deiminase pathway and multiple proteases and peptidases identified from various bacterial genera could so far be underappreciated in their contribution to the CF pathophysiology. By providing a standardized and effective protocol for sputum processing and microbial enrichment, our study represents an important basis for future studies investigating the physiology of microbial pathogens in CF <i>in vivo</i> - an important prerequisite for the development of novel antimicrobial therapies to combat chronic recurrent airway infection in CF.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, In vivo, Metaproteomics, Sputum, Cystic fibrosis, 16s sequencing, Microbial community, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology


