### Accession
PXD007820

### Title
Proteomic response to the thaxtomin phytotoxin elicitor cellobiose and to the deletion of the cellulose utilization regulator CebR in Streptomyces scabies

### Description
Streptomyces scabies is a plant pathogen responsible for common scab disease on root and tuber crops. The transport of the cellulose by-products cellobiose and cellotriose into the cell induces the biosynthesis of the main phytotoxin thaxtomin A. These carbohydrates bind to the cis-acting sequences of the cellulose utilization repressor CebR and thereby induce the expression of the thaxtomin activator TxtR. We performed a shotgun proteomic experiment to compare the wild-type S. scabies 87-22 and its cebR null mutant in the absence or presence of cellobiose. The global intracellular response during virulent behaviour of this plant pathogen could be determined during this experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by sonication from Streptomyces scabies 87-22 and Streptomyces scabies Δscab57761 mycelium grown in the absence or presence of cellobiose for 48 hours in ISP-4 medium at 28°C. After TCA precipitation and Bradford analysis, the protein solutions (10 µg) were reduced (25 mM DTT, 10 min, 60°C), alkylated (75 mM IAA, 20 min, room temperature) and digested overnight with trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (37°C). The resulting peptides from each sample were separated on a NanoAcquity UPLC® system (Waters Corporation) in 2D mode (five fractions: 11.1%, 14.5%, 17.4%, 20.8%, and 45.0% of solvent B1). For the first dimension (high pH), solvent A1 and B1 were composed of 20 mM ammonium formate in water and ACN (pH 10), respectively. For the second dimension (low pH), solvent A2 and B2 were composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN, respectively. Analysis of eluting tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt G1 quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation) equipped with a Nanolockspray source fitted with a pico-tip emitter. Accurate mass data were collected in a data independent positive mode of acquisition (MSe) by alternating between low and high-energy scan functions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MSe data from three biological replicates of the four conditions were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using a quality control sample to maximal overlay of the 2D feature maps. Protein identifications were obtained searching the Streptomyces scabies entries of a UniProt database using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER version 2.5 (PLGS 2.5, Waters Corporation). The default protein identification criteria were used. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (fixed) and methionine oxidation (variable) were selected as modifications. The PLGS results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks. After normalization of the raw abundances of all features and statistical analysis, the different fractions were combined. Subsequently, protein abundances were compared using Progenesis statistic tools. ANOVA values of p < 0.05, regulation of 1.5-fold or 0.66-fold, power > 0.8 and q-values < 0.05 were regarded as significant for all further results.

### Publication Abstract
Streptomyces scabies is responsible for common scab disease on root and tuber vegetables. Production of its main phytotoxin thaxtomin A is triggered upon transport of cellulose byproducts cellotriose and cellobiose, which disable the repression of the thaxtomin biosynthesis activator gene txtR by the cellulose utilization regulator CebR. To assess the intracellular response under conditions where S. scabies develops a virulent behavior, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of wild-type S. scabies 87-22 and its cebR null mutant (hyper-virulent phenotype) grown in the absence or presence of cellobiose. Our study revealed significant changes in abundance of proteins belonging to metabolic pathways known or predicted to be involved in pathogenicity of S. scabies. Among these, we identified proteins of the cello-oligosaccharide-mediated induction of thaxtomin production, the starch utilization system required for utilization of the carbohydrate stored in S. scabies's hosts, and siderophore synthesis utilization systems, which are key features of pathogens to acquire iron once they colonized the host. Thus, proteomic analysis supported by targeted mass spectrometry-based metabolite quantitative analysis revealed the central role of CebR as a regulator of virulence of S. scabies.

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Pathogenicity, Streptomyces scabies, Synapt ms

### Affiliations
University Ghent, WE10, L-ProBE
WE-10, L-ProBE, University Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Sören Planckaert

### Lab Head
Dr Bart Devreese
WE-10, L-ProBE, University Ghent, Belgium


