### Accession
PXD020186

### Title
The HLA-Ligand-Atlas. A resource of natural HLA ligands presented on benign tissues

### Description
A use case of the benign HLA-Ligand-Atlas is the prioritization of tumor-associated targets for e.g. peptide vaccination. Based on three glioblastoma samples, we illustrated how many of these peptides are covered in the benign dataset. The experimental and computational workflow for the isolation and identification of the glioblastoma immunopeptidomes is the same, as for all samples included in the HLA Ligand Atlas. As the three glioblastoma samples are not included in the HLA Ligand Atlas dataset, they have been deposited under a separate submission.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and class II molecules were isolated from snap-frozen tissue using standard immunoaffinity chromatography. The antibodies employed were the pan-HLA class I-specific antibody W6/32, the HLA-DR-specific antibody L243, and the pan-HLA class II-specific antibody Tü39. All antibodies were produced in house (University of Tübingen, Department of Immunology) from HB-95, HB-55 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA), and a hybridoma clone. The antibodies were cross-linked to CNBr-activated sepharose (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) at a ratio of 40 mg sepharose to 1 mg antibody for 1 g tissue with 0.5 M NaCl, 0.1 M NaHCO3 at pH 8.3. Free activated CNBr reaction sites were blocked with 0.2 M glycine. To purify HLA-peptide complexes, the tissue was minced with a scalpel and further homogenized with the Potter-Elvehjem instrument (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany). Tissue homogenization was performed in lysis buffer consisting of CHAPS (Panreac AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany), and one cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche) in PBS. Thereafter, the lysate was sonicated and cleared by centrifugation for 45 min at 4,000 rpm, interspaced by 1 h incubation periods on a shaker at 4°C. Lysates were further cleared by sterile filtration employing a 5 μm filter unit (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The first column contained 1 mg of W6/32 antibody coupled to sepharose, whereas the second column contained equal amounts of Tü39 and L243 antibody coupled to sepharose. Finally, the lysates were passed through two columns cyclically overnight at 4°C. Affinity columns were then washed for 30 minutes with PBS and for 1 h with water. Elution of peptides was achieved by incubating four times successively with 100 – 200 μl 0.2% TFA on a shaker. All eluted fractions were subsequently pooled. Peptides were separated from the HLA molecule remnants by ultrafiltration employing 3 kDa and 10 kDa Amicon filter units (Merck Millipore) for HLA-I and HLA-II, respectively. The eluate volume was then reduced to approximately 50 μl by lyophilization or vacuum centrifugation. Finally, the reduced peptide solution was purified five times using ZipTip pipette tips with C18 resin and 0.6 μl bed volume (Merck,) and eluted in 32.5% ACN/0.2% TFA. The purified peptide solution was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and supplemented with 1% ACN/0.05% TFA and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. HLA ligand characterization was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Nanospray FlexTM Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded with 1% ACN/ 0.05% TFA on a 75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 Nanotrap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 μl/min for 10 minutes. Separation was performed on a 50 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) column, with a particle size of 2 μm. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.15% FA in water) over 90 minutes. The column was subsequently washed by increasing to 95% B within 1 minute, and maintaining the gradient for 5 minutes, followed by reduction to 3% B and equilibration for 23 minutes. Data acquisition was performed as technical triplicates in data-dependent mode, with customized top speed (3 s) methods for HLA-I- and HLA-II-eluted peptides. HLA-I peptides have a length of 8 - 12 amino acids, therefore, the scan range was restricted to 400 - 650 m/z and charge states of 2 - 3. MS1 and MS2 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 and 30,000 respectively. Furthermore, we set the automatic gain control (AGC) targets to 1.5*105 and 7.0*104 and the maximum injection time to 50 ms and 150 ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The dynamic exclusion was set to 7 s. Peptides were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) while the collision energy was set to 35%.HLA-II peptides have a length of 8 - 25 amino acids, thus the scan range was set to 400 -1,000 m/z and the charge states were restricted to 2 - 5. Readout for both MS1 and MS2 were performed in the Orbitrap with the same resolution and maximum injection times as for HLA-I peptides. The dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s and AGC values employed were 5.0*105 and 7.0*104 for MS1 and MS2, respectively. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 30% collision energy was employed for HLA class II peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS data obtained from HLA ligand extracts was analyzed using the nf-core34 containerized, computational pipeline MHCquant (revision 1.5.1 - https://www.openms.de/mhcquant/) with default settings. The workflow comprises tools of the open-source software library for LC/MS OpenMS. Identification and post-scoring were performed using the OpenMS adapters to Comet 2016.01 rev. 3 and Percolator 3.4 at a local peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1% among replicate sample groups. The human reference proteome (Swiss-Prot, downloaded on the 21_04_2020, Proteome ID UP000005640, 20,365 protein sequences). Database search was performed without enzymatic restriction and methionine oxidation as the only variable modification. MHCquant settings for high-resolution instruments were applied such as a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment bin tolerance of 0.02 Da. The peptide length restriction, digest mass and charge state range were set to 8-12 amino acids, 800-2,500 Da and 2-3 for HLA-I and 8-25 amino acids, 800-5,000 Da and 2-5 for HLA-II, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Immunopeptidomics, Glioblastoma, Hla

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen
University of Tübingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Ana Marcu

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Georg Rammensee
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen


