### Accession
PXD003590

### Title
Proteomic analysis of secreted proteins from Salmonella cells deficient in STnc470

### Description
This study has the main goal of studying the impact of the small non coding RNA STnc470 on protein expression and secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture supernatant was precipitated with TCA, then precipitated proteins were resuspended in 8 M urea, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were clean with C18 and SCX cartridges. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded into a C18 trap column (200 µm x 0.5 mm, ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å, Eksigent) connected to a nanoHPLC system (Ekspert nanoLC 400, Eksigent). The separation was performed in a capillary C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) at 200 nL/min with the following gradient: 1 min in 5% solvent B (Solvent A: 0.1% FA and solvent B: 80% ACN/ 0.1% FA), 5-35% solvent B in 60 min, 35-80% solvent B in 1 min, 6 min in 80% solvent B, 80-5% B in 1 min, and hold in 5% for 11 min. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed in an electrospray ionization mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, AB Sciex). Full-MS spectra were collected in the range of 400 to 2000 m/z and the top 20 most intense parent ions were submitted to fragmentation for 100 milliseconds each using rolling-collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of peptides were performed with Paragon software as part of the ProteinPilot package (AB Sciex) by searching tandem mass spectra against Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium SL1344 sequences downloaded from Uniprot KnowledgeBase on November 11, 2014. Database searches were performed considering trypsin digestion, cysteine residue alkylation with iodoacetamide and biological modifications were considered as factors.

### Publication Abstract
Deep sequencing has revolutionized our understanding of the bacterial RNA world and has facilitated the identification of 280 small RNAs (sRNAs) in <i>Salmonella</i> Despite the suspicions that sRNAs may play important roles in <i>Salmonella</i> pathogenesis, the functions of most sRNAs remain unknown. To advance our understanding of RNA biology in <i>Salmonella</i> virulence, we searched for sRNAs required for bacterial invasion into nonphagocytic cells. After screening 75 sRNAs, we discovered that the ablation of InvS caused a significant decrease of <i>Salmonella</i> invasion into epithelial cells. A proteomic analysis showed that InvS modulated the levels of several type III secreted <i>Salmonella</i> proteins. The level of PrgH, a type III secretion apparatus protein, was significantly lower in the absence of InvS, consistent with the known roles of PrgH in effector secretion and bacterial invasion. We discovered that InvS modulates <i>fimZ</i> expression and hence flagellar gene expression and motility. We propose that InvS coordinates the increase of PrgH and decrease in FimZ that promote efficient <i>Salmonella</i> invasion into nonphagocytic cells.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Salmonellosis continues to be the most common foodborne infection reported by the CDC in the United States. Central to <i>Salmonella</i> pathogenesis is the ability to invade nonphagocytic cells and to replicate inside host cells. Invasion genes are known to be regulated by protein transcriptional networks, but little is known about the role played by small RNAs (sRNAs) in this process. We have identified a novel sRNA, InvS, that is involved in <i>Salmonella</i> invasion. Our result will likely provide an opportunity to better understand the fundamental question of how <i>Salmonella</i> regulates invasion gene expression and may inform strategies for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Secreted effectors, Salmonella, Small non coding rnas, Virulence

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Daoguo Zhou
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University


