### Accession
PXD025081

### Title
Quantitative analysis of acetylation in Vero cells infected with Peste des petits ruminants virus

### Description
Peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV) is a negative-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Paramyxoviridae family and causes acute, highly contagious disease in small ruminants. Lysine acetylation plays central role in regulating gene expression. However, the extent and function of lysine acetylation in host cells during PPRV infection remains unknown. In this study, intensive proteomic quantification analysis of the proteome and acetylome of PPRV-infected Vero cells was performed using dimethylation labeling-based quantitative proteomics. As results, we identified 4729 proteins and 1068 acetylated proteins with 2641 quantified modification sites detected by mass spectrometry, of which 304 acetylated proteins with 410 acetylation sites were significantly acetylated in response to PPRV infection. Bioinformatics analyses revealed that the differentially acetylated proteins participated in carbohydrate catabolic and DNA metabolic process, and were associated with multifarious functions, suggesting that intracellular activities were extensively changed after PPRV infection. Protein-protein interaction network of the identified proteins further indicated that a variety of chaperone and ribosome processes were modulated by acetylation. To our knowledge, this is the first study on acetylome in host cell infected with PPRV. It provides an important point for future studies on the acetylated proteins involved in the host response to PPRV replication.

### Sample Protocol
Cell, Virus and Infection Vero cells were maintained in authors’ laboratory, and cultured in DMEM medium (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO2 incubator. The PPRV vaccine strain Nigeria 75/1 was cultured in our laboratory and passaged in Vero cells as previously described [34]. Vero cells were infected with PPRV at 1 MOI of or mock-infected with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 0.01M, pH7.4) at 37°C for 1 h. The MOI was confirmed according to the viral titers of Vero cell line. After adsorption, the virus inoculum was removed, and the fresh medium was added to wells and incubated. In order to determine the sampling time point, the cells were harvested at 24, 48, 72 h post infection (p.i) and analysed by western blotting and pan anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM-104, PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China). 3 biological replicates of independent (three parallel) experiments were performed.  Protein Extraction The harvested cell samples were washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Then, each sample was sonicated on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). The resulting supernatants were centrifuged with 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the cell debris. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion and Dimethylation Labeling The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and subsequently alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in dark. For tryptic digestion, the protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration of less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion at 37 °C. Then, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB and labeled in parallel in different tubes by adding CH2O or CD2O to the control and infected samples, respectively. The reactions were mixed and further treated with NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride), incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Finally, the labeling reactions were quenched by adding 1% ammonia solution, then desalted adding formic acid and vacuum dried. Enrichment of Acetylated Peptides  Lysine-acetylated peptides were enriched using agarose-conjugated pan anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China). In brief, the dried tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed anti-acetyllysine pan antibody-conjugated agarose beads (PTM-104, PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) and incubated at 4 °C overnight with gentle oscillation. Then the beads were washed 4 times with NETN buffer and 2 times with ice-cold ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted 3 times from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA). The eluted fractions were pooled together and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried by vacuum centrifugation, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis The enriched peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (1.9 μm particles, 120 A pore, 15 cm length, 75 μm i.d). The gradient included an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in 90% ACN) for 24 min, followed from 25% to 40% for 10 min, and reaching to 80% in 3 min, then maintained at 80% for the last 3 min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography) system at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min.  The resulting peptides were ionized and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ Plus (Thermo Scientiﬁc) coupled online to the UPLC using NanoSpray Ionization (NSI) source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Intact peptides were detected at a resolution of 70,000 with scan range of 350–1800 m/z for full MS scans in the Orbitrap. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting of 28 and ion fragments were detected at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions, with 15 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and set at 5E4, with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Database Searches The protein acetylation sites identification and quantification were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against Chlorocebus sabaeus database (19,228 sequences), concatenated with reverse database and common contaminants. Trypsin/P was speciﬁed as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamido-methylation of cysteine (Cys) was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminal and acetylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) and the minimum score for modified peptide were set at <1% and >40, respectively. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. Bioinformatics analysis  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). Proteins were classiﬁed based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Protein domain annotation was performed using the InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/InterProScan/) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www. genome.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate and map the pathways. GO, protein domain and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.8. Wolfpsort (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) a subcellular localization predication software was used to predict subcellular localization. Amino acid sequence motifs (within ± 10 residues of the acetylated sites) were analyzed by motif-X. Motif-based clustering analyses were also performed, and cluster membership was visualized using a heat map. Functional interaction network analysis was performed using the STRING database（v.11.0）, with a high confidence threshold of 0.7, and visualized by Cytoscape 3.7.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification；lysine acetylation； protein-protein interaction；peste des petits ruminants virus

### Affiliations
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
xuelian meng

### Lab Head
Dr Xuelian meng
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


