### Accession
PXD042047

### Title
Analysis of ageing-dependent thiol oxidation reveals early oxidation of proteins involved in core proteostasis functions

### Description
Oxidants have a profound impact on biological systems in physiology and under pathological conditions. Oxidative post-translational modifications of protein thiols are well-recognized as a readily occurring alteration of proteins. Changes in protein thiol redox state can modify the function of proteins and thus can control cellular processes. However, chronic oxidative stress causes oxidative damage to proteins with detrimental consequences for cellular function and organismal health. The development of techniques enabling the site-specific and quantitative assessment of protein thiol oxidation on a proteome-wide scale significantly expanded the number of known oxidation-sensitive protein thiols. However, lacking behind are large-scale data on the redox state of proteins during ageing, a physiological process accompanied by increased levels of endogenous oxidants. Here, we present the landscape of protein thiol oxidation in chronologically aged wild-type Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a time-dependent manner. Our data determine early oxidation targets in key biological processes governing the de novo production of proteins, folding, and protein degradation. Comparison to existing datasets reveals evolutionary conservation of early oxidation targets. To facilitate accessibility and cross-species comparison of the experimental data obtained, we created the OxiAge Database, a free online tool for the research community that integrates current datasets on thiol redoxomes in aged yeast, nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, and mouse Mus musculus.

### Sample Protocol
OxICAT labeling and LC-MS sample preparation: Protein extraction from whole cells, differential thiol trapping, tryptic digest, peptide enrichment and cleavage of the biotin tag were performed exactly as described before (Topf et al. 2018, Nat Commun 9, 324, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02694-8). Briefly, samples were homogenized in 10% TCA using glass beads and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. 200 µg aliquots were centrifuged (21,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C), washed with 5% ice-cold TCA and resuspended in a mixture of 160 µl denaturing alkylation buffer (DAB; 6 M urea/200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5/10 mM EDTA/0.5% SDS) with 2 units of heavy ICAT reagent (ABSciex) dissolved in 40 µl acetonitrile. Samples were incubated for 2 h at 37°C under vigorous shaking. Proteins were precipitated by acetone and resuspended in a mixture of 160 µl DAB with 2 units of light ICAT reagent dissolved in 40 µl acetonitrile. TCEP was added to a final concentration of 1 mM and samples were incubated for 2 h at 37°C under vigorous shaking followed by acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were digested in 200 µl of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) containing 12 µg Trypsin (sequencing-grade modified, Promega). After 16 h of incubation at 37°C, insoluble proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (21,000 x g, 1 min, room temperature), resuspended in 50 µl of 60% (v/v) methanol/20 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated with 1 µg Trypsin at 42°C for 3 h. Supernatants of digests in 20 mM NH4HCO3 and in 60% (v/v) methanol/20 mM NH4HCO3 were combined. Clean-up of the digests by strong cation exchange chromatography, enrichment by avidin affinity chromatography and cleavage of the biotin tag were performed using the ICAT kit (AbSciex) following the manufacturers’ instructions. LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) exactly as described before for whole cell oxICAT samples (Topf et al. 2018, Nat Commun 9, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02694-8). Peptide samples were resuspended in 30 µl 0.1% TFA, and each biological replicate was analyzed in two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Raw files of the LC-MS/MS runs were jointly processed using MaxQuant version 2.0.2.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Peptides corresponding to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database (UniProtKB canonical set for strain ATCC 204508/S288c, Proteome ID UP000002311, retrieved on May 2nd, 2022, 6091 entries) were identified using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). ICAT light tag (C10H17N3O3, 227.13 Da) and ICAT heavy tag (13C9CH17N3O3, 236.16 Da) were set as light and heavy labels, respectively, with cysteine residue specificity. Up to five labeled amino acids per peptide were allowed. Trypsin was set for the generation of theoretical peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine was included as a variable modification. Labelling ratio estimation was performed using the options “Re-quantify” and “Match between runs” with a retention time window of 0.7 min. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the “first search” option of Andromeda and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. A peptide spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode “Revert”. The MaxQuant file “evidence.txt” was used for subsequent analysis. Entries from potential contaminants, decoy hits and evidences with no quantified intensity were removed. Intensities for the heavy or light labelled peptides of 0, resulting from MaxQuant identifying but not quantifying a peptide, were set to NA. Peptide starting positions (i.e., the sequence index of the first amino acid of the peptide) were extracted from the MaxQuant file “peptides.txt” and used for calculating absolute positions. Cysteine identifications (CysIDs) for all peptides containing a cysteine residue were generated from the protein identifier of the leading razor protein and the absolute position of the cysteine included in the peptide. Peptides with multiple cysteine residues were assigned a CysID including all identified residues. Next, % light intensity was calculated for each evidence by dividing the intensity of light-labelled peptides by the sum of intensities of light and heavy-labelled peptides. ISO-MSMS evidences with labelling state 0 (i.e. only the light labelling partner was identified) which exhibited % light intensities below 50% after re-quantification were removed. Likewise, ISO-MSMS evidences with labelling state 1 (i.e. only the heavy labelling partner was identified) which exhibited % light intensities above 50% after re-quantification were removed. MULTI-MATCH and MULTI-SECPEP evidences were filtered out if each ISO-MSMS evidence identified for the cysteine residue (i.e. miscleaved, methionine oxidation, different z values) was observed with labelling state 0 and % light intensity < 50% or respectively labelling state 1 and % light intensity > 50%. The resulting table contained 224,469 entries (corresponding to 97.2 % of all identified cysteine-containing evidences with non-zero intensity) and was used to calculate the proportion of reversibly oxidized cysteine residues, which we refer to as % oxidation, for each unique cysteine residue. For each timepoint and biological replicate total intensities (i.e., light + heavy) and light intensities, respectively, of both technical replicates were summed up over all evidences (i.e., modified, miscleaved, different charge states) of a given CysID. The % oxidation was calculated as the sum of light intensity divided by the sum of total intensity (light + heavy) multiplied by 100 (for a detailed description, see Topf et al. 2018, Nat Commun 9, 324). All raw values corresponding to day 3, biological replicate 3, were removed as this replicate showed disproportionately higher missing values (27% for light-labelled and 33% for heavy-labelled CysID evidences) compared to the other replicates (< 5% for light- and heavy-labelled CysID evidences, respectively). Furthermore, CysIDs with missing heavy or light intensities in more than one biological replicate were removed. In total, 65.5% of all peptides were removed after filtering. 3,178 peptides of a total of 9,213 remained for further downstream analysis. We refer to this dataset as “yeast OxiAge” dataset. Missing intensity values for light or heavy ICAT-labelled peptides resulting from unidentified or non-quantified peptides (see data processing) were imputed using a data-driven imputation strategy (Egert et al. 2021, J Proteome Res 20, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00119).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Proteostasis, Thiol oxidation, Oxicat

### Affiliations
Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
University of Wuerzburg
Chair of Biochemistry II
Am Hubland
97074 Würzburg

### Submitter
Julian Bender

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany


