### Accession
PXD014538

### Title
LFQ of Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus strains

### Description
Comparsion of proteomes of Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus to compare protein level via iBAQ analysis, expression (by LFQ) and coverage between Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus strain82-40 vs Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus strain ATCC 27374

### Sample Protocol
Freeze dreid whole cell pellets were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM DTT for one hour and then alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Lys-C was added at a ratio of 1:200 and samples allowed to digest for 4 hours. Each sample was then diluted with 100mM ABC and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made stage tip columns.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Campylobacter fetus</i> is commonly associated with venereal disease and abortions in cattle and sheep, and can also cause intestinal or systemic infections in humans that are immunocompromised, elderly, or exposed to infected livestock. It is also believed that <i>C. fetus</i> infection can result from the consumption or handling of contaminated food products, but <i>C. fetus</i> is rarely detected in food since isolation methods are not suited for its detection and the physiology of the organism makes culturing difficult. In the related species, <i>Campylobacter jejuni</i>, the ability to colonize the host has been linked to N-linked protein glycosylation with quantitative proteomics demonstrating that glycosylation is interconnected with cell physiology. Using label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics, we found more than 100 proteins significantly altered in expression in two <i>C. fetus</i> subsp. <i>fetus</i> protein glycosylation (<i>pgl</i>) mutants (<i>pglX</i> and <i>pglJ</i>) compared to the wild-type. Significant increases in the expression of the (NiFe)-hydrogenase HynABC, catalyzing H<sub>2</sub>-oxidation for energy harvesting, correlated with significantly increased levels of cellular nickel, improved growth in H<sub>2</sub> and increased hydrogenase activity, suggesting that N-glycosylation in <i>C. fetus</i> is involved in regulating the HynABC hydrogenase and nickel homeostasis. To further elucidate the function of the <i>C. fetus pgl</i> pathway and its enzymes, heterologous expression in <i>Escherichia coli</i> followed by mutational and functional analyses revealed that PglX and PglY are novel glycosyltransferases involved in extending the <i>C. fetus</i> hexasaccharide beyond the conserved core, while PglJ and PglA have similar activities to their homologs in <i>C. jejuni</i>. In addition, the <i>pgl</i> mutants displayed decreased motility and ethidium bromide efflux and showed an increased sensitivity to antibiotics. This work not only provides insight into the unique protein N-glycosylation pathway of <i>C. fetus</i>, but also expands our knowledge on the influence of protein N-glycosylation on <i>Campylobacter</i> cell physiology.

### Keywords
Campylobacter fetus subsp. fetus, Lfq, Proteome

### Affiliations
-Department of Microbiology and Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA. -Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Szymanski
-Department of Microbiology and Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA. -Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.


