### Accession
PXD005537

### Title
Proteomics profiling of Neuronal Mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondria are the ‘power-houses’ of all cells, generating ATP to fuel numerous pathways which are vital for cellular form and function (1). Neuronal processes and synapses present a constant demand for ATP to maintain ionic gradients and neurotransmission events (2), promoting sub-populations of mitochondria to be enriched pre- and post-synaptically (3, 4). These mitochondria display unique enzymatic (5), calcium buffering (6, 7) and antioxidant properties (8) and have thus been associated in the pathogenesis of a variety of neurodegenerative diseases where the synapse is the primary target. In this study, we employed label-free proteomics to characterize the proteomes of synaptic and non-synaptic mitochondria following biochemical isolation (5). Discrete proteomic profiles exist between the two subpopulations of mitochondria and a molecular fingerprint of these differences is seemingly conserved between mammalian species. The majority of the constituents of this grouping have been previously associated with diseases of the nervous system. In addition, bioinformatic analysis of this conserved expression pattern indicated that differences in the properties of protein complex I may represent an important specialisation of synaptic mitochondria. Following this, in vivo assays of mitochondrial candidates using Drosophila larval fillet preparations were performed. Our data demonstrates that selective knock-down of intrinsic mitochondrial proteins alter synaptic morphology which may contribute to pathological processes during ageing and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Rats: Nine male wild-type Sprague Dawley rats aged ca. 24 weeks (actual range 168-171
days) were used. Rats were group housed (3-4 per cage) in a SPF facility in open-top
cages and maintained on a 12-12h light-dark cycle (lights on at 07:00h), under
controlled temperature (22±2°C) and humidity (55±5%) with free access to drinking
water and standard 14% protein rodent deit (Harlan Teklad). Rats were killed by
conscious decapitation and brains were immediately excised. Brain stem and
cerebellum were removed and discarded. Fresh forebrains were weighed and pooled
for homogenization before mitochondrial preparations. Sheep: Three Scottish blackface sheep aged 5 years were utilized. Sheep were sacrificed at
the Farm Animal Teaching Hospital, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies,
University of Edinburgh by anaesthetisation and exsanguination. Brains were excised,
bisected at the sagittal midline and the brain stem and cerebellum were removed and
discarded. Tissues were submerged in ice cold high magnesium artificial cerebral
spinal fluid (NaCl 125mM; NaHCO3 26mM; glucose 25mM; KCl 2.5mM;
NaH2PO4(2H2O) 1.25mM; CaCl2 1mM; MgCl2 4mM) to maintain brain structural
integrity before cortical mitochondrial preparations. Mitochondrial preparations:
Methodology comprehensively reported in Lai et al (5) was employed to produce
proteomic data comparable to early biochemical reports. All procedures were carried
out at 4°C. Forebrains were homogenized by hand in isolation medium (0.32M
sucrose, 1mM K-EDTA, 10mM, Tris HCl) to give a 1:10 homogenate. The
homogenate was centrifuged at 1,300g for 3 minutes and the resulting pellet was
manually resuspended in 15ml isolation medium before recentrifugation as before.
Supernatants were pooled and centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 minutes to give the crude
mitochondrial pellet (CM). The CM pellet was resuspended in 15ml isolation medium
and 5ml of the suspension was layered into 3 tubes containing 7ml of 7.5% Ficollsucrose
medium (7% Ficoll, 0.32M sucrose, 50μM K-EDTA, 10mM Tris HCl) on top
of 7ml of 10% Ficoll-sucrose medium (10% Ficoll, 0.32M sucrose, 50μM K- EDTA,
10mM Tris HCl) and centrifuged at 99,000g for 30 minutes on a swing- out Beckman
ultracentrifuge. This resulted in a myelin (My) fraction banded at the top, a
synaptosomal (Syn) fraction at the second interphase and a ‘free’ (non-synaptic)
mitochondrial pellet (M) at the bottom of the tube. The myelin fraction was aspirated
and the synaptic fraction collected, without disturbing the pellet. This was then diluted
in 3x isolation medium and centrifuged at 18,500g for 10 minutes. The non-synaptic
mitochondrial pellet was frozen immediately on dry ice before storage at -80°C. The
resulting synaptosomal pellet was lysed and resuspended in 30ml 6mM Tris-HCl (pH
8.1) and centrifuged at 11,800g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed and the
pellet was again resuspended in 10ml of 6mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.1) and recentrifuged at
8,300g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended in
10ml of 3% Ficoll medium (3% Ficoll, 0.12M mannitol, 30mM sucrose, 25μM KEDTA,
5mM Tris-HCl). One third of this suspension was layered into 3 tubes containing 5ml 4.5% Ficoll medium (4.5% Ficoll, 0.24M mannitol, 60mM sucrose, 50μM K-EDTA, 10mM Tris-
HCl) on top of 10ml 6% Ficoll (6% Ficoll, 0.24M mannitol, 60mM sucrose, 50μM KEDTA,
10mM Tris-HCl) and centrifuged at 11,300g for 30 minutes in a swing-out Beckman ultracentrifuge. After centrifugation, the top band was removed and the intermediate band decanted and diluted with an equal volume of isolation medium. This lysate was then
centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 minutes providing synaptosomally derived mitochondria
(SM population) and an SM2 fraction (pellet). The SM and SM2 fractions were
pooled to give a greater yield for proteomic experiments and validation, frozen on dry
ice and stored at -80°C. Protein concentration assay: Samples were homogenized in label-free or RIPA buffer + 1% protease cocktail inhibitor (Thermo Scientific). After homogenization, samples were centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant containing the solubilized protein was removed and pellets discarded. Protein concentration of samples was determined using a Pierce Micro BCA assay kit according to the manufacturers instructions. 

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.Following alignment, data was filtered by retention time with features detected below 5 minutes and above 110 minutes discarded to correct for elution variability and peptides with charge state between 2 and 5 only included in the search. The runs were grouped according to subcellular localization (synaptic and nonsynaptic) and Statistical P values were automatically generated in Progenesis software through a 1 way ANOVA on the ArcSinh transform of the normalized data. Peptides were filtered by the following criteria: power <0.8, fold change >2, p<0.05
and the remaining data were exported from Progenesis for identification of individual
peptide sequences using the Uniprot Swall subspecies rattus norvegicus via Mascot
Search Engine (V2.3.2). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for
cleavage N-terminal to proline residues. Other parameters used were as follows. (i)
Variable modifications: methionine oxidation, methionine dioxidation, protein Nacetylation,
gln → pyro-glu. (ii) Fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation.
(iii) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10 ppm, ITMS- 0.6 Da. (iv) Maximum missed
cleavages: 2. (vi) False Discovery Rate: 1%. A cutoff score of >29 was used based on
Mascot probability threshold of 0.05 that the observed hit is a random event. As an
indication of identification certainty, the false discovery rate for peptide matches
above identity threshold was set at 1%. Identified proteins were re-imported into Progenesis for further processing. Proteins were subject to stringent filtering parameters to eliminate those which had <2 unique
peptides, <2-fold change between subpopulations and p>0.05 to obtain the proteins
which demonstrated the largest significant variation in expression between synaptic
and non-synaptic mitochondria. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis: IPA was performed as previously described (21) with the interaction data limited as follows: direct and indirect interactions; experimentally observed data only; 35 molecules per network; 10 networks per dataset. Prediction activation scores (z-score)
were calculated in IPA. The z-score is a statistical measure of the match between an
expected relationship direction and the observed protein expression. Positive z-scores
indicate activation (orange) and negative z-scores indicate inhibition (blue).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Synapse, Neuron, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Division of Neurobiology The Roslin Institute Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine University of Edinburgh Easter Bush Midlothian EH25 9RG SCOTLAND, UK
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Wishart
Division of Neurobiology The Roslin Institute Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine University of Edinburgh Easter Bush Midlothian EH25 9RG SCOTLAND, UK


