### Accession
PXD033627

### Title
effect of chinese madicine on plasma exosomal proteins in Primary Sjogren's syndrome

### Description
Modified Zengye Decoction, a traditional chinese medicine, can effectively alleviate SS symptoms, while its mechanism may be associated with the reduced protein expression in insulin response, porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism, and the TLR4/NF-κB pathway.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma exosomes of nine patients were divided into three random groups. Each group was pre-treated with a plasma exosome mixturefrom three patients, labeled pre-SS1, pre-SS2, and pre-SS3. Similarly, each group received post-treatment containing a mixture oftheplasma exosomes from patients treated with MZD, labeled post-SS1, post-SS2, and post-SS3.

### Data Protocol
Firstly, the MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer2.4 software and searched against the Homo sapiens database in the Universal Protein Resource Knowledge Base (UniProtKB).The precursor mass window was 15 ppm for the initial search and followed the enzymatic cleavage rule for trypsin. Amaximum of two missed cleavage sites and a 20-ppm mass tolerance for the fragment ions were allowed. The cutoff for the global false discovery rate (FDR) in the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein identification was P<0.01. Secondly, the label-free quantification (LFQ) of each identified protein was performed using the peptide signal intensities. The MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant was activated to quantify the protein abundance of the identified peptides. Match-between-runs were performed during the experimental replicates to extract the comprehensive quantification information. Perseus was used to complement a value from the normal distribution with default parameters for low-abundance proteins with missing values. Protein quantification and statistical significance analysis were performed using a two-way Student's t-test. Proteins that were quantified with a fold change(FC) of >1.5 and a significance value of P<0.05 after comparing the two groups were designated as DEPs, while log2 (FC) was used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Modified Zengye Decoction (MZD), a traditional Chinese medicine, is an effective treatment for patients with primary Sj&#xf6;gren's syndrome (pSS). <b>Purpose:</b> To evaluate the efficacy of MZD and investigate its effect on plasma exosomal proteins. <b>Methods:</b> Eighteen pSS patients were treated with MZD for 2&#xa0;weeks. The therapeutic effect was evaluated by observing the changes in clinical symptoms, laboratory parameters<b>,</b> and plasma cytokines before and after treatment. Then, the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the plasma exosomes before and after treatment were identified via label-free proteomics, while Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment were used to analyze the possible biological functions and signaling pathways involved in the exosomal DEPs. <b>Results:</b> MZD can effectively relieve the clinical symptoms of pSS patients, downregulate the plasma IgG and IgM levels, and inhibit plasma cytokine production. Thirteen DEPs were identified via label-free proteomics in the plasma exosomes before and after MZD treatment, of which 12 were downregulated proteins. GO analysis showed that these downregulated proteins were mainly related to the insulin response involved in dryness symptoms and the Gram-negative bacterial defense response and proteoglycan binding involved in infection. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that these downregulated proteins were primarily associated with the porphyrin metabolism involved in oteoarthrosis and the NF-&#x3ba;B and TLR4 pathways involved in infection. <b>Conclusion:</b> MZD can effectively alleviate SS symptoms, while its mechanism may be associated with the reduced protein expression in insulin response, porphyrin metabolism, and the TLR4/NF-&#x3ba;B pathway.

### Keywords
Proteomic; plasma exosome

### Affiliations
18302695419
Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Second Affiliated HospitalGuizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine.

### Submitter
peng yang

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Yang
Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Second Affiliated HospitalGuizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine.


