### Accession
PXD019717

### Title
Epitope mapping of an anti-plasmodium pfMSP119 antibody by Intact Transition Epitope Mapping - Targeted High-Energy Rupture of Extracted Epitopes

### Description
Rapid diagnostic tests are first line assays for diagnosing infectious diseases, such as malaria.  To minimize false positive and false negative test results in population screening assays, high quality reagents and well characterized antigens and antibodies are needed.  An important property of antigen - antibody binding is recognition specificity which best can be estimated by mapping an antibodys epitope.  The MBP-pfMSP119 antigen was chosen as mutual target for population screening.  Also, since an anti-pfMSP119 antibody is planned to function as positive control in screening assays, its binding characteristics to the antigen was investigated.  Intact Transition Epitope Mapping - Targeted High-Energy Rupture of Extracted Epitopes (ITEM-THREE) was carried out to map the epitope of a monoclonal anti-pfMSP119 antibody,  i.e. the recognized area on the MBP-pfMSP119 antigen surface.  The MBP-pfMSP119 fusion protein was cloned and expressed in E.coli which then was enriched by affinity purification on amylose resin.  The enriched and purified MBP-pfMSP119 fusion protein was structurally and functionally characterized before and after high pressure-assisted tryptic digestion  or after GluC digestion of the reduced and alkylated fusion protein.

### Sample Protocol
The anti-pfMSP119 antibody - pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 3A) was prepared by adding 6 ul of 0.52 ug/ul pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 1)  to 10 ul of 0.38 ug/ul anti-pfMSP119 antibody solution (solution 2A).  Similarly, the anti-His-tag antibody - pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 3B) was prepared by adding 1 ul of 0.52 ul pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 1)  to 8 ul of 0.3 ug/ul anti-His-tag antibody solution (solution 2B).  Also, the rituximab - pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 3C) was prepared by adding 4.5 ul of 0.52 ul pfMSP119 peptide solution (solution 1)  to 7.5 ul of 0.5 ug/ul rituximab solution (solution 2C).  All the immune complex-containing solutions (solutions 3A, 3B, 3C) were left to stand at room temperature for at least 1 h prior to nanoESI-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the nanoESI mass spectra were processed using MassLynx software, version 4.1 (Waters MS-Technologies, Manchester, United Kingdom).  Each mass spectrum was processed using the following parameters: smooth window (channels), +/- 5; number of smooths, 3, smoothing method, Savitzky Golay.

### Publication Abstract
Rapid diagnostic tests are first-line assays for diagnosing infectious diseases, such as malaria. To minimize false positive and false negative test results in population-screening assays, high-quality reagents and well-characterized antigens and antibodies are needed. An important property of antigen-antibody binding is recognition specificity, which best can be estimated by mapping an antibody's epitope on the respective antigen. We have cloned a malarial antigen-containing fusion protein, MBP-<i>pf</i>MSP1<sub>19</sub>, in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, which then was structurally and functionally characterized before and after high pressure-assisted enzymatic digestion. We then used our previously developed method, intact transition epitope mapping-targeted high-energy rupture of extracted epitopes (ITEM-THREE), to map the area on the MBP-<i>pf</i>MSP1<sub>19</sub> antigen surface that is recognized by the anti-<i>pf</i>MSP1<sub>19</sub> antibody G17.12. We identified three epitope-carrying peptides, <sup>386</sup>GRNISQHQCVKKQCPQNSGCFRHLDE<sup>411</sup>, <sup>386</sup>GRNISQHQCVKKQCPQNSGCFRHLDEREE<sup>414</sup>, and <sup>415</sup>CKCLLNYKQE<sup>424</sup>, from the GluC-derived peptide mixture. These peptides belong to an assembled (conformational) epitope on the MBP-<i>pf</i>MSP1<sub>19</sub> antigen whose identification was substantiated by positive and negative control experiments. In conclusion, our data help to establish a workflow to obtain high-quality control data for diagnostic assays, including the use of ITEM-THREE as a powerful analytical tool. Data are available via ProteomeXchange: PXD019717.

### Keywords
Malaria screening, Plasmodium falciparum, Pfmsp119 antigen, Epitope mapping, Assembled epitope

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Rostock
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany


