### Accession
PXD012643

### Title
Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of UBE2S auto-ubiquitination throughout the cell cycle.

### Description
Immunoprecipitated UBE2S from HeLa K cells synchronized in pro metaphase, anaphase and G1-phase, were analyzed by tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, the UBE2S beads suspended in 100 μl of the digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, 10 mM Iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich)) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and then supplied with 2.2 μg MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher) and incubated overnight at 37 °C.  Three replicates for each condition and total 6 samples.  The peptides were then labelled with TMT10plex as instructed by manufacturer (Thermo Fisher). The labelled peptides were mixed then dried in SpeedVac, resuspended in 5% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) and loaded to stage tips followed by fractionation by step elution with 10%, 15%, 20%, and 50% ACN/0.1%FA, then dried in SpeedVac. The dried peptides were resuspended in 0.5% FA before LC-MS/MS analysis.  The LC-MS/MS analysis were performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. Both instrument and columns used below are from Thermo Fisher. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) for 8 min at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 4-36% ACN/0.1%FA in 90 min /cycle at 120 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used the MS2 method with Top Speed at 3 sec per cycle time.  The full MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200, and the AGC was set at 4e5 with 50 msec maximum injection time. Then the most abundant multiply-charge ions (z = 3-5, above 2e5 counts) were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by HCD (38% CE) with isolation window at m/z 0.7 by quadrupole then detected in Orbitrap with 50K resolution, and AGC at 1e5 with 105 msec maximum injection time.  The precursor ions had the m/z related to K100-containing tryptic peptide ions in UBE2S as the priority:  678.3769 (4+), 678.6229 (4+), 448.9376 (3+), 678.1309 (4+), 621.3322 (4+), 620.8401 (4+), 663.8755 (4+), 664.3675 (4+).  The dynamic exclusion window was set ±10 ppm with a duration at 15 sec.  For the excised gel bands, bands were cut to small pieces then destained by 50% ACN/50mM TEAB including reduction with TCEP and alkylation with iodoacetamide in the destaining solution. Gel pieces was then digested by trypsin overnight and the peptides were extracted by 0.5% FA/50% ACN and dried in SpeedVac.  The LC-MS/MS analysis is very similar to above but with these differences: gradient is 4-32% ACN/0.1% FA, the intensity threshold of multiply charged ions for MS/MS is 5e4, and no precursor ion was set priority, and the dynamic exclusion window was set to 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine to search against the reviewed Uniprot protein database of Homo sapiens (August 2018) plus the in-house contaminate database.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 1 miss-cleavages. Carbamidomethyl at Cys and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and the dynamic modifications included Deamidation (N, Q), TMT6plex (K) and and GlyGlyTMT6plex (K) (343.206). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search.  The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS2 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Ubiquitination, Ube2s, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Institute of Cancer Research Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


