### Accession
PXD001428

### Title
Multiple protease based human phosphopeptide atlas

### Description
Site-specific phospho-antibodies are commonly used to study these changes, however only a limited number of good antibodies is available, covering just a few signaling nodes in important pathways. It is highly unlikely that specific antibodies, covering the more than hundred thousands of estimated phosphosites in human cells, will become available soon. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based approaches are becoming of interest, as these are able to monitor at least thousands of sites simultaneously. However, it has become apparent that important signaling nodes, detectable by phosphosite specific-antibodies are quite often not observed in these large-scale in-depth MS-based studies. Here we addressed this issue by using multiple proteases for protein digestion, thereby increasing the size of the accessible and detectable phosphoproteome. We demonstrate that nearly each phosphosite has a preferred protease which favors detection by MS. For specific sites the use of alternative proteases increases the intensity by more than 1,000 fold. Based on the results we define and make publicly available a human phosphopeptide atlas of more than 37,771 unique phosphopeptides, correlating to over 18,000 unique phosphosites, that will be useful for both shot-gun as well as targeted MRM/PRM/SWATH based phosphoproteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T lymphoma cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin. After treatment (10 μM PGE2, 10 min) Jurkat cells were washed twice with PBS and harvested. Cell lysis was performed on ice by sonication in buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture. Proteins were reduced with DTT at a final concentration of 4 mM at 56 °C for 25 min; subsequently samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 8 mM at RT for 30 min in the dark. For proteolytic digestion, the urea concentration was diluted to 1 M before addition of proteases (AspN, chymotrypsin, GluC, trypsin and LysC). An enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 was used. The digestion was quenched by acidification to 5% of formic acid (FA). The digests were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried in vacuo and stored at -80 °C for further use. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed essentially as previously described (Zhou et al., 2013). Peptides were subjected to reversed phase nLC-MS/MS analysis using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 with an analytical column heater (40°C) and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite. Peptides were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) before being separated on the analytical column (Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm). Peptides were chromatographically separated by a 150 min gradient from 7% to 30% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 100 nL/min. The total measurement time for each sample was 180 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Briefly, survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, scanning from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 using an AGC setting of 1e6 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and precursors with either unknown or 1+ charge states were excluded. After the survey scan the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent decision tree-based ion trap CID or ETD fragmentation (Frese et al., 2011; Swaney et al., 2008). The normalized collision energy for CID was set to 35% and supplemental activation for ETD and dynamic exclusion were enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 60 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted from their native raw file format to the mgf or mzML file format using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 ([Node_05] is ETD, [Node_08] is CID). Subsequently the data was searched against a Swissprot Homo sapiens database version 2012_09 (40,992 sequences) and, separately, against the corresponding reversed decoy database using the MS-GF+ search tool, version 9881 (Kim et al., 2010). The database search was performed with the following parameters: mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses and appropriate settings for activation technique and fragmentation spectrum mass accuracy. The enzymatic parameters were set to allow fully enzymatic termini for each peptide, for the respective enzyme (trypsin_KR, LysC_K, AspN_DE, GluC_DE, chymotrypsin_FLWYM). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at the PSMs level. The minimum and maximum peptide lengths allowed were 6 and 45 amino acids, respectively. The phosphorylation site localization of the identified phosphopeptides was performed using the phosphoRS algorithm 3.1 (Taus et al., 2011). A site localization probability (pRS) of at least 0.75 was used as threshold for the phosphoresidue localization. Finally, the mzIdentML output files were converted to plain text files by the mzidLibrary tool 1.6 (Ghali et al., 2013). To evaluate which proteins would be more suitable in detecting a particular site, we made use of spectral counting (Old et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2006). The total spectral counts in enrichment replicates of the five different protease data sets have variations in depth and therefore total PSMs. For comparison of the different data sets, we have used a spectral count score (SCS) for all phosphorylation sites in each data set. The SCS for a given phosphorylation site was calculated as follows: (1) the amount of PSMs of that phosphosite in a given protease data set was divided by total spectral counts obtained by that protease, then (2) the obtained value was normalized to 100% on the sum of the five values obtained from each protease. For label-free analysis, raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The database search was performed in Andromeda search engine with the following parameters: an initial mass tolerance of ±20 ppm and a final mass tolerance of ±6 ppm for precursor masses, ±0.6 Da for CID and ETD ion trap fragment ions, allowing two missed cleavages for trypsin, three for LysC and chymotrypsin, five for GluC and AspN. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N‐terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for peptides, proteins and phosphosites, the minimum peptide length allowed was six amino acids and a minimum Andromeda peptide score of 60 was required. The match between runs feature was enabled. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 and a score difference of at least 5 were used as threshold for the localization of phosphorylated residues.

### Publication Abstract
Although mass-spectrometry-based screens enable thousands of protein phosphorylation sites to be monitored simultaneously, they often do not cover important regulatory sites. Here, we hypothesized that this is due to the fact that nearly all large-scale phosphoproteome studies are initiated by trypsin digestion. We tested this hypothesis using multiple proteases for protein digestion prior to Ti(4+)-IMAC-based enrichment. This approach increases the size of the detectable phosphoproteome substantially and confirms the considerable tryptic bias in public repositories. We define and make available a less biased human phosphopeptide atlas of 37,771 unique phosphopeptides, correlating to 18,430 unique phosphosites, of which fewer than 1/3 were identified in more than one protease data set. We demonstrate that each protein phosphorylation site can be linked to a preferred protease, enhancing its detection by mass spectrometry (MS). For specific sites, this approach increases their detectability by more than 1,000-fold.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteases, Kinase, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck,
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


