### Accession
PXD016741

### Title
System-wide analyses of the fission yeast poly(A)+ RNA interactome reveal insights into organisation and function of RNA-protein complexes

### Description
Production, function, and turnover of mRNA are orchestrated by multi-subunit machineries that play a central role in gene expression. Within these molecular machines, interactions with the target mRNA are mediated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), and the accuracy and dynamics of these RNA-protein interactions are essential for their function. Here, we show that fission yeast whole cell poly(A)+ RNA-protein crosslinking data provides system-wide information on the organisation and function of the RNA-protein complexes. We evaluate relative enrichment of cellular RBPs on poly(A)+ RNA to identify interactors with high RNA9 binding activity and provide key information about the RNA-binding properties of large multi10 protein complexes, such as the mRNA 3’ end processing machinery (cleavage and polyadenylation factor, CPF) and the RNA exosome. We demonstrate that different functional modules within CPF differ in their ability to interact with RNA. Importantly, we reveal that CPF forms additional contacts with RNA via the Fip1 subunit of the polyadenylation module and two subunits of the nuclease module. In addition, our data highlights the central role of the RNA helicase Mtl1 in RNA degradation by the exosome as mutations in Mtl1 lead to 16 disengagement of the exosome from RNA. We examine how routes of substrate access to the complex are affected upon mutation of exosome subunits. Our results provide important insights into how different components of the exosome contribute to engagement of the complex with substrate RNA. Overall, our data uncover how multi-subunit cellular machineries interact with RNA, on a proteome-wide scale.

### Sample Protocol
enrichment of RNA-binding proteins was acheived using RIC, FASP digestion.

### Data Protocol
Protein ID and label free qaunt was performed with Maxquant and statistical analsysis was carried out in the R environment

### Publication Abstract
Large RNA-binding complexes play a central role in gene expression and orchestrate production, function, and turnover of mRNAs. The accuracy and dynamics of RNA-protein interactions within these molecular machines are essential for their function and are mediated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Here, we show that fission yeast whole-cell poly(A)<sup>+</sup> RNA-protein crosslinking data provide information on the organization of RNA-protein complexes. To evaluate the relative enrichment of cellular RBPs on poly(A)<sup>+</sup> RNA, we combine poly(A)<sup>+</sup> RNA interactome capture with a whole-cell extract normalization procedure. This approach yields estimates of in vivo RNA-binding activities that identify subunits within multiprotein complexes that directly contact RNA. As validation, we trace RNA interactions of different functional modules of the 3' end processing machinery and reveal additional contacts. Extending our analysis to different mutants of the RNA exosome complex, we explore how substrate channeling through the complex is affected by mutation. Our data highlight the central role of the RNA helicase Mtl1 in regulation of the complex and provide insights into how different components contribute to engagement of the complex with substrate RNA. In addition, we characterize RNA-binding activities of novel RBPs that have been recurrently detected in the RNA interactomes of multiple species. We find that many of these, including cyclophilins and thioredoxins, are substoichiometric RNA interactors in vivo. Because RBPomes show very good overall agreement between species, we propose that the RNA-binding characteristics we observe in fission yeast are likely to apply to related proteins in higher eukaryotes as well.

### Keywords
Rna exosome complex; rna interactome capture; rna-binding proteins; rna-protein crosslinking; ribonucleoprotein complexes

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Shabaz Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Lidia Vasilieva
University of Oxford


