### Accession
PXD033590

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of the exoproteome of a wild type and cps1 mutant strains of the filamentous fungus Botrytis cinerea.

### Description
Botrytis cinerea is the causing agent of grey mould on hundreds of plants cultivated in fields, tunnels and greenhouses worldwide, including economically important crops. Considering the central role of the fungal cell wall in the interaction between fungi and plants, the role of a conserved putative polysaccharide synthase in the physiology, development and virulence of B. cinerea was explored. To this aim, the BcCps1 gene was deleted and the mutant strain was characterized. In order to reveal the impact of the mutation on the fungal secretion, the exo-proteome of the wild type and mutant strains were prepared for comparative analysis of their contents.

### Sample Protocol
Four independent biological replicates on exoproteome extracts for cps1 mutants and wild-type strains have been performed. 5 µg of proteins were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. The steps of sample preparation and protein digestion by the trypsin were performed as previously described [Rascle C. et al, 2018, Environ Microbiol Rep]. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 91 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200), a standard AGC target and an injection time in automatic mode, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of R=30000 (@m/z 200), an standard AGC target and a maximum injection time in automatic mode. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a ENSEMBL botrytis cinerea ASL83294v1 database (13749 entries, release 53). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was pjeanerformed using Percolator algorithm [Käll L et al, 2007, Nat Methods] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The quantification parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based (6) Imputation mode : Low Abundance Resampling and (7) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and an abundance ratio (for each biological replicate) seen 4 times with the same trend.

### Publication Abstract
The fungal cell wall occupies a central place in the interaction between fungi and their environment. This study focuses on the role of the putative polysaccharide synthase Cps1 in the physiology, development and virulence of the grey mold-causing agent <i>Botrytis cinerea</i>. Deletion of the <i>Bccps1</i> gene does not affect the germination of the conidia (asexual spores) or the early mycelial development, but it perturbs hyphal expansion after 24 h, revealing a two-phase hyphal development that has not been reported so far. It causes a severe reduction of mycelial growth in a solid medium and modifies hyphal aggregation into pellets in liquid cultures. It strongly impairs plant penetration, plant colonization and the formation of sclerotia (survival structures). Loss of the BcCps1 protein associates with a decrease in glucans and glycoproteins in the fungus cell wall and the up-accumulation of 132 proteins in the mutant's exoproteome, among which are fungal cell wall enzymes. This is accompanied by an increased fragility of the mutant mycelium, an increased sensitivity to some environmental stresses and a reduced adhesion to plant surface. Taken together, the results support a significant role of Cps1 in the cell wall biology of <i>B. cinerea</i>.

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Fungal cell wall, Secretomics.

### Affiliations
Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie, UMR 5240, Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bayer SAS, Lyon, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruel
Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie, UMR 5240, Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bayer SAS, Lyon, France.


