### Accession
PXD040521

### Title
Succinylation in pseudorabies virus infection

### Description
We examined the global succinylation during PRV infection through a 4D label free quantitative proteomics method, which is the conventional separation of the three dimensions of mass-to-charge ratio, retention time, and ion intensity with the inclusion of the ion separation as a fourth dimension. We analyzed the function of some key enzymes that underwent succinylation and determine whether viral proteins undergo succinylation.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, PK-15 cells were collected and sonicated on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China) in lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors. Then, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation and digested by trypsin. The tryptic peptides were then incubated with anti-succinyllysine antibody conjugated agarose beads (PTM biolabs, Hangzhou). After washing and desalting, peptides were separated on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics, USA). Next, the peptides were submitted to capillary source and the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, USA) mass spectrometry. At the TOF detector, precursors and fragments were examined using an MS/MS scan with a range of 100 to 1700 m/z. In addition, the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation mode of the timsTOF Pro was used. Ten PASEF-MS/MS images were obtained every cycle, with the fragmentation of precursors with charge states 0 to 5 being the preferred range.

### Data Protocol
Utilizing the MaxQuant search engine (Germany), the collected MS data were examined. Tandem mass spectra were looked for using the SwissProt (Switzerland), and Uniprot (USA) and reverse decoy databases together.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Succinylation: pseudorabies virus

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Insititute of Animal Science, Wenzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xiaoyong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyong Chen
Wenzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences


