### Accession
PXD006665

### Title
A Proteomic Survey of Enzymes in the Plasma and Gastric Fluid of Burmese Python

### Description
Background:  Exceptional and extreme feeding behaviour makes the Burmese python (Python bivittatus) an interesting model to study physiological remodelling and metabolic adaptation in response to refeeding after prolonged starvation. In this study, we used transcriptome sequencing of five visceral organs during fasting as well as 24h and 48h after ingestion of a large meal to unravel the postprandial changes in Burmese pythons. We first used the pooled data to perform a de novo assembly of the transcriptome and supplemented this with a proteomic survey of enzymes in the plasma and gastric fluid. Results: We constructed a high-quality transcriptome with 34,423 transcripts of which 19,713 (57%) were annotated. Among highly expressed genes (FPKM>100 in one tissue) we found the transition from fasting to digestion was associated with differential expression of 43 genes in the heart, 206 genes in the liver, 114 genes in the stomach, 89 genes in the pancreas and 158 genes in the intestine. We interrogated the function of these genes to test previous hypotheses on the response to feeding. We also used the transcriptome to identify 314 secreted proteins in the gastric fluid of the python Conclusions:  Digestion was associated with an upregulation of genes related to metabolic processes, and translational changes therefore appears to support the postprandial rise in metabolism. We identify stomach-related proteins from a digesting individual and demonstrate that the sensitivity of modern LC-MS/MS equipment allows the identification of gastric juice proteins that are present during digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of samples for proteomics analyses  Two Burmese pythons (weighing 400 and 800 g, respectively) were fed a rodent meal corresponding to approximately 25% of their body mass. Approximately 24 h into the postprandial period the animals were euthanized with an overdose of pentobarbital (100 mg kg-1, i.m.). Immediately afterwards, an incision was made to expose the stomach, which was then ligated at the lower oesophagus and the pylorus, before the intact stomach was excised by a cleavage just below the two sutures resulting in the stomach being released from the rest of the animal. All undigested mouse remains were manually removed by forceps and 25 ml/kg tris-buffered saline (TBS) was injected into the stomach. The stomach was then ligated at the opened end, rinsed by gently shaking the tissue, and finally the digestive fluid-containing solution was collected and stored on ice. To ensure collection of all gastric fluid, the stomach was rinsed additional two-three times with 12 ml/kg TBS. Subsequently, the samples were filtered and centrifuged, and the supernatant stored at -80 °C. We also obtained two samples of gastric juice from a third individual (200 g) that had been fed 4 g peptone (Sigma Aldrich), suspended in water. Peptone is a mixture of small peptides and amino acids and the solution was injected directly into the stomach and after three hours the snake was euthanized by an overdose of pentobarbital. The stomach was removed, rinsed with TBS, and a single sample collected and stored, as described above. We analysed two samples from each of the three individuals, resulting in a total of six digestive fluid samples being analysed by MS/MS. In addition, we obtained a single plasma sample from each snake by direct cardiac puncture followed by centrifugation and storage for later analysis.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analyses The proteins in the six obtained python digestive fluid samples were recovered by trichloroacetic acid precipitation. The resulting pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea, 5 mM DTT, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in order to denature and reduce the proteins. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 25 mM. The samples were incubated for additional 20 minutes at room temperature and then diluted five times with a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 buffer before the addition of approximately 2 μg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) per 50 μg protein in the sample. Subsequently, the samples were incubated at 37 °C for approximately 16 h. The proteins in the plasma sample were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin, as described for the digestive fluid samples. Finally, the resulting peptides in all samples were micropurified and stored at -20 C until the LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analyses Nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, EASY-nLC II) connected to a mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600, AB Sciex) equipped with an electrospray ionization source (NanoSpray III, AB Sciex) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6 control. The samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, injected, trapped and desalted isocratically on a precolumn whereupon the peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (16 cm × 75 μm i.d.) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Marisch GmbH). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient from 5 % to 35 % phase B (0.1 % formic acid and 90 % acetonitrile). An information dependent acquisition method was employed allowing up to 25 MS/MS spectra per cycle of 2.8 s.   Protein identification and filtering of data The six collected MS files, related to digested fluid, were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX) and the “proteinpilot MGF” parameters. Subsequently, the files were merged to a single MGF-file using Mascot daemon. The resulting file (encompassing 122538 MS/MS queries) was used to interrogate the 16693 Mus musculus sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (version 2014_10) and the generated python database encompassing 21131 protein sequences using Mascot 2.5.0 (Matrix Science)[67]. Trypsin, with up to one missed cleavage allowed, was selected as enzyme; carbamidomethyl was employed as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and proline was selected as variable modifications. The instrument setting was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF, the mass accuracy of the precursor and product ions was 15 ppm and 0.2 da respectively, and the significance threshold (p) was set to 0.01 and an expect cut-off at 0.005. The data obtained by the LC-MS/MS-analysis of the python plasma proteome was analysed as described for the digestive fluid samples, except that the Mus musculus sequences were not interrogated. This dataset contains 9224 MS/MS queries. All obtained results were subsequently parsed using MS Data Miner v. 1.3.0 [68], and protein hits were only accepted if they were identified based on two unique peptides. Semi-quantitative proteomics data was obtained using the emPAI-values given by the Mascot 2.5.0 software after analysis of the MS/MS data [69].   To identify the proteins secreted into the python stomach, identified python plasma proteins, as well as the mouse protein homologs were removed from the list of identified python digestive fluid proteins. With regard to the removal of prey protein homologs, the overall mouse protein names were used to search the list of python proteins (e.g. “collagen” was used as search term, not “collagen alpha-1(I) chain”) and to identify python proteins that were identified based on homology with mouse. These proteins were removed from the list of stomach-secreted python proteins. For each identified protein remaining on the list, we reassessed the annotation of the python sequence, i.e. sequence comparisons were performed using blastp version 2.2.30, and in addition, UniProt and NCBI protein databases, as well as PubMed and SignalP 4.1, were interrogated to identify functional properties and cellular location of the identified proteins. Plasma proteins, remaining collagen homologous, intracellular proteins, and membrane proteins were discarded from the list of identified python stomach secretome proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Exceptional and extreme feeding behaviour makes the Burmese python (Python bivittatus) an interesting model to study physiological remodelling and metabolic adaptation in response to refeeding after prolonged starvation. In this study, we used transcriptome sequencing of 5 visceral organs during fasting as well as 24 hours and 48 hours after ingestion of a large meal to unravel the postprandial changes in Burmese pythons. We first used the pooled data to perform a de novo assembly of the transcriptome and supplemented this with a proteomic survey of enzymes in the plasma and gastric fluid. We constructed a high-quality transcriptome with 34&#xa0;423 transcripts, of which 19&#xa0;713 (57%) were annotated. Among highly expressed genes (fragments per kilo base per million sequenced reads &gt; 100 in 1 tissue), we found that the transition from fasting to digestion was associated with differential expression of 43 genes in the heart, 206 genes in the liver, 114 genes in the stomach, 89 genes in the pancreas, and 158 genes in the intestine. We interrogated the function of these genes to test previous hypotheses on the response to feeding. We also used the transcriptome to identify 314 secreted proteins in the gastric fluid of the python. Digestion was associated with an upregulation of genes related to metabolic processes, and translational changes therefore appear to support the postprandial rise in metabolism. We identify stomach-related proteins from a digesting individual and demonstrate that the sensitivity of modern liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry equipment allows the identification of gastric juice proteins that are present during digestion.

### Keywords
Plasma, Gastric fluid, Lc-ms/ms, Burmese python

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Bioscience, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Jinjie Duan

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Wang
Professor, Department of Bioscience, Aarhus University, Denmark


