### Accession
PXD012903

### Title
Analysis of protein regulation in cucumber leaves after Corynespora cassiicola inoculation: a proteomic approach

### Description
Corynespora leaf spot (CSL), caused by Corynespora cassiicola, has become one of the most important foliar diseases of cultivated cucumber. However, the defense mechanisms of cucumber plants in response to C. cassiicola are still poorly understood. Here, proteins from resistant plants were analyzed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). A total of 286 differentially expressed proteins were identified (P<0.05, ratio>1.2 or <0.83) at 6 and 24 h after pathogen inoculation in the resistant cucumber cultivar Jinyou 38. Some of the early responses to C. cassiicola infection were revealed, and four vital clues regarding the resistance of Cucumis sativus to cucumber CLS were discovered. First, the proteomic approach revealed the modulation of signaling pathways in resistant cucumber plants in response to C. cassiicola infection. Second, the plant immune system recognizes the pathogen and initiates the expression of basal immune response proteins, including those related to defense and stress responses, signal transduction, cell metabolism and redox regulation. Third, the common stress pathways were activated by C. cassiicola; in particular, mildew resistance locus O (MLO) proteins played a crucial role in the prevention of CLS. Fourth, the rapid activation of the carbohydrate and secondary metabolic pathways, the modification and reinforcement of cell walls, and the adjustment of the apoplectic environment to high-stress conditions were crucial in cucumber resistance to CLS disease. Overall, our data increase the knowledge of incompatible interactions between plants and pathogens and provide new insight into the contribution of molecular processes in cucumber to disease resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. The resistant cucumber seedlings were kept at 25 °C growth after C. cassiicola inoculation, and then, the second leaf collected at each time (0 h, 6 h and 24 h) were divided into three groups (three leaves per group). Frozen samples were finely ground, and the powder was extracted in a 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid/acetone solution containing 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at -20 °C for 1 h. After extraction, the solution was centrifuged at 10,000×g for 45 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was vacuum-dried and solubilized in 1/10 volumes of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). After a 3-min incubation in boiling water, the suspensions were ultrasonicated (80 w, ten ultrasonic bursts of 10 s each with gap of 15 s) and then incubated for 3 min. The crude extract was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000×g for 10 min. The protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Promega, USA). The total protein samples were 300 μg at each time point for iTRAQ-based comparative proteomic analysis. iTRAQ labeling and iTRAQ Labeling. iTRAQ analysis was conducted at Shanghai Hoogen Biotechnology Company. Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure, and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 4-plex/8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μL of ethanol and added to the respective peptide mixture. The samples were labeled as (Sample1)-113, (Sample2)-114, (Sample3)-115, (Sample4)-116, (Sample5)-117, (Sample6)-118, (Sample7)-119, (Sample8)-121, and were multiplexed and vacuum dried. Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Chromatography. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated via SCX chromatography with an AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with 2 mL of buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 A, PolyLC Inc., Maryland, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 0-10% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 2 min, 10-20% buffer B for 25 min, 20-45% buffer B for 5 min, and 50-100% buffer B for 5 min. Elution was monitored via absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every min. The collected fractions (approximately 30 fractions) were combined into 10 pools and desalted on C18 cartridges. Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS MS analysis. Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to an Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ten microliters of each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (5 μg) was loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5 μm resin in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 140 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method in which the most abundant precursor ions were dynamically chosen from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The determination of the target value was based on predictive automatic gain control (pAGC). The dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Cucurbitaceae database and a decoy database using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da; enzyme=trypsin; missed cleavage=2; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-term); variable modification, oxidation (M); FDR≤0.01. Bioinformatic analysis of proteins. Three replicates of the technique were used in the experiment. Two biological replicates were performed on the control and the rest were performed three biological replicates. All data are presented as statistical analyses were performed by Student’s t-test. The protein (P-values <0.05, ratio> 1.2 or <0.83) were considered as significant differentially expressed. P-values and Ratio-values were assessed by Excel 2007. Differentially expressed proteins were mapped to Gene Ontology (GO) terms, including biological process, cellular component and molecular function, via local BLAST against a reference database downloaded from a website (GO-Annotation@EBI). The metabolic pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins was conducted using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway database (http://www.kegg.jp).

### Publication Abstract
Cucumber target leaf spot (TLS) disease caused by Corynespora cassiicola has become one of the most important fungal foliar diseases of cultivated cucumbers. However, the defense mechanisms of cucumber plants (Cucumis sativus) against C. cassiicola are still poorly understood. Here, proteins from resistant cucumber plants were analyzed using iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification) method. A total of 286 differentially expressed proteins were identified (p &lt; 0.05, ratio &gt; 1.2 or &lt; 0.83) 6 and 24 h after pathogen inoculation in the resistant cultivar Jinyou 38 (the data are available via ProteomeXchange; identifier, PXD012903). Some of the early responses to C. cassiicola infection were revealed, and four factors related to the resistance of cucumber plants to TLS were discovered. First, the proteomic approach revealed modulation of signaling pathways in resistant cucumber plants in response to C. cassiicola infection. Second, the plant immune system recognizes the pathogen and initiates expression of immune response proteins, including those related to plant defense, stress response, signal transduction, cell metabolism, and redox regulation. Third, C. cassiicola activates common stress response pathways; in particular, mildew resistance locus O (MLO) proteins were found to play a crucial role in the TLS prevention. Fourth, rapid activation of the carbohydrate and secondary metabolic pathways, modification and reinforcement of cell walls, and adjustment of the apoplastic environment to the highly stressful conditions were crucial in the cucumber resistance to TLS. Overall, our data contribute to the understanding of interactions between plants and their pathogens and provide new insight into molecular processes involved in the resistance of cucumber plants to disease.

### Keywords
Corynespora cassiicola, Defense-related proteins, Itraq, Cucumber, Histochemical staining, Qrt-pcr

### Affiliations
15840135256
College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, PR China

### Submitter
Guangchao Y

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyan Fan
College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, PR China


