### Accession
PXD012154

### Title
Coxsackievirus B persistence modifies the secretome of pancreatic ductal cells in a virus-strain-specific manner, part 2

### Description
The group B Coxsackieviruses can establish persistent infections in human cells, and these infections have been linked to chronic diseases including type 1 diabetes. Still, only little is known about persistent Coxsackievirus B infection induced changes in human pancreas. We have established persistent Coxsackievirus B1 infections in human pancreatic duct cell line using two different virus strains, and studied infection-induced changes in protein secretion using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Persistent Coxsackievirus B1 infections caused broad changes in protein secretion, for example changes regulated secretory pathway. Strikingly, many changes differed between the virus strains, including extensive shut down of antiviral immune responses by one of the viruses. Our results provide novel information about persistent Coxsackievirus B infection induced changes in human pancreas and about the potential heterogeneity in the outcomes of the infections.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture supernatants of PANC-1 cells with persistent CVB1 infection and non-infected cells were concentrated using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter units (Merc Millipore). This was followed by protein in-solution digestion using trypsin. Sample clean-up was done using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters). The samples were then analyzed in triplicate using QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann 2008). The identifications were performed against a combined SwissProt human and Uniprot enterovirus sequence database with added iRT peptide (Biognosys) sequences and common contaminants database included in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation was used as a variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Further data processing and statistical analyses were performed using Perseus software (Tyanova et al. 2016) using the normalized LFQintensities from MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Persistent infection, Enterovirus, Secretome, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University Finland

### Submitter
Niina Lietzen

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University Finland


