### Accession
PXD037709

### Title
The TriMet_DB: a manually curated database of the metabolic proteins of Triticum aestivum

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based wheat proteomics is challenging because the current interpretation of mass spectrometry data relies on public databases that are not exhaustive (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) or contain many redundant and poor or un-annotated entries (UniProtKB/TrEMBL). Here we report the development of a manually curated database of the metabolic proteins of Triticum aestivum (hexaploid wheat), named TriMet_DB (Triticum aestivum Metabolic Proteins DataBase). The manually curated TriMet_DB was generated in FASTA format, so that it can be read directly by programs used to interpret the mass spectrometry data. Furthermore, the complete list of entries included in the TriMet_DB is reported in a freely available resource, which includes for each protein the description, the gene code, the protein family,and the allergen name (if any). To evaluate its performance, the TriMet_DB was used to interpret the mass spectrometry data acquired on the metabolic protein fraction extracted from the MEC cultivar of Triticum aestivum.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and preparation  Grain of the bread making wheat (Triticum aestivum) cultivar MEC was grown at CREA-CI, Foggia. 200 mg of wheat flour were extracted in 2 mL of extraction buffer (0.4 M NaCl, 0.067 M K2HPO4, pH 7.6) for 15 min under continuous stirring at 20°C. The insoluble fraction was spinned down at 13523 x g, for 15 min at 4°C, in an Eppendorf centrifuge (Eppendorf srl, Milan, Italy). The pellet material was separated and the extraction procedure was repeated twice. The supernatants from these extractions were pulled and stored at -80°C until required. The concentration for each extract was determined by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Milan, Italy). Finally, 50 µg of each sample were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and digestedby porcine trypsin. Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim ®Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm i. d. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min at 40°C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 20% in 32 min, 20% to 40% in 30 min, 40% to 60% in 20 min and 60% to 98% in 15 min, finishing by holding 98% B 5 min, 98% to 5% in 1 min. and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 20 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using a source voltage of 1.75 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 200 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (@ 200 m/z). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 2÷4 and intensity above the threshold of 5∙103 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, meaning it would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminished to zero or 3 s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option (i.e. by using all parallelizable time during full scan detection for MS/MS precursor injection and detection). To assess the reproducibility of the available MS data, the RP-nHPLC/nESI-MS/MS analysis and the subsequent database search were carried out in triplicate. Mass spectrometer calibration was performed by using the Pierce® LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data, obtained by the triplicate LC-MS/MS runs, were processed using PEAKS X de novo sequencing software (v. 10.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada). Data were searched against the manually curated TriMet_DB here compiled (constituted by 3269 entries), and against the SwissProt database restricted to the reviewed T. aestivum entries (379, release May 2021; hereafter called: T. aestivum SwissProt_DB). Database search was carried out using the following parameters: i) full-tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; ii) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; and iii) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set to 10 ppm and the max fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤ 0.1%. Proteins containing the same peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony (or Occam’s razor) [33,34]. In a single database search, a protein was considered confidentially identified if it fulfilled both of the following requirements: i) a minimum of two peptides with a score above the peptide filtering threshold matched; ii) the list of the matched peptides included at least a unique peptide (i.e. a peptide with a score above the peptide filtering threshold that can be mapped to only one protein group). Then, to produce the final list of proteins identified by searching both databases, only those proteins identified at least in two out of three LC-MS/MS replicates were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Mass-spectrometry-based wheat proteomics is challenging because the current interpretation of mass spectrometry data relies on public databases that are not exhaustive (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) or contain many redundant and poor or un-annotated entries (UniProtKB/TrEMBL). Here, we report the development of a manually curated database of the metabolic proteins of <i>Triticum aestivum</i> (hexaploid wheat), named TriMet_DB (Triticum aestivum Metabolic Proteins DataBase). The manually curated TriMet_DB was generated in FASTA format so that it can be read directly by programs used to interpret the mass spectrometry data. Furthermore, the complete list of entries included in the TriMet_DB is reported in a freely available resource, which includes for each protein the description, the gene code, the protein family, and the allergen name (if any). To evaluate its performance, the TriMet_DB was used to interpret the MS data acquired on the metabolic protein fraction extracted from the cultivar MEC of <i>Triticum aestivum</i>. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037709.

### Keywords
Manually curated database; mass spectrometry-based proteomics; wheat; triticum aestivum; metabolic proteins

### Affiliations
University of Catania

### Submitter
Antonella Di Francesco

### Lab Head
Dr Vincenzo Cunsolo
University of Catania


