### Accession
PXD039136

### Title
Human,Embryonic Kidney Cells(293T-Vector/Flag-△50),LC-MSMS

### Description
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging disease caused by progerin accumulation. However, the mechanism of how progerin causes cell defects is unclear in HGPS cells. To further investigate the possible mechanism, we used Flag-tagged progerin as bait in mass spectrometry to survey the possible regulatory factors.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged progerin was transfected into HEK-293T cells. PEI reagent was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were lysed in buffer A mixed with protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche) after 48 h. 30 μL anti-Flag affinity gel (Biotool, Kirchberg, Switzerland, Cat.No.B23102) was added and incubated for 16 h at 4°C. The beads were washed three times using 1×Tris saline buffer [50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4) and 150 mM NaCl)] for 5 min each. Flag-progerin protein was purified from HEK-293T cells, followed by SDS–PAGE analysis. The gel was stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Progerin-binding proteins were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry performed at APTBIO (Shanghai, China).

### Data Protocol
The raw file of mass spectrometry was retrieved from the corresponding database using the software Mascot 2.2, and finally the identified protein results were obtained. The database search parameters were as follows: Enzyme-Trypsin, Database-uniprot_human_174418_20181101.fasta, Fixed modifications-Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications-Oxidation (M), Missed Cleavage-2, Peptide Mass Tolerance-20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance-0.1 Da, Filter by score >=20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Binding protein, Lc-msms, Progerin, 293t

### Affiliations
The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
Northeast Normal University

### Submitter
Na Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Lu
The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China


