### Accession
PXD014188

### Title
Investigating the Succinylome and Malonylome of Schizophrenia

### Description
The succinylome and malonylome of human oligodendrocyte precursors (MO3.13 line) and postmortem brain tissue (whole lysates and mitochondrial enrichments) were studied with shotgun mass spectrometry. The goal was to determine what changes in oligodendrocytes are induced with the addition of the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 and compare this with schizophrenia brain tissue; to visualize the changes that antipsychotics have on the succinylome and malonylome and how this may relate to their side effects; to see what changes induced by MK-801 are returned to more control-like levels and how this may relate to mechanisms of drug action; and to see what changes in these PTMs may exist in vivo in patients with schizophrenia compared to healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial enrichment was performed with a Dounce tube and centrifugal separation. All lysates were reduced and alkylated before being digested with trypsin in gel. Samples were injected into an Acquity M-Class HPLC coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Glu-Fib was used in the lock mass channel.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (version 3.0.6039) aligned the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) before identifying the peptides and proteins in each sample and performing relative quantitation. Protein identification was performed using the following parameters: maximum ion charge of +8, trypsin cleaving sites (up to one missed cleavage), maximum protein mass of 600 kDa, fixed carbamidomethyl C, variable oxidation M, variable acylation (succinylation or malonylation) K, minimum of 2 fragments per peptide, 5 fragments per protein, and 1 peptide per protein, using the Uniprot revised Homo sapiens database (February, 2018 for post-mortem studies and October, 2018 for MO3.13 studies). An FDR limit of 4% was used with an on-the-fly-reversed list generated by Progenesis. CSV tables from Progenesis were exported containing identifications with mass error < 20 ppm. Peptides containing the modification of interest and ANOVA = 5% for quantitation were selected for.

### Publication Abstract
Two protein post-translational modifications, lysine succinylation and malonylation, are implicated in protein regulation, glycolysis, and energy metabolism. The precursors of these modifications, succinyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA, are key players in central metabolic processes. Both modification profiles have been proven to be responsive to metabolic stimuli, such as hypoxia. As mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic dysregulation are implicated in schizophrenia and other psychiatric illnesses, these modification profiles have the potential to reveal yet another layer of protein regulation and can furthermore represent targets for biomarkers that are indicative of disease as well as its progression and treatment. In this work, data from shotgun mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics were compiled and analyzed to probe the succinylome and malonylome of postmortem brain tissue from patients with schizophrenia against controls and the human oligodendrocyte precursor cell line MO3.13 with the dizocilpine chemical model for schizophrenia, three antipsychotics, and co-treatments. Several changes in the succinylome and malonylome were seen in these comparisons, revealing these modifications to be a largely under-studied yet important form of protein regulation with broad potential applications.

### Keywords
Malonylation, Antipsychotics, Mk-801, Schizophrenia, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), R. Monteiro Lobato, 255 – Campinas/SP 13083-862, São Paulo, Brazil
UNICAMP

### Submitter
Bradley Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), R. Monteiro Lobato, 255 – Campinas/SP 13083-862, São Paulo, Brazil


