### Accession
PXD045042

### Title
Adipose triglyceride lipase is a therapeutic target in advanced prostate cancer that promotes metabolic plasticity

### Description
The project aims to understand whether phosphorylation of ATGL changes any of its lipase interactors.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry were carried out as described previously [PMID: 31442056] with slight modifications. The protein lysate was incubated with 5µg of anti V5 antibody [Abcam ab15828] followed by incubation with 20µl Dynabeads Protein A beads [Invitrogen 10002D] for 1hour at 4oC. The protein complex was eluted from the beads using 2× Laemmli buffer and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. In-gel digestion was performed using trypsin protease and the entire lane was processed to generate two pools of peptides. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a nanoLC1200 system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ETD (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
. The MS raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher) with Mascot algorithm (Mascot 2.5, Matrix Science). The data was searched against the homo sapiens protein database from NCBI refseq [updated 2020_03_24]. Dynamic modification of Oxidation, protein N-terminal Acetylation, Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine was allowed.  The precursor mass tolerance was confined within 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.5dalton and a maximum of two missed cleavage with trypsin enzyme was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR). The gene product inference and quantification were done with label-free iBAQ approach using ‘gpGrouper’ algorithm [PMID: 30093420].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Advanced prostate cancer, Phosphorylation, Atgl, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Associate Professor, Department of Cancer Systems Imaging, Division of Diagnostic Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel E. Frigo
Associate Professor, Department of Cancer Systems Imaging, Division of Diagnostic Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX


