### Accession
PXD037413

### Title
Ligand binding and conformational dynamics of the E. coli nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase revealed by hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry

### Description
Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenases are integral membrane proteins that utilizes the proton motive force to reduce NADP+ to NADPH while converting NADH to NAD+. Atomic structures of various transhydrogenases in different ligand-bound states have become available, and it is clear that the molecular mechanism involves major conformational changes. Here we utilized hydrogen-deuterium-exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to map ligand binding sites and analyzed the structural dynamics of E. coli transhydrogenase. We found different allosteric effects on the protein depending on the bound ligand (NAD+, NADH, NADP+, NADPH). The binding of either NADP+ or NADPH to domain III had pronounced effects on the transmembrane helices comprising the proton-conducting channel in domain II. We also made use of cyclic ion mobility separation mass spectrometry (cyclic IMS-MS) to maximize coverage and sensitivity in the transmembrane domain, showing for the first time that this technique can be used for HDX-MS studies. Using cyclic IMS-MS, we increased sequence coverage from 68% to 73% in the transmembrane segments. Taken together, our results provide important new insights into the transhydrogenase reaction cycle and demonstrate the benefit of this new technique for HDX-MS to study ligand binding and conformational dynamics in membrane proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HDX sample preparation and mass spectrometry Protein samples were freshly thawed and the buffer was exchanged to equilibration buffer (E-buffer; 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02% DDM at pH 7.8) containing 1 mM of the respective ligand (binding) or without any ligand (control). The final sample concentration for the transhydrogenase was adjusted to 1.5 mg/mL. HDX mass spectrometry experiments were carried out on a fully automated HDX-2 system (supplied by Waters, Milford USA). In brief, the sample was diluted 15-fold with the corresponding, fully deuterated, labeling buffer (L-buffer; 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02% DDM at pH 7.4/pD 7.8) and incubated for specific times (0, 30, 180, 900 and 2750 seconds). The H/D exchange was quenched by diluting the sample in a 1 to 1 ratio in an acidic, ice cold (0°C), phosphate buffer (150 mM KPi, 0.02% DDM at pH 2.2). Then, 24 pmol of protein was injected into the chromatographic system. After online peptic digestion, trapping and C18 separation, the peptides were measured on a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (supplied by Waters, Milford USA) in HDMSE mode (50-2000 m/z), including ion mobility for gas phase separation. Samples were measured in technical quadruplicates in randomized order. To evaluate the system and measure protein-dependent deuterium back-exchange, we produced a fully deuterated reference sample and subjected it to the normal HDX-MS workflow.  HDX cyclic ion mobility mass spectrometry E. coli transhydrogenase protein samples were prepared at a concentration of 4.0 mg/mL in phosphate storage buffer and transported on dry ice from MPI laboratories to Waters Corp. (Wilmslow, UK). Prior to use, the samples were diluted to 1.0 mg/mL using E-buffer. Aliquots containing 16 pmol of protein were injected onto the pepsin column.  Details were the same as previously described. Peptides eluting from the analytical reversed phase column were infused into the electrospray source of a SELECT SERIESTM CyclicTM IMS mass spectrometer (Waters). Data were acquired in HDMSE mode (50-2000 m/z), with the cyclic ion mobility device operating a single pass separation routine.

### Data Protocol
Non-deuterated peptides were identified using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3. (PLGS, Waters) for each condition (control and binding). Only peptides with a high confidence score (over 6) identified in at least three out of four replicates were retained for further HDX evaluation. Peak picking of all corresponding peaks through calculating weighted average m/z (centroid) for all isotopic peaks in each peptide was done using the software DynamX 3.0 (Waters). Relative deuterium uptake was calculated by comparing the centroid mass of deuterated isotope peaks in each peptide with their corresponding undeuterated control peaks. The resulting relative uptake was plotted against respective labeling times. All assigned spectra were manually inspected and revised as necessary. For statistically relevant differences in deuterium uptake all peptides and their respective spectra were subjected to a two-stage t-test previous described by Houde et. al. Statistics were performed with an in house written R-script. In brief, all peptides were subjected to a t-test in which the positive standard error of the mean (SEM) across the quadruplicates at each time point was calculated. Next, the averages standard error of the mean was calculated by dividing the sum of every SEM in each time point and condition through the number of time points. A t-distribution value is taken for a 95% confidence interval in the first stage (n = 3, P ≤ 0.05, two-sided unpaired), with the number of technical replicates minus one as degrees of freedom. Next, a precursor specific test value is calculated by multiplying the t-distribution value with the average SEM of each precursor. Precursors were accounted as significant in the first stage if the absolute value of the deuterium uptake difference in each time point is equal or greater as the calculated test value. At least three time points had to pass the first stage to be submitted to the second stage. Here, the summed differences for all time points were calculated and the corresponding SEM was estimated by multiplying the average SEM of a precursor with the number of time points. Next, a second test value is calculated by multiplying the SEM of the summed uptake differences with the t-distribution value, which was taken for an 98% confidence interval (n = 5, two-sided, unpaired). Now, the absolute value of the summed uptake differences of each precursor has to be equal or greater as the calculated test value to be accounted as significant. Only peptides that passed these two stages were used to create differential deuterium uptake maps, which were displayed on the most recent homology models of E. coli transhydrogenase built using UCSF Chimera and based on the double face-down (attached) conformation of the ovine mitochondrial transhydrogenase.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenases are integral membrane proteins that utilizes the proton motive force to reduce NADP<sup>+</sup> to NADPH while converting NADH to NAD<sup>+</sup>. Atomic structures of various transhydrogenases in different ligand-bound states have become available, and it is clear that the molecular mechanism involves major conformational changes. Here we utilized hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to map ligand binding sites and analyzed the structural dynamics of <i>E. coli</i> transhydrogenase. We found different allosteric effects on the protein depending on the bound ligand (NAD<sup>+</sup>, NADH, NADP<sup>+</sup>, NADPH). The binding of either NADP<sup>+</sup> or NADPH to domain III had pronounced effects on the transmembrane helices comprising the proton-conducting channel in domain II. We also made use of cyclic ion mobility separation mass spectrometry (cyclic IMS-MS) to maximize coverage and sensitivity in the transmembrane domain, showing for the first time that this technique can be used for HDX-MS studies. Using cyclic IMS-MS, we increased sequence coverage from 68&#xa0;% to 73&#xa0;% in the transmembrane segments. Taken together, our results provide important new insights into the transhydrogenase reaction cycle and demonstrate the benefit of this new technique for HDX-MS to study ligand binding and conformational dynamics in membrane proteins.

### Keywords
Channel opening, Membrane protein, Hdx-ms, Cyclic ims‑ms, Small ligand binding

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Proteomics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


