### Accession
PXD025869

### Title
Characterization of Simulium damnosum salivary antigens

### Description
Simulium damnosum sensu lato (s.l.) blackflies transmit Onchocerca volvulus, a filarial nematode that causes human onchocerciasis. Human landing catches (HLCs) is currently the sole method used to estimate blackfly biting rates but is labour-intensive and questionable on ethical grounds. A potential alternative is to measure host antibodies to vector saliva deposited during bloodfeeding. In this study, the salivary proteome of S. damnosum s.l. was investigated. Blackflies were collected in Ghana by HLCs and dissected to extract their salivary glands. Salivary proteins were separated by gel-electrophoresis, and antigenic proteins visualized by immunoblot. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) was performed to characterize the proteome of S. damnosum s.l. salivary glands. Several antigenic proteins were recognized, with the major ones located around 15 and 40 kDa. LC–MS/MS identified the presence of antigen 5-related protein, apyrase/nucleotidase, and hyaluronidase.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary glands were dissected in aliquots of 20 glands, stored in Tris buffered saline (TBS, pH 7.5) at a concentration of one salivary gland per ul TBS and kept in a cool box during dissections. The aliquots were stored at –20° C until preparation of the assays. Prior to the analyses, the salivary glands were disrupted by three quick freeze-and-thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. The aliquots of the salivary glands homogenates (SGH) were then spun at 13,500 rpm for 5 min to pellet any debris, and the supernatant of all aliquots was collected and pooled together. The concentration of the final pool was approximated by a nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 280 nm and was +/- 0.94 – 1.02 mg/ml. The salivary proteins present in blackfly SGH were electrophoretically separated on a 12 % polyacrylamide gel under non-reducing conditions using a Mini-protean apparatus (Bio-Rad) (200 V, 55 min). A total of 4 μg of SGH was loaded per lane. To characterize the proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis via in gel digestion, the gel was stained with Coomassie G-250. Nine individual bands containing the proteins of interest were then excised from the Coomassie G-250 stained SDS-PAGE gel using sterile scalpels and cut into small pieces (approx. 1 mm × 1 mm). Bands were de stained by sonication for 30 min in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). After de staining, the solution was removed and the gels were dried in ACN. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 10 mm dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC at 60° C for 30 min. Samples were again dried with ACN and free cysteine residues were blocked at room temperature in the dark for 10 min using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC. Samples were dried thoroughly and the digestion buffer (10 % ACN, 40 mM ABC and 13 ng/µl trypsin) was added to cover the gel pieces. Proteins were digested at 37° C overnight, after which they were sonicated for 30 min using 150 µl of 50 % ACN with 0.5 % formic acid. The supernatant containing the peptides was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube to which 150 µl of elution solution was added. Following a 30 min sonication, the solution was removed, combined with the previous solution and dried using Speedvac. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 2 % ACN with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and injected into the Ultimate 3000 Nano LC coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC–MS/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1 % formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of ACN and 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm × 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. The loading buffer was composed of water, 2 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of B going from 4 % to 35 % over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluted peptide cations were converted to gas phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of the peptide precursors from 350 to 1,400 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 104 and the maximum injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for both proteins and peptides and a minimum length of seven amino acids was specified. The Andromeda search engine was used to screen the MS/MS spectra against the Simuliidae database (downloaded from NCBI in June 2020, containing 16,564 entries), and the Culicoides nubeculosus (downloaded from Uniprot in May 2020, containing 79 entries) and Culicoides sonorensis databases (downloaded from Uniprot in March 2021, containing 21,090 entries) (Ceratopogonidae). Enzyme specificity was set as C terminal to Arg and Lys allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamydomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification and N terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation and serine/threonine phosphorylation were selected as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Simulium damnosum s.l.; blackfly; saliva; antigens; exposure marker

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
Centre for the Evaluation of Vaccination, Vaccine & Infectious Diseases Institute, University of Antwerp

### Submitter
Laura Willen

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Volf
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic


