### Accession
PXD016223

### Title
Data in support of Omics investigation of the Intestinal inflammation and Gut Microbiota in ABCB1a Gene  Knock-Out Mouse model

### Description
Colon cancer (CRC) and chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are two common gastrointestinal diseases that have a high impact on the quality of life of the affected individuals and their families as well as on the society. The aim of the present study was to contribute to the understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms of how abcb1 affects the development of colitis and potential environmental interactions. Additionally, we want to form a basis for future studies using the abcb1/mdr1a knockout model. Therefore, we characterized the model using quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics of colon, ileum and urine as well and gut microbiota by Next-Genome-Sequencing (16SRNA). Additionally, we evaluated the effect of an environmental factor, intake of red meat, using this model.

### Sample Protocol
Colon and ileum biopsies were prepared for proteomic analysis using an optimized filter-aided sample preparation protein digestion protocol as previously described (21). Essentially, the intestinal biopsies were homogenized in 0.5 mL cold lysis buffer (5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) using bead-beating (Bullet blender Gold; Next Advance; NY, USA) for 2 minutes, speed 9 using Stainless Steel Beads mix 0.9–2.0 mm. The protein concentration of the lysates was estimated by two methods. A bicinchoninic acid assay with bovine serum albumin as standard, measured using a Sunrise microplate reader (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland), and by measuring absorbance at 280nm using a Nanophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein digestion was performed using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol with 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin-filter (YM-10; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). A biopsy lysate volume corresponding to 100 µg total solubilized protein was reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and alkylated using 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in lysis buffer. The proteins were digested to peptides overnight at 37°C with two µg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide material was eluted from the spin-filter, and purified by phase inversions with ethyl acetate and formic acid. The final peptide eluent was dried down in a vacuum centrifuge overnight and stored at -80°C until time of analysis.  For urine the Wessel and Flügge method gave the best protein yield and was therefore used to precipitate urinary proteins from the mice (22). 150 μl of methanol was added to 50 μl of urine sample in an Eppendorf Low bind tube, and then 50 μl of chloroform was added and lastly mixed with 200 μl of Milli-Q water. The samples were vortexed and centrifuged (15 minutes at 14,000 g) leading to two liquid phases, with the proteins precipitate in the interphase. The upper phase contains water soluble metabolites and the lower phase contains organic soluble compounds. In order to pellet the proteins, the upper phase was removed and discarded. 200 μl of methanol was added and the samples were centrifuged (15 minutes at 14,000 g). The supernatant containing organic soluble compounds was removed and the protein pellet was air dried. The protein pellets were resuspended in 50 μl SDC (0.5 % SDC in 50 mM TEAB) and the samples were vortexed. Finally, the samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. For measuring protein concentration an Implen NanoPhotometer using protein absorption method (Protein A280) was used. Protein concentrations were measured from 0.160 mg/ml to 18.2 mg/ml with most of the samples containing 0.5-1.5 mg/ml protein. The samples were stored at -80°C overnight. Proteomics – UPLC-TandemMS Analysis The protein lysates (colon, Ileum, urine) was redissolved in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid (Thermofisher Ultra) and the concentration of the redissolved peptide lysate was by measuring absorbance at 280nm using a Nanophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A total of 5 µg peptide material was analyzed per UPLC-TandemMS analysis and all biopsies were analyzed in technical dublicates in a randomized order of animals. The tryptic peptides were separated by an nanoUPLC system (RSLC;Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a reverse phase C18 material trapping column setup with 50cm Acclaim PepMap100 main column at 40°C, approx 550-650bar (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The liquid phase consisted of 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), and the flow rate was kept constant at 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted from the column by changing the liquid phase to 12% solvent B on a 5 minutes ramp gradient and subsequently to 35% solvent B on a 30 minutes ramp gradient. For validation of ABCB1 expression, four KO and four WT samples were analyzed on an extended (120 min) gradient to increase sensitivity. The eluting peptides were introduced directly into the mass spectrometer by a picotip emitter for nanoflow ionization (New objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method, selecting up to 12 MS/MS acquisitions of eluting ions in the m/z 350-1400 range based on highest signal intensity for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The measured peptide signal intensities from the full MS scans were integrated using MaxQuant 1.6.0.2 software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016), and used to calculate the relative protein quantities (LFQ; label-free quantitation). The fragment MS/MS scans were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus C57BL/6J Reference proteome (UP000000589). The following abundant peptide modifications were included in the analysis: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of N peptides from the N-terminal of proteins (variable) and oxidation of methionine (variable).  A target-decoy fragment spectra search strategy was employed in MaxQuant and used to filter the identified proteins and peptides to below 1% false discovery rate (FDR). All identified proteins were annotated using Peresus 1.6.0.2 to retrieve e.g. gene, gene ontology information, KEGG, PDB, Prosite and more. The raw MS data and MaxQuant search output have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) with the dataset identifier XXX (23, 24).  Proteomics – Statistical processing and evaluation Filtering The replicates were averaged by the median. The list of identified proteins was further reduced by filtering to ensure high quality quantitative data: 1) The quantitation of any protein was required to be based on at least two quantifiable peptides unique or shared between protein groups (razor). 2) Each peptide was required to be quantifiable in at 50% of the biopsies in the meat- or no-meat eating group. Unsupervised PCA We performed an unsupervised principle component analysis (PCA) to reveal protein groups related to each group of animals (Abcb1, FVB) vs. timepoint (6w,10w,20w,30w) vs. diet (altromin, meat). Due to the small n for week 5 and 30, we focused the study on the central timepoints: 10w and 20w. The input for the PCA was all quantified proteins and their abundances. Missing values (i.e. proteins where a quantitation value was not obtained for a given replicate analysis) were replaced by values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8), to simulate signals from low abundant proteins. The grouping of the replicates on the PCA scores plots was investigated. Differential analysis To identify proteins with a statistically significant mean abundance change between group’s two-sided t-tests were performed. We applied permutation-based false positive control to correct for multiple hypothesis testing using standard parameters in Perseus v1.6.0.2 (S0=0.1, 250 randomizations). The statistically significant proteins were subsequently filtered to FDR<5%. Investigation of regulated pathways and causal regulations were performed using PANTHER (Mi et al., 2013), String-db (Szklarczyk et al., 2017). To identify underlying biological schemes in the list of significantly changes proteins, we performed a pathway enrichment analysis using the Reactome database in WebGestalt. Pathways meeting FDR<5% were considered statistically significantly enriched and are reported. We used all quantifiable proteins as background, to ensure sample-type specific pathways (e.g. proteins tagged as being extracellular in urine) would be subtracted. Tissue imaging and histology The HE stain was preformed according to the standard method essentially as described in (Carson & Hladik 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Abcb1, Crc, Proteomics, Ibd

### Affiliations
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University


