### Accession
PXD022733

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Of Low-Grade, Early-Stage Endometrial Carcinoma

### Description
Low-grade early-stage endometroid cancer (EC) is the most frequently diagnosed tumor type of the uterine corpus. Our study aimed to assess dysregulated pathways in this specific subset of tumors through proteomic analysis. There is still a knowledge gap in the molecular pathways that determine the biological behaviour of these tumors. The purpose of this study was to describe dysregulated molecular pathways from EC patients. Paired healthy controls were collected and both subjected to MS/MS proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 16 tumor samples with paired healthy tissue were sectioned using a microtome (7 µm thick), transferred into 1.5 ml tubes and deparaffinized by incubation with xylol for 30 min. After the addition of methanol samples were vortexed thoroughly and centrifuged for 2 min (15,000 rpm). The supernatant was removed, and tissue samples were air-dried followed by resuspension in RIPA buffer with protease/phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were boiled and sonicated for followed by heating for 2 h at 80 °C (500 rpm).  Samples were reduced by adding TCEP to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM and alkylated with iodoacetamide to a ﬁnal concentration of 40 mM. Protein extracts were cleaned and digested with the SP3 method as described previously. Briefly, 10 µl of SP3 bead stock (Sera-Mag SpeedBead carboxylate-modified magnetic particles; GE Healthcare Life Sciences) for samples (or a 1:10 protein:bead ratio for sections) and 200 µl aceto nitrile (ACN; final concentration of 70%) were added to 200 µl of protein extract and incubated for 10 min (1000 rpm). Tubes were mounted on a magnetic rack; supernatants were removed and beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN (1 ml each). Beads were resuspended in 200 µl 200 mM HEPES pH 8 and digested overnight with trypsin (1:25 trypsin:protein ratio for sections, PierceTM trypsin protease, Thermo Scientific; 37 °C, 500 rpm). The next day, spinning down tubes were mounted on a magnetic rack and recovered the supernatant to a fresh 1.5mL tube.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against all entries from the human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2019) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0) ⁠. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Orbitrap) for MS2 fragment ions. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionine and acetylation of lysine residue used as variable modifications. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications.

### Publication Abstract
Low-grade, early-stage endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most frequent malignant tumor of the uterine corpus. However, the molecular alterations that underlie these tumors are far from being fully understood. The purpose of this study is to describe dysregulated molecular pathways from EC patients. Sixteen samples of tumor tissue and paired healthy controls were collected and both were subjected to mass spectrometry (MS)/MS proteomic analysis. Gene ontology and pathway analysis was performed to discover dysregulated pathways and/or proteins using different databases and bioinformatic tools. Dysregulated pathways were cross-validated in an independent external cohort. Cell signaling, immune response, and cell death-associated pathways were robustly identified. The SLIT/ROBO signaling pathway demonstrated dysregulation at the proteomic and transcriptomic level. Necroptosis and ferroptosis were cell death-associated processes aberrantly regulated, in addition to apoptosis. Immune response-associated pathways showed a dominance of innate immune responses. Tumor immune infiltrates measured by immunofluorescence demonstrated diverse lymphoid and myeloid populations. Our results suggest a role of SLIT/ROBO, necroptosis, and ferroptosis, as well as a prominent role of innate immune response in low-grade, early-stage EC. These results could guide future research in this group of tumors.

### Keywords
Endometrial cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH. MADRID. SPAIN.
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH (IDIPAZ)

### Submitter
Alberto Pelaez García

### Lab Head
Dr David Hardisson
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH. MADRID. SPAIN.


