### Accession
PXD027033

### Title
Integrated multi-omics analysis reveals drought stress response mechanism in chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.)

### Description
Drought is one of the major constraints for crop productivity across the globe. Chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) is mainly cultivated in the arid and semi-arid tropical regions under rain-fed conditions and drought stress is one of the major constraints, which causes up to 50% yield losses annually. In this study, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics datasets from root tissues of contrasting drought responsive chickpea genotypes, ICC 4958 (drought-tolerant), JG 11 (drought-tolerant); an introgression line, JG 11+ (drought-tolerant) and ICC 1882, (drought-sensitive) under control and stress conditions were generated. The integrated analysis of these multi-omics data revealed complex molecular mechanism underlying drought stress response in chickpea. Transcriptomics integrated with proteomics data identified enhancement of hub proteins encoding isoflavone 4’-O-methyltransferase (Ca_06356), UDP-D-glucose/UDP-D-Galactose 4-epimerase (Ca_15037) and delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthesis (Ca_24241). These proteins highlighted the involvement of critical pathways such as antibiotic biosynthesis, galactose metabolism and isoflavonoid biosynthesis in activating drought stress response mechanism. Subsequently, integration of metabolomics data identified six key metabolites (fructose, galactose, glucose, myo-inositol, galactinol and raffinose) that showed enhanced correlation with galactose metabolism. Further, integration of root -omics data together with genomic dataset of the “QTL-hotspot” region harbouring several drought tolerance related traits revealed involvement of candidate genes encoding aldo keto reductase family oxidoreductase (Ca_04551) and leucine rich repeat extensin 2 (Ca_04564). These results from integrated multi-omics approach provided a comprehensive understanding and new insights into the drought stress response mechanism of chickpea.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and analyzed as described in Chaturvedi et al. (2015). Proteins were pre-fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Forty micrograms of total protein were loaded onto a gel. Gels were fixed and stained with methanol: acetic acid: water: Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (40:10:50:0.001). Gels were destained in methanol: water (40:60). Gel pieces were destained, equilibrated and digested with trypsin, desalted and concentrated according to Valledore and Weckwerth (2014). Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, the tryptic peptide pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. One μg of each sample (3 biological replicates for stressed and control) was loaded on a C18 reverse phase column (Thermo scientific, EASY-Spray 500 mm, 2 μm particle size). Separation was achieved with a 90 min gradient from 98% solution A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 0 min to 40% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 90 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. nESI-MS/MS measurements were performed on Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z resolution 120000, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 sec, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 sec, charge state screening enabled with the rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm present in Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo, Germany) as described in (Chaturvedi et al., 2013). We have used the following settings in Proteome Discoverer for data analysis which include: Peptide confidence: High, which is equivalent to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR), and Xcorr of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 for peptides of charge 2, 3, 4,5, 6. The variable modifications were set to acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine, with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion and 0.8 Da for the fragment ion. The number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted was 2. There were no fixed modifications, as dynamic modifications were used. For identification, annotated chickpea genome database containing 27,494 protein annotations (Varshney et al., 2013b) was used. Peptides were matched against these databases plus decoys, considering a significant hit when the peptide confidence was high. The identified proteins were quantitated based on total ion count, followed by a normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) normalization strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is one of the major constraints limiting chickpea productivity. To unravel complex mechanisms regulating drought response in chickpea, we generated transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics datasets from root tissues of four contrasting drought-responsive chickpea genotypes: ICC 4958, JG 11, and JG 11+ (drought-tolerant), and ICC 1882 (drought-sensitive) under control and drought stress conditions. Integration of transcriptomics and proteomics data identified enriched hub proteins encoding isoflavone 4'-O-methyltransferase, UDP-d-glucose/UDP-d-galactose 4-epimerase, and delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase. These proteins highlighted the involvement of pathways such as antibiotic biosynthesis, galactose metabolism, and isoflavonoid biosynthesis in activating drought stress response mechanisms. Subsequently, the integration of metabolomics data identified six metabolites (fructose, galactose, glucose, myoinositol, galactinol, and raffinose) that showed a significant correlation with galactose metabolism. Integration of root-omics data also revealed some key candidate genes underlying the drought-responsive "QTL-hotspot" region. These results provided key insights into complex molecular mechanisms underlying drought stress response in chickpea.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Drought stress, Signalling pathways, Chickpea, Gene expression, Integrated multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Palak Chaturvedi

### Lab Head
Dr Palak Chaturvedi
University of Vienna


