### Accession
PXD002400

### Title
5 cell lines - Deep proteome analysis of 5 cell lines (WI38, Hep2G, MCF-10A, MDA-MB-231, MCF7), using peptide isolectic focusing fractionation.

### Description
Deep proteome analysis of 5 cell lines (WI38, Hep2G, MCF-10A, MDA-MB-231, MCF7), using peptide isolectic focusing fractionation.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent cell on 10 cm dishes were scraped, shortly  pelletted and lysed in urea buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris•HCl, pH 8.3) and sonicated for 20 seconds (2 pulse, 60% power). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14000g, 5 min). Protein concentration was then measured by Bradford colorimetric assay. 500 micrograms of proteins were reduced in DTT 2mM for 30 minutes at 25 °C and successively free cysteines were alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature in the darkness. LysC digestion was performed by adding LysC (Wako) in a ratio 1:40 (w/w) to the sample and incubating it for 18 hours under gentle shaking at 30 °C. After LysC digestion, the samples were diluted 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, 7 µl of immobilized trypsin (Applied Biosystems) were added and samples were incubated 4 hours under rotation at 30 °C.  Digestion was stopped by acidification with 10 ul of trifluoroacetic acid and trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation. The resulting peptide mixtures were loaded on Empore cartridges (3M) following the instructions of the manufacturer and eluted with 70% acetonitrile. After partial removal by evaporation of the acetonitrile used for the elution from the Empore cartridges, the peptide mixture was diluted up to 2.5 mL with MilliQ water and 150 µL of ampholyte solution (pH range 3-10, 40% w/w, Bio-Rad) were added. The sample was then loaded into the focusing chamber of the Microrotofor device. Isoelectric focusing was performed following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, constant 1 W  power current was applied, while the maximum allowed voltage and current were set to 500V and 10mA, respectively. . After reaching stable voltage (~ 2.5 h time), the current was applied for further 30 minutes before collecting the fractionated peptides from the focusing chamber..  The resulting fractions were desalted on STAGE Tips (max 15 µg per StageTip), dried and reconstituted to 25 µL of 0.5 % acetic acid in water. 5 microliters of the desalted peptides were injected on a LC-MS/MS system (Agilent 1200 [Agilent  Technologies] and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos [Thermo]). Each analysis was run in duplicate. For the chromatographic separation,  a linear binary gradient, ranging from 5% to 40% of organic buffer (80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid), in 240 minutes was used. As aqueous solvent, 5% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid was used.20 cm long capillary (75 µm inner diameter),packed in-house with 3 µm C18 beads (ReprosilPur C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch), was used as chromatographic column. At  one end of the capillary a nanospray tip was generated using a laser puller (P-2000 Laser Based Micropipette Puller, Sutter Instruments), allowing fretless packing. The nanospray source of the mass spectrometer was operated with a spay voltage of 1.9 kV and with an ion transfer tube temperature of 260 °C. Data were acquired in data dependent mode, with one survey MS scan in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution 60000 at m\z 400), followed by up to 20 MS\MS scans in the ion trap on the most intense ions (intensity threshold = 500 counts). Once selected for fragmentation, ions were excluded from further selection for the next 30 seconds, in order to increase the number of new sequencing events.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline v1.4.1.2 and the built-in Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq velos orbitrap

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrueck Centrum for Molecular Medicine
Quantitative Protemics/Metabolomics     Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Guido Mastrobuoni

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Quantitative Protemics/Metabolomics     Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


