### Accession
PXD026879

### Title
Neuroproteomics with Systems Biology: The proteomic landscape of adult human hypothalamus

### Description
The hypothalamus is an anatomically small, but functionally crucial region of the human brain. Normal hypothalamus functioning is central to the regulation of neuroendocrine and neurovegetative systems as well as modulation of chronobiology and behavioral aspects of the human body. Till date the human hypothalamus proteome profile is lacking from literature. In this study, we attempt to delineate the human hypothalamus proteome using high-resolution mass spectrometry approach. We identified a total of 5,349 proteins in the proteomics study. The unassigned spectra from the proteomics study were further used for identifying multiple post translational modification sites as well as for proteogenomics analysis. This resulted in the identification of 616 additional proteins. We observed a higher representation of mitochondrial and synaptic proteins in the proteomics data, as well as enrichment of pathways supporting the hypothalamic involvement in autophagy and adult neurogenesis. Interestingly, the phospholipase D signaling pathway emerged as a junction to the various aspects of hypothalamic functions, and relation to neurodegenerative disorders. Additionally, the investigation for multiple post translational modifications led to the identification of several known and novel post translational modification sites. A total of 13,544 peptides corresponding to 2,542 proteins with modifications of R/K-methylation, S/T/Y-phosphorylation, N/Q-deamidation, R-citrullination, and K-acetylation have been reported in this study. Proteogenomic analysis of hypothalamus resulted in the identification of 291 GSSPs which were further categorised into probable gene correction events. Among these, we confirmed 28 peptides to confer evidence for 10 predicted pseudogenes with coding potential, 4 novel protein-coding (3 novel isoforms, and 1 novel SEP), and 3 protein correction (1 novel exon, 1 alternate frame of translation and 1 N-terminal protein extension) events. We believe that hypothalamic proteome would aid as a platform to decipher the molecular basis for the diverse range of functions performed by this region and provide a baseline for exploring the role of these proteins in neurological health and disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection All samples were collected from the Human Brain Tissue Repository (HBTR), National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore. The hypothalamus tissue was dissected from 3 individual histopathologically normal adult brain samples by trained neuropathologists at HBTR. The dissected tissue sections were stored at -80℃ until further analysis. The study was conducted with the approval of the Ethics Committee at NIMHANS, Bangalore. Written consents were obtained from the close relatives of the deceased tissue donors.  Protein extraction The frozen tissue samples were lysed in tissue lysis buffer (TLB: 4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)) by sonication using a probe sonicator. The tissue was sonicated at 40% amplitude, suspended in TLB and further subjected to heating at 95 ºC for 10 mins. This was followed by centrifugation at 12,000rpm for 10 mins, after which the clear supernatant containing the proteins was collected in fresh vials. The protein estimation was carried out using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce). Equal amounts of protein were pooled from the 3 donor tissues and were used for further analysis.   In-gel digestion 100µg of pooled lysate was resolved on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gel and 24 gel bands were sliced from the gel lanes. Each of these gel bands was considered as single fraction of the sample. The bands were cut into 1mm pieces and suspended in destaining solution (40mM ammonium bicarbonate in 40% acetonitrile (ACN)). The completely destained bands were then subjected to reduction using 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (in 50mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)) heated at 60℃ for 30 mins followed by alkylation in the dark for 20 mins in 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (in 50mM TEABC). The protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37℃ using Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptides were then extracted using 40% ACN, vacuum dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. The reconstituted peptides were then cleaned up using C18StageTips (3M Empore high-performance disks). The desalted peptides were then vacuum dried and stored at -80℃ until mass spectrometry runs were performed.  In-solution digestion The peptide level fractionation was carried out with the in-solution digestion or basic-reversed phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC). A total of 300µg of pooled lysates were subjected to reduction with 10mM DTT in 50 mM TEABC at 60℃ for 30 mins, followed by alkylation with 20mM IAA in 50mM TEABC for 20 mins in the dark. The lysate was then incubated with chilled acetone (1:7) for precipitating the proteins. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50mM TEABC and sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:20 v/v) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to aid the protein digestion overnight at 37℃. The digested peptides were acidified using 0.1% formic acid and lyophilized prior to the high pH reversed phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) -based fractionation. The bRPLC solvent A (10 mM TEABC, pH 8.5) was used to reconstitute the dried peptides, which were then loaded on a Waters XBridge C18 column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA; 5 µm, 250 × 4.6 mm) using the Agilent 1200 binary pump (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The peptides were separated on 120 mins long gradient of 5-100% bRPLC solvent B (10 mM TEABC in 95% ACN, pH 8.5) with a flow rate of 0.5mL/min. A total of 96 fractions were collected which were concatenated to a final of 12 fractions. The peptide fractions were vacuum dried and stored at -80℃ until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis The in-gel and in-solution digested peptide fractions (n=36) were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each of the peptide fractions was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A), loaded on a C18 packed nanoViper trap column (100Å, 3µm, 75µm x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) and the flow rate was fixed at 4µL/min of solvent A. The peptides were resolved on a C18 packed Easy-Spray RLC analytical column (2 µm, 15x50 µm, Thermo Scientific) with a 120 mins long gradient of 5-35% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% ACN) and flow rate of 300nL/min. The data-dependent acquisition mode was used in the positive ion mode to acquire data. The scan range was set at 400-1,600 m/z and a resolution of 120,000 was used on the Orbitrap mass analyzer for MS1 runs. The ion injection time of 55ms, dynamic exclusion of 40secs and AGC target of 400,000 was used at MS1. The top 10 intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS analysis and subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33%. The fragment ion detection was also carried out in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60,000, ion injection time 75ms and isolation window of 1.6.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for MS/MS searches using SEQUEST (version 2.4.1) and Mascot (version 2.5.1) algorithms against NCBI RefSeq human protein database (version 81). The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; oxidation of methionine and acetylation at protein N-terminus were set as the dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The cut-off false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the protein, peptide and PSM levels, when the data was searched against the decoy database. Label-free quantitation to determine relative abundances of identified proteins was performed using an intensity-based absolute quantitation method (iBAQ). The intensities of the observed tryptic peptides of a given protein were summed and then divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides using an in-house python script. The unassigned spectra from the proteomics search results were filtered out and used for a subsequent search with similar parameters as mentioned in the previous section with additional parameters of multiPTMs, which included the addition of the ptmRS node in the processing workflow on Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and the dynamic modifications such as (i) S, T, Y-phosphorylation; (ii) K-acetylation; (iii) K, R-methylation; (iv) N, Q-deamidation; and (v) R-citrullination. The modified PSMs with a ptmRS score greater than 75% were filtered and input into the PTM-Pro tool for the prediction of high confidence PTMs. The unassigned spectra from the proteomic and multiPTM searches were filtered out and further used for the proteogenomic analysis. A custom reference database was generated, using a three-frame translation of the GENCODE genome annotation (v26), inclusive of transcripts, pseudogenes, non-coding RNA and N-terminal peptides. This database included sequences of minimum length ≥7 amino acids, translated from stop-to-stop codons. The other search parameters were kept similar to the previous proteomic search. The resultant peptides from this search were filtered out if they mapped to any known protein or had an isobaric mass ambiguity. The remaining peptides uniquely identified through the custom database were taken forward for analysis. These peptides were termed as Genome Search Specific Peptides (GSSPs) and were selected only if they met a 1% FDR threshold and had a minimum of 2 peptide spectral matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
The human hypothalamus is central to the regulation of neuroendocrine and neurovegetative systems, as well as modulation of chronobiology and behavioral aspects in human health and disease. Surprisingly, a deep proteomic analysis of the normal human hypothalamic proteome has been missing for such an important organ so far. In this study, we delineated the human hypothalamus proteome using a high-resolution mass spectrometry approach which resulted in the identification of 5349 proteins, while a multiple post-translational modification (PTM) search identified 191 additional proteins, which were missed in the first search. A proteogenomic analysis resulted in the discovery of multiple novel protein-coding regions as we identified proteins from noncoding regions (pseudogenes) and proteins translated from short open reading frames that can be missed using the traditional pipeline of prediction of protein-coding genes as a part of genome annotation. We also identified several PTMs of hypothalamic proteins that may be required for normal hypothalamic functions. Moreover, we observed an enrichment of proteins pertaining to autophagy and adult neurogenesis in the proteome data. We believe that the hypothalamic proteome reported herein would help to decipher the molecular basis for the diverse range of physiological functions attributed to it, as well as its role in neurological and psychiatric diseases. Extensive proteomic profiling of the hypothalamic nuclei would further elaborate on the role and functional characterization of several hypothalamus-specific proteins and pathways to inform future research and clinical discoveries in biological psychiatry, neurology, and system biology.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Adult neurogenesis, Proteomics, Human brain, Hypothalamus, Post translational modifications, Autophagy, Neuropeptides., Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Thottethodi Subrahmanya Keshava Prasad
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore, India


