### Accession
PXD032835

### Title
Proteome integral solubility alteration high-throughput proteomics assay identifies Collectin-12 as a non-apoptotic microglial caspase-3 substrate.

### Description
Caspases are a family of proteins mostly known for their role in the activation of the apoptotic pathway leading to cell death. In the last decade, caspases have been found to fulfil other tasks regulating the cell phenotype independently to cell death. Microglia are the immune cells of the brain responsible for the maintenance of physiological brain functions but can also be involved in disease progression when overactivated. We have previously described non30 apoptotic roles of caspase-3 (CASP3) in the regulation of the inflammatory phenotype of microglial cells or pro-tumoral activation in the context of brain tumors. CASP3 can regulate protein functions by cleavage of their target and therefore could have multiple substrates. So far, identification of CASP3 substrates has been performed mostly in apoptotic conditions where CASP3 activity is highly upregulated and these approaches do not have the capacity to uncover CASP3 substrates at the physiological level. In our study, we aim at discovering highaffinity substrates of CASP3 involved in the normal regulation of the cell. We used an unconventional approach by chemically reducing the basal level activity of CASP3 (by DEVD38 fmk treatment) coupled to a Mass Spectrometry screen (PISA) to identify stabilized, and consequently, non-cleaved proteins in microglia cells. PISA identified several significantly stabilized proteins after DEVD-fmk treatment, including a few already known CASP3substrates which validated our approach. Among them, we focused on the Collectin12 (COLEC12 or CL-P1) transmembrane receptor and uncovered a potential role for CASP3 cleavage of COLEC12 in the regulation of the phagocytic capacity of microglial cells. Taken together, these findings suggest a new way to uncover non-apoptotic high-affinity substrates of CASP3 important for the modulation of microglia cell physiology.

### Sample Protocol
The Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) assay was carried out using the PISA assay and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reporter ion quantitative proteomics technology, similarly to the originally published PISA assay method (Gaetani et al. JPR 2019 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00500). Briefly cells were BV2 cells were cultured as above-described into ten T25 flasks, five of which were treated for two hours in cell culture with 20M DEVD-FMK and five with the same volumes of DMSO as control. After treatment, cells were detached using TrypLE solution (Thermo Fisher), washed with 10ml phosphate buffered saline (PBS) twice and cell pellets were collected and resuspended in 1ml of PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche, Switzerland).  For PISA thermal treatment and soluble fraction isolation each cell suspension of each biological replicate was split into fifteen 0.2ml PCR tubes, distributing homogenous cell suspension of 60 microliters, one for each temperature point, with the first being 43°C and the last 57°C, with one °C of interval. The thermal treatment at each temperature point was performed for all 10 biological replicates for 3 min at each temperature using a SimplyAmp thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples where then left at room temperature for 6 min before being snap frozen in liquid N2. Cell lysis was then obtained by freezing cells in liquid N2 and then thawing at 35°C. After four freeze-thaw cycles all temperature points aliquots of the same biological replicates were re-united, then ultracentrifuge sedimentation was performed at 150,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C using an Optima XPN-80 (Beckman Coulter, USA) ultracentrifuge. PISA-Proteomics sample processing was operated on a total protein content of fifty μg of each sample, processed as follows: reduction with 8 mM dithiothreitol  (55 °C, 45 min), alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, 25 °C, in darkness), protein precipitation overnight at -20 °C using sample:cold acetone in a ratio of 1:5. After precipitation, the supernatant was discarded and protein pellets were resuspended in 20 mM EPPS containing 8 M urea, then samples were progressively diluted in 20 mM EPPS to lower urea concentration and digested using LysC enzyme at 30C for 6h at the substrate:enzyme ratio of 1:75 followed by trypsin digestion overnight at 37° (enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50). The digested proteins were labelled using TMT 10‐plex for two hours and pooled in the final 10-plex sample according to manufacturer`s protocol.  The 10-plex sample was cleaned and desalted using on C18 SepPack column C18 (Sep-Pak, C18, Vac 1 cm3, 50 mg, Waters, USA), then all the eluate was speedvac dried.  1D – Off-line peptide separation by Reversed-Phase High pH fractionation. The first dimension of peptide separation was carried out according to previously published protocol (ref. Gaetani et al 2019, JPR, as before), using a C-18 at a capillary flow rate of 200 μL/min. Fractionation was applied using a binary solvent system consisting of 20 mM NH4OH in H2O and 20 mM NH4OH in acetonitrile. The elution was monitored measuring UV absorbance at 214 nm. A total of 96 fractions of 100 μL each were collected and concatenated into 24 fractions. Each fraction was dried by speedvac concentrator overnight. 2D-nLC coupled t ESI-MS/MS analysis. The correspondent of 1 microgram of each fraction was injected for LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY Spray Source and connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific), as previously described (Gaetani et al JPR 2019). Peptide separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; length, 50 cm; inner diameter, 2 μm; particle size, 2 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at 55 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) (solvent A) and 98% ACN (v/v), 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B) and eluted with a gradient of 4–26% B in 91 min, 26–95% B in 9 min. Subsequently, the analytical column was washed with 95% B for 5 min before re-equilibration with 4% B. Data dependent acquisition using a top 17 method was used, with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer v2.5 using Mascot and Sequest in series as serch engines. The complete Uniprot mouse proteome reference database (UP000000589) was applied for matching MS/MS spectra. TMT10 quantification of peptide and protein abundances was used. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, arginine and glutamine deamination were used as variable modifications for both identification and quantification. Trypsin cleavage with maximum two missed cleavages was allowed and only high confidence (1% false discovery rate) was retained in the dataset at both protein and peptide levels. After removing contaminants, only proteins with at least two unique peptides were included in the final data set. Quantification values for each protein were normalized on the total ion abundance of TMT10 reporters for a given protein and then on the average value for the untreated sample. Soluble abundance ratio and ΔSm value were obtained on normalized values, two-tailed Student’s t test was applied to calculate p-values, and logarithmic transformation was applied prior to graphical visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Caspases are a family of proteins mostly known for their role in the activation of the apoptotic pathway leading to cell death. In the last decade, caspases have been found to fulfill other tasks regulating the cell phenotype independently to cell death. Microglia are the immune cells of the brain responsible for the maintenance of physiological brain functions but can also be involved in disease progression when overactivated. We have previously described non-apoptotic roles of caspase-3 (CASP3) in the regulation of the inflammatory phenotype of microglial cells or pro-tumoral activation in the context of brain tumors. CASP3 can regulate protein functions by cleavage of their target and therefore could have multiple substrates. So far, identification of CASP3 substrates has been performed mostly in apoptotic conditions where CASP3 activity is highly upregulated and these approaches do not have the capacity to uncover CASP3 substrates at the physiological level. In our study, we aim at discovering novel substrates of CASP3 involved in the normal regulation of the cell. We used an unconventional approach by chemically reducing the basal level CASP3-like activity (by DEVD-fmk treatment) coupled to a Mass Spectrometry screen (PISA) to identify proteins with different soluble amounts, and consequently, non-cleaved proteins in microglia cells. PISA assay identified several proteins with significant change in their solubility after DEVD-fmk treatment, including a few already known CASP3 substrates which validated our approach. Among them, we focused on the Collectin-12 (COLEC12 or CL-P1) transmembrane receptor and uncovered a potential role for CASP3 cleavage of COLEC12 in the regulation of the phagocytic capacity of microglial cells. Taken together, these findings suggest a new way to uncover non-apoptotic substrates of CASP3 important for the modulation of microglia cell physiology.

### Keywords
Pisa, Colec12, Solubility, Proteomics, Non-apoptotic, Sustrates, Caspase-3, Microglia

### Affiliations
Chemical Proteomics, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Massimiliano Gaetani

### Lab Head
Dr Massimiliano Gaetani
Chemical Proteomics, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.


