### Accession
PXD041804

### Title
Immunoprecipitation methods impact the peptide repertoire in immunopeptidomics

### Description
T cell-based immunotherapies, which have become a promising treatment approach for cancer patients, rely on the identification of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-presented peptides. Mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidomics is the state-of-the-art method for the identification of clinically relevant naturally presented HLA-restricted tumor-associated antigens. In the last years, different methods for the immunoprecipitation-based isolation of HLA-presented peptides have been developed and are used in the field. Here, we performed a comparison of a column-based with a high-throughput 96-well method by analyzing the immunopeptidome of cell lines as well as primary solid and hematological tumor samples. Whereas no differences in the total number of identified peptides were observed, the column-based method identified method-exclusive peptides that featured higher hydrophobicity and exhibited improved predicted immunogenicity. Adding an additional acetonitrile elution step to the 96-well method could partially reduce this hydrophilic shift. In total, we showed that immunopeptidomics data is affected by the immunoprecipitation method used for isolation, which might have a critical impact on the selection of target antigens and has to be considered when selecting clinically relevant targets for the development of T cell-based immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and II molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification as described (either DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9450-2_10 with additional sample collection of the second ZipTip wash step washing solution. Or DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7537-2_14 with additional 50% ACN elution from the sample 96-well plate) using the pan-HLA class I–specific mAb W6/32, the pan-HLA class II–specific mAb Tü39, and the HLA-DR–specific mAb L243 (produced in-house). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was used for sample separation followed by an on-line coupled Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were analyzed in three technical replicates, where 5 µl with shares of 20% were injected with 1% (v/v) ACN in 0.05% (v/v) TFA as loading buffer for each technical replicate onto a 75 µm x 2 cm trapping column (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) at 4 µl/min for 5.75 min followed by peptide separation at 50 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 µm x 25 cm separation column with 2 µm particle size (PepMap C18, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of ACN over 90 min. Ionization of eluting peptides was conducted by a nanospray source and analysis occurred in the on-line coupled mass spectrometer by implementing a top speed (3 s) HCD (Higher-energy C-trap dissociation) method generating fragment spectra with a resolution of 30,000, a mass range limited of 400-650 m/z for HLA class I peptides and 400-1000 m/z for HLA class II peptides, and positive charge states 2 – 3 for HLA class I and 2 – 5 for HLA class II selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed as described previously (DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9450-2_10). Integrating search results of the SequestHT search engine against the human proteome (Swiss-Prot database, 20,279 reviewed protein sequences, September 27th, 2013) was performed by the Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher), using a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and allowing oxidized methionine as a dynamic modification. The false discovery rate (FDR, estimated by the Percolator algorithm 2.04) was limited to 5% for HLA class I and 1% for HLA class II. HLA class I binder analysis was performed using SYFPEITHI 1.0 (DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-118-9_5) and NetMHCpan 4.1 DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa379).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Immunoprecipitation, Immunogenicity, Immunotherapies, Hla peptides, Hydrophobicity, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Marcel Wacker

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane S. Walz
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


