### Accession
PXD004088

### Title
P falciparum Pf377 protein complex in gametocytes

### Description
The identification of Pf377 interacting proteins in the osmiophilic bodies in P. falciparum gametocytes. In a comparative proteomics approach, immunopurified Pfg377 complexes were obtained in wild type and Osmiophilic Body -depleted gametocytes (Pf377 knock out gametocytes) and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to identify Pfg377 interaction partners in wt gametocytes as candidate for OB associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of osmiophilic body proteins by affinity proteomics - Prior to the immunopurification experiment, antibodies against Pfg377 B fragment were crosslinked to agarose beads: Agarose beads (50L) were washed 3 times with PBS 0.1% Tween-20 (Sigma-Aldrich) and resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 M NaCl (pH 8.0). Antibodies (20L) were added and the mix incubated for 3h at room temperature. Beads were then washed (500g centrifugations for 5 minutes was performed to pellet beads throughout the experiment) three times with 200mM sodium borate pH9.0 to eliminate unbound antibody. Beads were then resuspended in 3 volumes of methylpimelimidate (DMP, the crosslinking agent) 20mM in 200mM borate pH9.0 and incubated for 90 minutes at room temperature in a shaker. Crosslinking solution was washed away and beads resuspended washed 3 times in TrisHCl 50mM pH7.5, and then incubated at room temperature for 2 hours, to terminate the crosslinking reaction. Non-crosslinked antibodies were removed by washing 3 times with 1mL of 0.58% v/v acetic acid 150mM NaCl. Beads were then washed 3 times in PBS and stored at 4° until experiment began. Correct crosslinking was evaluated through an acrylamide protein gel in which crosslinked beads showed to contain a protein of the expected length of the -Pfg377B antibodies. Samples containing 3x107 mature synchronous gametocytes from wt and the pfg377KO clone 8-20 were isolated via magnetic columns, pelleted and frozen. Lysis occurred for 30 minutes at 4°C in lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150mM sodium chloride, 1% Nonidet P40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, Complete protease inhibitor). Debris was pelleted and supernatants were incubated for 3 hours at 4°C with non-crosslinked agarose beads to pre-clear the lysate. Beads were pelleted and discarded, and pre-cleared supernatant was then incubated overnight at 4°C with crosslinked beads containing Pfg377 fragment B antibodies. Beads were then pelleted and washed three times in lysis buffer. Elution of the bound protein was achieved through addition of 2x Laemmli sample buffer (Life Sciences) to the beads and incubating the sample at 95°C for 5 minutes. Gel based fractionation of the proteins in the supernatants was conducted by gel electrophoresis in a 4%-12% Bis-Tris precast gel (Life Technologies) and MES-SDS buffer. The gel was stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue and a single slice containing each sample was excised. Gel slices were treated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM  iodoacetamide and digested by trypsin overnight at 37 0C. Tryptic digests were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA and purified by STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification by MaxQuant - Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) was used to identify proteins. The protein database contained protein sequences from P. falciparum (http://plasmodb.org/common/downloads/release-27/Pfalciparum3D7/) and human IPI version 3.68 (ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/IPI/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide and 0.5 Da for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Deamination of glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and asparagine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. MaxQuant was used as described  to perform internal mass calibration of measured ions and peptide validation by the target decoy approach and to enable the ‘match between run option’ for an elution time window of 2 minutes. Peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were accepted. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities computed in MaxQuant with the label free quantification (LFQ) option switched on.

### Publication Abstract
An essential step in the transmission of the malaria parasite to the Anopheles vector is the transformation of the mature gametocytes into gametes in the mosquito gut, where they egress from the erythrocytes and mate to produce a zygote, which matures into a motile ookinete. Osmiophilic bodies are electron dense secretory organelles of the female gametocytes which discharge their contents during gamete formation, suggestive of a role in gamete egress. Only one protein with no functional annotation, Pfg377, is described to specifically reside in osmiophilic bodies in Plasmodium falciparum Importantly, Pfg377 defective gametocytes lack osmiophilic bodies and fail to infect mosquitoes, as confirmed here with newly produced pfg377 disrupted parasites. The unique feature of Pfg377 defective gametocytes of lacking osmiophilic bodies was here exploited to perform comparative, label free, global and affinity proteomics analyses of mutant and wild type gametocytes to identify components of these organelles. Subcellular localization studies with fluorescent reporter gene fusions and specific antibodies revealed an osmiophilic body localization for four out of five candidate gene products analyzed: the proteases PfSUB2 (subtilisin 2) and PfDPAP2 (Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 2), the ortholog of the osmiophilic body component of the rodent malaria gametocytes PbGEST and a previously nonannotated 13 kDa protein. These results establish that osmiophilic bodies and their components are dispensable or marginally contribute (PfDPAP2) to gamete egress. Instead, this work reveals a previously unsuspected role of these organelles in P. falciparum development in the mosquito vector.

### Keywords
Malaria, Osmiophilic body, P. falciparum, Gametocyte, Pf377

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences; Plymouth University (UK)
Plymouth University

### Submitter
Edwin Lasonder

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Lasonder
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences; Plymouth University (UK)


