### Accession
PXD006790

### Title
The non-canonical poly(A) polymerase FAM46C acts as an onco-suppressor in multiple myeloma

### Description
FAM46C is one of the most frequently mutated genes in multiple myeloma (MM). Here, using a combination of in vitro and in vivo approaches, we demonstrate that FAM46C encodes an active non-canonical poly(A) polymerase which enhances mRNA stability and gene expression. Reintroduction of active FAM46C into MM cell lines, but not its catalytically-inactive mutant, leads to broad polyadenylation and stabilization of mRNAs strongly enriched with those encoding endoplasmic reticulum-targeted proteins and induces cell death. Moreover, silencing of FAM46C in MM cells expressing WT protein enhance cell proliferation. Finally, using a FAM46C-FLAG knock-in mouse strain we show that the FAM46C protein is strongly induced during activation of primary splenocytes and that B lymphocytes isolated from newly generated FAM46C KO mice proliferate faster than those isolated from their WT littermates. Concluding, our data clearly indicate that FAM46C works as an onco-suppressor, with the specificity for B-lymphocyte lineage from which multiple myeloma originates.

### Sample Protocol
Co-Immunopreciptation  Cell harvested from two 145 mm plates at a confluency of 80-90% were fleshly frozen, thawed on ice, and incubated for 30 min at 4°C with gentle rotation in 3 mL LB buffer (20mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton-X100, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 0.02 µM pepstatin A, 0.02 µg/ml chymostatin, 0.006 µM leupeptin, and 20 µM benzamidine hydrochloride supplemented with proteases and phosphatase inhibitors; Invitrogen). Next, lysates were sonicated for 30 min in Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) (30s pulses with 30s intervals), after which they were cleared by centrifugation at 13 000 rpm and 4°C for 15 min.  Immunoprecipitations were performed using house-in made affinity slurry CNBr-activated SepFast MAG 4HF [Biotoolomics] coupled with house-in purified anti-GFP antibodies). After 2h of incubation, beads were washed 6 times with LB buffer and finaly washed with TEV buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 75 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT). Cleavage with TEV protease was conducted for 2h at RT. Then, proteins were precipitated with PRM reagents (0.05 mM pyrogallol red, 0.16 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium oxalate, 50 mM succinic acid, and pH 2.5 [Sigma-Aldrich]) and then analyzed by MS.  Mass spectrometry analysis  Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced in 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 57°C, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at RT in the dark, and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a 180-min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS-MS2 mode and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300–2000.

### Data Protocol
The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination; the final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples. If the protein of interest was identified in the washing run and in the next measured sample at the same or smaller intensity, then the sample was regard as contaminated and these samples were excluded from final graphs. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS-MS2 mode and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300–2000. Data were analyzed with the Max-Quant (Version 1.5.3.12) platform. The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used. We also searched our data for protein isoforms (for example BCCIP alfa/beta) to determine which were present. Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm to estimate quantities of identified proteins and identified proteins were analyzed as follows. Protein abundance was defined as the LFQ value calculated by MaxQuant software for a protein (sum of intensities of identified peptides of a given protein) divided by its molecular weight. Specificity was defined as the ratio of the protein LFQ intensity measured in the bait purification to background level (i.e., protein LFQ intensity in the negative control purification with the background level was arbitrarily set to 1 for proteins not detected in the negative control). High values of both protein abundance and specificity indicated proteins that were enriched in the purification and thus suggested interactions. Common protein contaminations were removed from graphs. All MS analyses were performed at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, IBB PAS.

### Publication Abstract
FAM46C is one of the most frequently mutated genes in multiple myeloma. Here, using a combination of in vitro and in vivo approaches, we demonstrate that FAM46C encodes an active non-canonical poly(A) polymerase which enhances mRNA stability and gene expression. Reintroduction of active FAM46C into multiple myeloma cell lines, but not its catalytically-inactive mutant, leads to broad polyadenylation and stabilization of mRNAs strongly enriched with those encoding endoplasmic reticulum-targeted proteins and induces cell death. Moreover, silencing of FAM46C in multiple myeloma cells expressing WT protein enhance cell proliferation. Finally, using a FAM46C-FLAG knock-in mouse strain, we show that the FAM46C protein is strongly induced during activation of primary splenocytes and that B lymphocytes isolated from newly generated FAM46C KO mice proliferate faster than those isolated from their WT littermates. Concluding, our data clearly indicate that FAM46C works as an onco-suppressor, with the specificity for B-lymphocyte lineage from which multiple myeloma originates. FAM46C is one of the most frequently mutated genes in multiple myeloma (MM), but its molecular function remains unknown. Here the authors show that FAM46C is a poly(A) polymerase and that loss of function of FAM46C drives multiple myeloma through the destabilisation of ER response transcripts.

### Keywords
Fam46c, Lc-msms, Mouse, Anemia, B lymphocytes, Polyadenylation, Multiple myeloma

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Laboraotry of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics, Insititue of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy od Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Andrzej Dziembowski
Laboraotry of RNA Biology and Functional Genomics, Insititue of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy od Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


