### Accession
PXD036801

### Title
Discovery of RUF6 ncRNA interacting proteins involved in P. falciparum immune evasion

### Description
RUF6 is a ncRNA gene family that is transcribed by RNA Polymerase III but actively regulates the Pol II-transcribed var virulence gene family. Understanding how RUF6 ncRNA connect to downstream effectors is lacking. We developed an RNA-directed proteomic discovery (ChIRP-MS) protocol to identify in vivo RUF6 ncRNA protein interactions. The RUF6 ncRNA interactome was purified with biotinylated antisense oligonucleotides. Quantitative label-free mass spectrometry identified several unique proteins linked to gene transcription including. Affinity purification of Pf-DDX5 identified proteins originally found by our RUF6-ChIRP protocol, validating the technique’s robustness for identifying ncRNA interactomes in P. falciparum. Our work identifies a RUF6 ncRNA protein complex that interacts with RNA Pol II to sustain var gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
1) Chromatin isolation by RNA purification and proteomics mass spectrometry analysis (ChIRP-MS).  ChIRP was performed as previously described (Chu & Chang, 2018) with the following modifications. 4x1010 parasites per sample were harvested and lysed with saponin prior to 3% formaldehyde crosslinking. After final wash buffer washes, five additional washes with 500 mM NaCl followed by another five washes with 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (ABC) were performed. Bound proteins were analyzed by proteomics mass spectrometry. A total of 4 biological replicates, cultured separately and grown at different times, for each of the four samples, scrambled probes, RNase A treated, even probes and odd probes, were performed. For proteomics mass spectrometry, bound proteins were first on-beads digested for one hour with 0.6 µg of trypsine/LysC (Promega), then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online liquid chromatography (LC) was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific).   2) Co-Immunoprecipitation followed by Mass spectrometry (Co-IP-MS). pSLI-2xFKBP-GFP-DDX5 tagged parasites (n = 5 biological replicates) and pSLI-2xFKBP-GFP-unknown function tagged parasites (n = 5 biological replicates) were synchronized. At 18 hpi, each culture (1.5 × 109 parasites) was centrifuged and RBCs were lysed with six volumes of 0.15% saponin in DPBS for 5 min at 4°C. Parasites were centrifuged at 4,000 g for 5 min at 4°C, and the pellet was washed twice with DPBS at 4°C. Parasites were then cross-linked with 3% formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature and quenched with 125 mM glycine for 5 min on ice. Cross-linked parasites were washed twice with DPBS and then lysed with 5 ml of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher 78440) and 1 U/μl of Benzonase (Merck 71206) at 4°C and incubated with rotation for 30 min at 4°C. Extracts were centrifuged for 8 min at 380g at 4°C and the cytoplasmic supernatant was removed. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in 900 μL nuclear lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1%sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, PI) at 4°C and transferred to 1.5 ml sonication tubes (300 μL per tube, DiagenodeC30010016). Samples were sonicated for 10 min (30 s on/off) in a Diagenode Pico Bioruptor at 4°C. Lysates were then centrifuged for 10 min at 13,500g at 4°C and supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. 900 μL of the supernatant was mixed with 1.35 mL (2:3) dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mmM EDTA). Nuclear fraction supernatants were incubated with 25 μl of α-GFP trap beads (Chromotek) first washed twice in dilution buffer, overnight with rotation at 4°C. The next day, the beads were collected on a magnet and the supernatant was removed. While on the magnetic stand, beads were washed twice with 500 μL washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.05% NP40), once with 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma 09830) buffer, and then transferred to new tube. Finally, the beads were resuspended in 100 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 CH3CN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness with a SpeedVac apparatus. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 of injection buffer in 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Online LC was performed with an RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
ChIRP-MS & Co-IP-MS: For identification, the data were searched against the Plasmodium falciparum FASTA database (PlasmoDB-36 Pfaciparum3D7 AnnotatedProtein containing cas9 and the common contaminants) using SequestHT through proteome discoverer (version 2.2 or 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (v3.9.3 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms, PMID: 17610305). False-discovery rate (FDR) calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=4 or N=5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Antigenic variation, Malaria virulence, Var genes, Ruf6 ncrna

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


