### Accession
PXD013036

### Title
Comparison of Amphibalanus amphitrite exuviae (molts) and adhesive

### Description
The base of the barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite has a layer of protein and cuticle that adheres the barnacle to the surface. The proteins in the adhesive have been characterized, but it is unknown whether the adhesive proteins are associated with the cuticle. To address this possibility, we examined the proteins associated with the molt (exuviae) from the main body, which is also composed of cuticle.

### Sample Protocol
Molts were collected from barnacles within an hour of release and added to a PCT (pressure cycling technology) tube (1 per tube). Five had 30 µl of urea buffer (8M urea in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate) added and six had 30 µl of hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) added. Another five barnacles were “forced” to molt by keeping the barnacles in a humid chamber without water for 24 hours and then adding water back. These forced molts were processed with urea buffer. Gummy glue (hydrated adhesive) was collected from the base of the barnacle and ~2 mg were added to PCT tubes. Three gummy glue samples were incubated with urea buffer and three were incubated with HFIP. A micropestle cap was added to each PCT tube and samples were exposed to pressure (45 kpsi, 60 cycles, 50s on, 10s off, RT) in a Barocycler NEP 2320 to extract proteins. Protein content was then quantified via BCA analysis. All samples were treated with 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40mM iodoacetamide to reduce and alkylate cysteines. HFIP and urea samples were sequentially diluted to 100 and 150 µl with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10% n-propanol for digestion with sequencing grade LysC (20 kpsi, 45 cycles, 50s on, 10s off, 37°C) and trypsin (20 kpsi, 90 cycles, 50s on, 10s off, 37°C) (LysC/trypsin mix, Promega, Madison, WI). Digested peptides were cleaned via C18 desalting tips and dried via speed-vac (Thermo Savant, Waltham, MA). Peptides were resuspended to 0.1 ng/ul in 0.1 formic acid and 1 μl of the sample was injected into LC-MS/MS system for proteomics analysis using U3000 LC coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Autosampler loaded sample onto trap column (PepMap 100, C18, 300 um ID x 5mm, 5um, 100A) via loading pump at 5ul/min flow rate and 2% solvent B. Analytical pump at 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides from the trap onto analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 um IDx150 mm, C18, 2um, 100A) using a gradient of increasing solvent B (increase of 8% over 12 minutes, followed by a 10% increase over 18 minutes, a 30% increase over 47 minutes, and a 30% increase over 8 minutes for molt samples; increase of 18%  over first 80 minutes, followed by a 60% increase over 15 minutes for gummy glue samples). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Mass spectra were acquired on Fusion Lumos Orbitrap equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source in data-dependent acquisition mode with 3 s cycle times. A survey scan range of 400-1,600 Da was acquired on the Orbitrap detector (resolution 120K). Maximum injection time was 50 ms and AGC target was 400,000. The most intense ions with charges of 2-7 were fragmented using HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation), and ions were excluded for 30 s from subsequent MS/MS submission.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS detector was an IonTrap with 35 ms injection time and AGC target of 10,000. Spectra were extracted and converted into mgf using ProteoWizard software then searched against a database containing common standards and contaminants i.e. trypsin, keratin, etc. (190 protein sequences) and a subset of an in-house created database of predicted barnacle proteins based on transcriptomic data from A. amphitrite sub-mantle tissue (Wang et al., 2015) using Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) as previously described (So et al., 2016; So et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications, precursor tolerance was set to 100 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da, 3 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Concerns about the bioaccumulation of toxic antifouling compounds have necessitated the search for alternative strategies to combat marine biofouling. Because many biologically essential minerals have deleterious effects on organisms at high concentration, one approach to preventing the settlement of marine foulers is increasing the local concentration of ions that are naturally present in seawater. Here, we used surface-active borate glasses as a platform to directly deliver ions (Na<sup>+</sup>, Mg<sup>2+</sup> and BO<sub>4</sub><sup>3-</sup>) to the adhesive interface under acorn barnacles (Amphibalanus (=Balanus) amphitrite). Additionally, surface-active glasses formed reaction layers at the glass-water interface, presenting another challenge to fouling organisms. Proteomics analysis showed that cement deposited on the gelatinous reaction layers is more soluble than cement deposited on insoluble glasses, indicating the reaction layer and/or released ions disrupted adhesion processes. Laboratory experiments showed that the majority (greater than 79%) of adult barnacles re-attached to silica-free borate glasses for 14 days could be released and, more importantly, barnacle larvae did not settle on the glasses. The formation of microbial biofilms in field tests diminished the performance of the materials. While periodic water jetting (120 psi) did not prevent the formation of biofilms, weekly cleaning did dramatically reduce macrofouling on magnesium aluminoborate glass to levels below a commercial foul-release coating. This article is part of the theme issue 'Transdisciplinary approaches to the study of adhesion and adhesives in biological systems'.

### Keywords
Exuviae, Barnacle, Chitin, Adhesive

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Janna Schultzhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Janna Schultzhaus
Naval Research Laboratory


