### Accession
PXD001185

### Title
Colonization state influences the hemocyte proteome in a beneficial squid-vibrio symbiosis

### Description
The squid, Euprymna scolopes, and the luminescent bacterium, Vibrio fischeri, form a highly specific beneficial light organ symbiosis. Not only does the host have to select V. fischeri from the environment, but it must also prevent subsequent colonization by non-symbiotic microorganisms. Host macrophage-like hemocytes are believed to play a role in mediating the symbiosis with V. fischeri. Previous studies have shown that the colonization state of the light organ influences the host’s hemocyte response to the symbiont. To further understand the molecular mechanisms behind this process, two quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic techniques, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) and label-free spectral counting, were used to compare and quantify the adult hemocyte proteomes from colonized (sym) and uncolonized (antibiotic-treated/cured) squid. Overall, iTRAQ allowed for the quantification of 1,024 proteins with 2 or more peptides. Thirty-seven unique proteins were determined to be significantly different between sym and cured hemocytes (p-value < 0.05), with 20 more abundant proteins and 17 less abundant in sym hemocytes. The label-free approach resulted in 1,241 proteins that were identified in all replicates. Of 185 unique proteins present at significantly different amounts in sym hemocytes (as determined by spectral counting), 92 were more abundant and 93 were less abundant. Comparisons between iTRAQ and spectral counting revealed that 30 of the 37 proteins quantified by iTRAQ exhibited similar trends identified by the label-free method. Both proteomic techniques mutually identified 16 proteins that were significantly different between the two groups of hemocytes (p-value <0.05). The presence of V. fischeri in the host light organ influenced the abundance of proteins associated with the cytoskeleton, adhesion, lysosomes, proteolysis, and the innate immune response. These data provide evidence that colonization by V. fischeri alters the hemocyte proteome and reveals proteins that may be important for maintaining host-symbiont specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Hemocytes were collected from adult E. scolopes with colonized (sym) or uncolonized (cured) light organs. To remove V. fischeri from the light organ, squid were treated with an antibiotic cocktail for five days. Hemocytes from eight squid from each condition were pooled and the proteins were extracted in a RIPA buffer. The protein pool from sym and cured hemocytes was then split in half and digested with trypsin. Peptides (100 micrograms each) from the two sym replicates and the two cured replicates were labeled with the 4plex-iTRAQ reagents. The four samples were combined and then fractionated into ten fractions on a Hewlett Packard HPLC 1090 using strong cation exchange (SCX). Individual SCX fractions were then separated with a 161-minute water to organic gradient on a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a 5600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer. For label-free proteomics, unprocessed sym and cured hemocyte proteins were digested with trypsin using a filter assisted sample preparation method (FASP; Expedeon). Tryptic digests of sym and cured unlabeled protein were analyzed in technical duplicates (22-hour runs per sample) with a 2d nano-LC-MS/MS system consisting of a split-phase nano column (RP-SCX-RP) connected to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted from the SCX column with 11 increasing salt pulses (0 to 500 mM ammonium acetate) followed by 2-hour water to organic gradients. Separated peptides were subsequently ionized via nanospray into the QExactive.

### Data Protocol
For the iTRAQ experiment, the combined raw MS/MS files (*.wiff) from Analyst TF 1.5.1 were analyzed with the ParagonTM search algorithm of ProteinPilot (version 4.0). Data were searched against an E. scolopes protein sequence database originating from published transcriptomic sequences (34, 684 sequences). The ProteinPilot software determined the mass tolerance of precursor and fragment ions during the calibration of the data. Searching parameters included the 4-plex iTRAQ reagents, trypsin digestion, MMTS cysteine alkylation, bias correction, and background correction, in addition to selecting no special factors, biological modifications or amino acid substitutions. The false discovery analysis conducted by the ProteinPilot software utilized a reversed sequence decoy database to determine the false discovery rate. Peptides identified by ProteinPilot were filtered using the “auto” setting to only include unique peptides, no missed cleavages, and at least 2 or more iTRAQ ions per peptide. Additionally, each protein quantified by ProteinPilot required two or more peptides. To compensate for any technical variation between iTRAQ labels, the remaining peptides were subject to a Cyclic Loess normalization using a script designed at Yale University’s W.M. Keck MS and Proteomics Resource Laboratory. Pairwise comparisons of each iTRAQ reporter during normalization revealed that the experimental variation arising from the iTRAQ reagents and methods was around 1.75 fold, which was used as the fold change cut-off. The iTRAQ ion areas for labels 114 and 115 (sym) and for labels 116 and 117 (cured) were averaged for each peptide of each protein. These average iTRAQ values were then used to compare the protein levels between sym and cured hemocytes. Proteins were determined to be significantly more or less abundant if the p-value was less than 0.05 (established by a t-test of the iTRAQ ion areas from contributing peptides) and a Log2 fold change greater than 0.80 or less than -0.80 (fold change of 1.75). Only proteins with a ProteinPilot unused score of  >2.0 (99% confidence level), a significant p-value, and those meeting the Log2 fold change cut-offs were considered for further analysis. For label-free proteomics, all MS/MS spectra were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm (version .27) and filtered with DTASelect/Contrast (version 1.9) at the peptide level (Xcorrs of at least 1.8 (+1), 2.5 (+2), 3.5 (+3)), with a minimum DeltCN of 0.08. SEQUEST parameters included a fixed modification for carboxyamidomethylated cysteines, a variable modification for urea carbamylation of arginine and lysine residues, trypsin digestion, up to 4 missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 3.0 Da and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Only proteins identified with two fully tryptic peptides from a 22-hour run were considered for further biological study. Tandem MS/MS spectra were searched against a database consisting of E. scolopes, V. fischeri ES114, and common contaminant protein sequences (22, 733 sequences). False discovery rates were determined by selecting one technical run from each sym and cured proteome analysis and searching those data against a reversed decoy database created from the squid-vibrio protein sequence database. Spectral counts were extracted for all proteins and compared across all runs. Protein spectral counts were normalized and compared between sym and cured hemocytes using the normalized spectral abundance factor method (NSAF). Significant differences between NSAF values for proteins of sym and cured hemocytes were determined by an unpaired equal variance t-test (p-value <0.05). For each significantly different protein, the ratio of the average NSAF for sym relative to the average NSAF for cured was Log2 transformed and filtered for proteins meeting a cut-off of a 1.5 fold change.

### Publication Abstract
The squid Euprymna scolopes and the luminescent bacterium Vibrio fischeri form a highly specific beneficial light organ symbiosis. Not only does the host have to select V. fischeri from the environment, but it must also prevent subsequent colonization by non-symbiotic microorganisms. Host macrophage-like hemocytes are believed to play a role in mediating the symbiosis with V. fischeri. Previous studies have shown that the colonization state of the light organ influences the host's hemocyte response to the symbiont. To further understand the molecular mechanisms behind this process, we used two quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomic techniques, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) and label-free spectral counting, to compare and quantify the adult hemocyte proteomes from colonized (sym) and uncolonized (antibiotic-treated/cured) squid. Overall, iTRAQ allowed for the quantification of 1,024 proteins with two or more peptides. Thirty-seven unique proteins were determined to be significantly different between sym and cured hemocytes (p value &lt; 0.05), with 20 more abundant proteins and 17 less abundant in sym hemocytes. The label-free approach resulted in 1,241 proteins that were identified in all replicates. Of 185 unique proteins present at significantly different amounts in sym hemocytes (as determined by spectral counting), 92 were more abundant and 93 were less abundant. Comparisons between iTRAQ and spectral counting revealed that 30 of the 37 proteins quantified via iTRAQ exhibited trends similar to those identified by the label-free method. Both proteomic techniques mutually identified 16 proteins that were significantly different between the two groups of hemocytes (p value &lt; 0.05). The presence of V. fischeri in the host light organ influenced the abundance of proteins associated with the cytoskeleton, adhesion, lysosomes, proteolysis, and the innate immune response. These data provide evidence that colonization by V. fischeri alters the hemocyte proteome and reveals proteins that may be important for maintaining host-symbiont specificity.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Vibrio fischeri, Spectral counting, Innate immunity, Itraq, Euprymna scolopes, Hemocytes

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Tyler Schleicher

### Lab Head
Dr Spencer V. Nyholm
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA


