### Accession
PXD008549

### Title
buffalo parthenogenesis TMT LC-MS/MS

### Description
Oocytes act as the genetic vector for zygote reprogramming, and stores a large amount of material that is required to regulate embryogenesis. However, to date, there is no report on the dynamic changes of maternal proteins and genes that occur during the early stages of the embryo, particularly studies that use proteomic techniques in buffalos. Here, an integrated single-cell RNA sequencing transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic analysis were employed to systematically explore the dynamic function of maternally-expressed proteins in parthenogenesis model of buffalo.The proteome of the buffalo was quantitatively analyzed during parthenogenesis of mature oocytes and the two-cell stage embryo. Of 1,908 quantified proteins, 123 differed significantly. The transcriptome was analyzed 8 stages (GV, MII, 2-cell,4-cell,8-cell,16-cell,morula,blastocyst)of buffalo using the single-cell RNA sequencing, and a total of 3567 unique genes were identified to be differently expressed between all consecutive stages of pre-implantation development. Bioinformatics studies and validated results indicated that maternal expression of the proteins possibly plays a role in the formation of cellular junctions firstly after parthenogenetic activation and the “maternal-to-zygotic transition” (MZT) process exists during parthenogenesis and occur between the 8-cell to 16-cell stage.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted protein was dissolved in 45uL of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, 5 μL of 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 55 μL of ultrapure water. Next, we used 5 μL of 200 mM trichloroethyl phosphate for 1 h at 55°C to reduce the sample, followed by 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in an environment protected by light. Each sample was then precipitated in cold acetone (1:6) at -20°C overnight, centrifuged (12,000 g; 4°C; 10 min), and the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and dissolved in 100 uL of 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, 2.5 μL of trypsin (1 μg/μL) was added into each sample for digestion at 37°C overnight. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) was added to the TMT reagent in each tube (0.8 mg), and dissolved for 5 min at room temperature. Next, 20 μL of each tag were added to each sample for labelling and the samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. We then added 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine into each sample and incubated for 15 min at room temperature to terminate the reaction. Samples were pooled and evaporated in a vacuum; samples of MII oocytes and PC embryos were labeled with TMT- 126 and TMT-127, respectively. Each sample was evaporated in a vacuum and re-suspended in 50 μL of buffer A (98% ddH2O, 2% ACN; pH 10.0) and separated by high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) column (2.1 × 100 mm, 3μm, 150 Å, C18). For separation, we used buffer A and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% ddH20; pH 10.0) for a 60-min linear gradient (4%–20% buffer B for 30 min, 20%–95% buffer B for 25 min, and 95% buffer B for 5 min. The fractions that were eluted from the column every 1.5 min were collected, and 20 fractions were collected according to the peak intensity. The collected fractions were desalted using a ZipTips C18 column (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). After being desalted, the fractions were evaporated with a vacuum, and 10 uL of solvent A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) were used for re-suspend the samples. A volume of 2 μl from each sample was loaded onto a trap column (PepMap RSLC C18 column, 50um×15 cm, 2 um nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), a maximum pressure (600 bar) was applied, and an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap100C18 column, 0.075 × 150 mm,3 μm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for elution at a rate of 300 nL/min. Next, we used buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (98% ACN and 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 60-min gradient (5%–40% buffer B for 45 min, 40%–100% buffer B for 10 min, 100% buffer B for 5 min) to separate the peptides. An LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an Easy-nLC 1,000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) was used for analyses of all peptide fractions online. A data-dependent mode in the scan range of 350–1,800 m/z was carried out for the mass spectrometry (MS) analyses, and the survey scans were captured at a mass resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z by the Orbitrap analyzer. In the linear ion trap, ten of the most intense precursor ions were selected for secondary mass spectrometry analysis (MS2) under the mode of high-energy collision dissociation. The dynamic exclusion parameter included an exclusion count of 2 and an exclusion time of 40 s. Siloxane ions were used for internal calibration (m/z = 445.1200).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified by Proteome Discoverer software v1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) based on the UniProt/Swiss-Prot Bos taurus database (Proteome ID: UP000009136). The search parameters used were as follows: fixed modifications, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da); TMT reagent adducts (+229.162932 Da) on the lysine and peptide amino termini; and variable modification, including oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da). Mass tolerance of precursor ions was 20 ppm, and fragment ions were set to ± 0.5 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR )was calculated using the peptide validator and based on a decoy database search. A p-value < 0.05 and a fold change >1.2 were considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal-effect genes are especially critical for early embryonic development after fertilization and until massive activation of the embryonic genome occurs. By applying a tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled quantitative proteomics combined with RNA sequencing approach, the proteome of the buffalo was quantitatively analyzed during parthenogenesis of mature oocytes and the two-cell stage embryo. Of 1908 quantified proteins, 123 differed significantly. The transcriptome was analyzed eight stages (GV, MII, 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, 16-cell, morula, blastocyst) of Buffalo using the RNA sequencing approach, and a total of 3567 unique genes were identified to be differently expressed between all consecutive stages of pre-implantation development. Validation of proteomics results (TUBB3, CTNNA1, CDH3, MAP2K1), which are involved in tight junction and gap junction, revealing that the maternal expression of the proteins possibly plays a role in the formation of cellular junctions firstly after parthenogenetic activation. Correlation and hierarchical analyses of transcriptional profiles and the expression of NPM2 and NLRP5 mRNA of buffalo <i>in vitro</i> developed oocytes and parthenogenetic embryos indicated that the "maternal-to-zygotic transition" (MZT) process might exist in the model of parthenogenesis, which is similar to a normally fertilized embryo, and may occur between the 8-cell to 16-cell stage. These data provide a rich resource for further studies on maternal proteins and genes and are conducive to improving nuclear transfer technology.

### Keywords
Parthenogenesis  maternal  lc-ms/ms  tmt

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresource, Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi 530004, China
Guangxi University

### Submitter
Fumei Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Zhang
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresource, Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi 530004, China


