### Accession
PXD028907

### Title
β-1,3-glucan recognition by Acanthamoeba castellanii as a putative mechanism of amoeba-fungal interactions

### Description
Acanthamoeba castellanii (Ac) and macrophages share structural, morphological, physiological and biochemical similarities, including the ability to phagocyte a myriad of microorganisms in the environments they live. Whereas there is voluminous information on phagocytic receptors of macrophages, for Ac, the understanding of how the recognition of extracellular microorganisms works still awaits elucidation. Recently, our group described mannose-binding proteins expressed on the surface of the trophozoites. However, as soluble mannose did not inhibit entirely the process, other interactions might be possible. In the present work, we aimed to characterize the potential Ac proteins able to recognize the polysaccharide β-1,3-glucan on fungal surfaces. Our data demonstrate that Ac could bind curdlan or laminarin on its surface as detected by Dectin-1-Fc and fluorescent conjugate, suggesting the presence of β-1,3-glucan binding molecules. Optical tweezers detected higher adhesion affinity of laminarin or curdlan coated beads to A. castellanii (characteristic time of 46.9 s and 43.9 s, respectively) in comparison control beads (BSA or dextran-coated). In agreement, a H. capsulatum (Hc) G217B having β-1,3-glucan as the most external layer strongly adhered to Ac (characteristic time of 5.3 s), whereas Hc G186A, an α-1,3-glucan expressing strain, displayed much lower adhesion forces (characteristic time of 83.6 s). The specificity of our system was confirmed with addition of soluble β-1,3-glucan, which inhibited dramatically the adhesion of Hc G217B to Ac (characteristic time of 38,5 s). By indirect ELISA, the biotinylated extract of Ac showed higher binding to Hc G217B surface than Hc G186A, as similar results were observed when using Dectin-1-Fc. By interaction assays, association rates to Ac and RAW macrophages were twice higher for Hc G217B when compared to Hc G186A. Inhibitions with mannose, or its combinations with curdlan or laminarin demonstrated inhibitions higher than 50% during Ac and Hc G217B interaction. For RAW macrophages, the combinations mannose + laminarin and mannose + curdlan had inhibition of 64.4% and 51.5%, respectively, in the interaction with Hc G217B. The killing assay show that for A. castellanii, there was a decrease in the number of viable fungi when either laminarin and curdlan were added, which is similar to results observed with macrophages, suggesting the participation of this receptor for fungal entrance and survival within phagocytes. Proteomics identified several proteins with the capacity to bind β-1,3-glucans, including a membrane integral component (L8HDD6) displaying a legume lectin domain and also belonging to the Concanavalin A-like lectin/glucanase domain superfamily. By the demonstrated binding specificity of this receptor, our data reinforce other pathways of fungal recognition and suggests to a possible parallel or even divergent evolution, between A. castellanii and macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
One-hundred µg of the aforementioned extract, containing Ac biotinylated surface proteins with β-1,3-glucan affinity, was incubated with 100 μg of streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher) for 30 min at RT with shaking. Beads were washed five times with PBS and magnetic capturing, and dried in a speed vac (Epperdorf, Germany) [20]. The magnetic beads were suspended in 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea, added of 1 M HEPES to final concentration of 100 mM in solution, followed by 100 mM dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 1 h at 30 °C. Alkylation was performed with 400 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and tubes incubated at RT in the dark for 30 min. After, 175 μL of ultrapure water (TEDIA, USA) and 100 ng/mL sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in 0.1 M of acetic acid were added to a final concentration of 0.1 ng/mL, and tubes incubated overnight at 37 °C. Then, 2 μL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, samples cleaned up (micro Spin Column, Harvard Apparatus) and dried in a speed vac. Tryptic peptide were dissolved in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA and approximately 4 μL of the mixture was loaded onto an in‐house packed column (15 cm × 75 μm) filled with 3 μm ReproSil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using the NanoLC-Ultra nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies). Samples were injected in a nano-LC–MS/MS system consisting of an EASY II-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystem) coupled to a nanoESI LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two µg of peptides were loaded to a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm) packed inhouse with C-18 ReproSil 5 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) and a New Objective PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm) packed with Reprosil-pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). For each sample, peptides elution used a linear gradient of solvent solution ACN 95%, 0.1% TFA from 5% to 20% for 85 min, 20-40% for 22 min, 40-95% for 5 min and 95% for 8 min, using 250 nL/min as flow rate. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive mode top 10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. MS1 scan was acquired in an Orbitrap analyzer set for a 350-1800 m/z range, 60000 resolution (at m/z 400) with a minimal signal required of 10000, isolation width of 2.0. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 30 normalized collision energy (NCE) with a dynamic exclusion of 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were processed using the peptides search engine BSI PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) for peptide identification. The considered parent mass error tolerance and fragment mass error tolerance were both set to 0.6 Da and 0.5 Da, with precursor mass search type monoisotopic. The maximum missed tryptic cleavages was set to two, and one non‐specific cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylating was set as fixed modification (MW = 57.02 Da) and as variable modifications, methionine oxidation (MW = 15.99 Da) and lysine Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin conjugation (MW = 339.16 Da) were allowed. The Ac database used was downloaded from www.uniprot.org and contained 14,944 proteins as for February 2021. The considered false discovery rate was set to 1%. All processed data and spectra generated by software were compared with raw data spectra and manually checked. An output of de novo peptides was obtained from the Peaks X software and analyzed in the De Novo Sequencing (PepExplorer) of the PatternLab for Proteomics (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org). The PepExplorer was set up against the same target-decoy sequence database of Ac as described above, according to instructions informed elsewhere [35], with a set of parameters that were adjusted to optimize the analysis process and most stringent comparison parameters, including the Reverse Decoy Label insertion,  minimal identity of 0.5, a minimum peptide size of 6 amino acids and a De novo score cut off of 90. Upon analysis, the dynamic report showed a list of identified proteins and the matching peptides based on sequence alignments that were compared among samples for the determination of proteins with affinity to β-1,3-glucan affinity. Only protein hits that presented two or more different peptides identified, were considered as valid, with the presence of peptides with at least five amino acid residues sequenced consecutively in the series Y-, or B- or by complementary form. Detected proteins with domains with recognized affinity to β-1,3-glucan were classified according to Legentil et al. [67] and InterPro (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) into 7 main groups and used to construct the Table 1. Besides, protein transmembrane domains were mapped using the Transmembrane Hidden Markov Model (TMHMM server v. 2.0; http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/) and the PSI-blast based secondary structure PREDiction (PSIPRED 4.0; http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred)

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acanthamoeba castellanii</i> (<i>Ac</i>) is a species of free-living amoebae (FLAs) that has been widely applied as a model for the study of host-parasite interactions and characterization of environmental symbionts. The sharing of niches between <i>Ac</i> and potential pathogens, such as fungi, favors associations between these organisms. Through predatory behavior, <i>Ac</i> enhances fungal survival, dissemination, and virulence in their intracellular milieu, training these pathogens and granting subsequent success in events of infections to more evolved hosts. In recent studies, our group characterized the amoeboid mannose binding proteins (MBPs) as one of the main fungal recognition pathways. Similarly, mannose-binding lectins play a key role in activating antifungal responses by immune cells. Even in the face of similarities, the distinct impacts and degrees of affinity of fungal recognition for mannose receptors in amoeboid and animal hosts are poorly understood. In this work, we have identified high-affinity ligands for mannosylated fungal cell wall residues expressed on the surface of amoebas and macrophages and determined the relative importance of these pathways in the antifungal responses comparing both phagocytic models. Mannose-purified surface proteins (MPPs) from both phagocytes showed binding to isolated mannose/mannans and mannosylated fungal cell wall targets. Although macrophage MPPs had more intense binding when compared to the amoeba receptors, the inhibition of this pathway affects fungal internalization and survival in both phagocytes. Mass spectrometry identified several MPPs in both models, and in silico alignment showed highly conserved regions between spotted amoeboid receptors (MBP and MBP1) and immune receptors (Mrc1 and Mrc2) and potential molecular mimicry, pointing to a possible convergent evolution of pathogen recognition mechanisms.

### Keywords
Dectin, Interaction, Histoplasma capsulatum, Acanthamoeba. castellanii, Β-glucan, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Instituto Biomédico, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia – MIP, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rua Prof. Hernani Pires de Melo 101, São Domingos, Niterói-RJ, Brazil, ZipCode 24210-130, Phone: +55 21 2629-2410
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Luis Felipe Ramos

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Jefferson Guimaraes
Instituto Biomédico, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia – MIP, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rua Prof. Hernani Pires de Melo 101, São Domingos, Niterói-RJ, Brazil, ZipCode 24210-130, Phone: +55 21 2629-2410


