### Accession
PXD011960

### Title
Integrated phosphoproteome and transcriptome analysis reveals Chlamydia-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in host cells

### Description
Chlamydia trachomatis are the etiological agents of a range of diseases and are epidemiologically associated with cervical and ovarian cancers. The interplay between host and chlamydia is highly complex, and to obtain panoramic view of the functional interplay, we performed combinatorial global phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic analyses of C. trachomatis-induced signaling. We identified numerous previously unknown C. trachomatis phosphoproteins and C. trachomatis-regulated host phosphoproteins that are substrates of kinases involved in various cellular processes. Interestingly, several host transcription factors (TFs) that are phosphorylated in C. trachomatis infections, including ETS2 repressor factor (ERF), proto-oncogenic transcription factor ETS1 are targets of ERK MAPK signaling. While these TFs were found to be essential for Chlamydia development, we demonstrated their involvement in inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in C. trachomatis infected cells by transcriptional regulation of genes involved in cellular motility and invasion. Our data reveals substantially unexplored complexity of C. trachomatis-induced signaling and provides broader insights into pro-carcinogenic potential of C. trachomatis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark room. Proteins were first digested by Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) at a LysC-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) for 3 h at room temperature. Then, the sample solution was diluted to final concentration of 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion was performed at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 h. Enzyme activity was quenched by acidification of the samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (cite this paper: PMID: 12585499) prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed and processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.1.2). Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable modifications including L-[13C6,15N4]-arginine, L-[13C6,15N2]-lysine, methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications for phosphoproteome analysis. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm for MS scans and 20 ppm for MS/MS scans. The match between runs was enabled. Database search was performed using Andromeda against UniProt human database (October, 2014) and Chlamydia database (February, 2015) with common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Chlamydia trachomatis (Ctr) causes a range of infectious diseases and is epidemiologically associated with cervical and ovarian cancers. To obtain a panoramic view of Ctr-induced signaling, we performed global phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic analyses. We identified numerous Ctr phosphoproteins and Ctr-regulated host phosphoproteins. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that these proteins were predominantly related to transcription regulation, cellular growth, proliferation, and cytoskeleton organization. In silico kinase substrate motif analysis revealed that MAPK and CDK were the most overrepresented upstream kinases for upregulated phosphosites. Several of the regulated host phosphoproteins were transcription factors, including ETS1 and ERF, that are downstream targets of MAPK. Functional analysis of phosphoproteome and transcriptome data confirmed their involvement in&#xa0;epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a phenotype that was validated in infected cells, along with the essential role of ERK1/2, ETS1, and ERF for&#xa0;Ctr replication. Our data reveal the extent of Ctr-induced signaling and provide insights into its pro-carcinogenic potential.

### Keywords
Chlamydia, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
MDC

### Submitter
Koshi Imami

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
MDC


