### Accession
PXD000165

### Title
Analysis of botrytis cinerea mycelium proteins

### Description
Comparison of Botrytis cinerea wild-type B.05.10 and T4 strains using label-free nUPLC-MSE and 2-DE approaches. B. cinerea strain mycelium were grown in synthetic minimal medium-modified Czapeck-Dox. Protein extracts were obtained from pulverized mycelium using TCA-phenol method. Acquired spectra were internally calibrated with peptides from trypsin 180 autolysis (M+H+=842.509,M+H+=2211.104) with an m/z precision of ±20 ppm. A combined search (PMF and MS/MS) was performed with GPS ExplorerTM software v3.5 (Applied Biosystems) over non-redundant NCBI databases using the MASCOT search engine. The database search utilized the following parameters: taxonomy restrictions to Fungi (06.17.2011), one missed cleavage sites, 100 ppm mass tolerance in MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS data, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. The confidence in the peptide mass fingerprinting matches (p<0.05) was based on the MOWSE score.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea infects more than different 200 plant species and causes substantial losses in numerous crops. The B05.10 and T4 wild-type strain genomes have been recently sequenced, becoming a model system for necrotrophic pathogens, as well as opening up new alternatives in functional genomics, such as proteomics. We analyzed B. cinerea mycelium from these two wild-type strains, introducing label-free shotgun nUPLC-MS(E) methodology to complement the 2-DE-MS-based approach. We assessed the label-free nUPLC-MS(E) methodology for protein identification and quantification using five mycelium protein dilutions. A total of 225 and 170 protein species were identified by nUPLC-MS(E) in the B05.10 and T4 strains, respectively. Moreover, 129 protein species were quantified in both strains. Significant differences in protein abundance were found in 15 more abundant and 16 less abundant protein species in the B05.10 strain compared to the T4 strain. Twenty-nine qualitative and 15 significant quantitative differences were found using 2-DE. The label-free nUPLC-MS(E) was a reliable, reproducible and sensitive method for protein identification and quantification to study the B. cinerea mycelial proteome. Results obtained by gel-based and gel-free complementary approaches allow a deeper characterization of this fungus, as well as the identification of potential virulence factors.

### Keywords
2de, Botrytis cinerea, Quantification, Mse

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Kerman Aloria

### Lab Head


