### Accession
PXD018866

### Title
A peptidisc-based AP/MS approach to explore the interactome of the bacterial Sec translocon

### Description
We recently presented the peptidisc membrane mimetic for the global reconstitution of membrane proteomes into water-soluble detergent-free particles, termed peptidisc library. We here develop a method that combines the peptidisc library with affinity pulldown and mass spectrometry (AP/MS) to explore the membrane interactome at native expression level, which minimizes artifacts due to protein overproduction or exposure to detergents. Using the Sec translocon as a case study, we identify an expanded holo-translocon complex, termed the HMD complex, which consists of 9 different membrane subunits - SecYEG, SecDFyajC, YidC, plus YfgM and PpiD. This super-complex can be biochemically isolated in peptidisc but not in detergent. We also detect associations of the HMD complex with the outer membrane Bam complex and we discover a novel unannotated inner membrane protein named YibN. This interactome analysis at native expression level points out the membrane complexes that are dissociated in detergent, yet stable enough to be captured in peptidiscs. We believe this information is critical for the design of biochemical procedures that will enable their successful purification.

### Sample Protocol
We use a set of E. coli strains that are modified with a sequential peptide affinity (SPA) tag inserted at specific gene position, thereby creating a C-terminal fusion with the protein of interest.  This chromosomal-level tagging approach maintains expression of the target protein at near-endogenous levels (Babu, M et al. Nat Biotechnol 2018). After reconstitution of the membrane proteome into peptidiscs, tagged bait proteins and their interactors are identified by AP/MS using anti-FLAG antibodies (Carlson, M.et al. Elife 2018).

### Data Protocol
To build a MP interaction network, the MS/MS spectra from each replicate affinity pulldown was searched against reference E.coli. protein sequences using the SEQUEST/ STATQUEST algorithm (Kislinger et al., 2003)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec translocon, Protein translocation, Protein complex analysis, Affinity tagging, Membrane mimetics, Affinity purification/mass spectrometry (ap/ms), Peptidisc, Membrane protein complexes, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Duong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada


