### Accession
PXD006839

### Title
NuRD and CAF-1-mediated silencing of the D4Z4 array is modulated by DUX4-induced MBD3L proteins

### Description
This study was designed to identify proteins associated with the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat array in human muscle cells using a locus-specific proteomics approach (enChIP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
After generating human myoblast cell lines stably co-expressing FLAG-tagged, nuclease-deficient Cas9 (FLAG-dCas9) and guide RNA targeting either the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat (gD4Z4) or the MYOD1 distal regulatory region (gMYOD1), we immunoprecipitated FLAG-dCas9 using an anti-FLAG antibody and analyzed the associated proteins by LC-MS/MS using an OrbiTrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 was used for data analysis. The acquired LC-MS/MS raw spectra were searched against the UniProt human protein database (March 19, 2014) that also included common contaminants as defined in the CRAPome repository using SEQUEST.

### Publication Abstract
The DUX4 transcription factor is encoded by a retrogene embedded in each unit of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat. DUX4 is normally expressed in the cleavage-stage embryo, whereas chromatin repression prevents DUX4 expression in most somatic tissues. Failure of this repression causes facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) due to mis-expression of DUX4 in skeletal muscle. In this study, we used CRISPR/Cas9 engineered chromatin immunoprecipitation (enChIP) locus-specific proteomics to characterize D4Z4-associated proteins. These and other approaches identified the Nucleosome Remodeling Deacetylase (NuRD) and Chromatin Assembly Factor 1 (CAF-1) complexes as necessary for DUX4 repression in human skeletal muscle cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Furthermore, DUX4-induced expression of MBD3L proteins partly relieved this repression in FSHD muscle cells. Together, these findings identify NuRD and CAF-1 as mediators of DUX4 chromatin repression and suggest a mechanism for the amplification of DUX4 expression in FSHD muscle cells.

### Keywords
Human, D4z4, Fshd, Dux4

### Affiliations
Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
FHCRC

### Submitter
Yuko Ogata

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Tapscott
Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


