### Accession
PXD015877

### Title
The length of a ubiquitin chain is a general determinant for selective recognition by ubiquitin-binding proteins.

### Description
The attachment of differently linked ubiquitin (Ub) chains of varying length to proteins is a prevalent posttranslational modification in eukaryotic cells. The fate of a modified protein is determined by Ub-binding proteins (UBPs) that interact with Ub chains in a linkage-selective manner. Therefore, proteome-wide interaction studies using differently linked Ub chains have become a focus of research activities. However, the impact and functional consequences of chain length on the binding selectivity of UBPs remain mostly elusive, due to a lack of available tools and sufficient amounts of pure, length-defined Ub chains. Here we generated linkage- and length-defined Ub chains using click-chemistry and gel-free fractionation and employed such defined polymers in affinity-based enrichment assays to identify length- and linkage-selective interactors on a proteome-wide scale. For the first time, this revealed that the length of a Ub chain has generally a major impact on its ability to be selectively recognized by UBPs.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS using recombinant ubiquitin chains and HEK293T whole cell lysate (triplicate). Elution fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE following in-gel tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS measurement in technical duplicate. Data were analyzed using MaxQuant and Perseus.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) with match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) (minimum ratio count 2) enabled. The minimal peptide length was set to 5. For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2018-02-22) and the integrated database of common contaminants were used. Further data processing was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.1.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Posttranslational modification, Ub-binding proteins, Chain-length

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology - Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology - Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz


