### Accession
PXD031321

### Title
Calpain Cleavage of Junctophilin-2 generates a Spectrum of Calcium-dependent Cleavage Products and DNA-rich NT1-Fragment Domains in Cardiomyocytes

### Description
Calpains are calcium (Ca2+) activated neutral proteases that are involved in several essential signaling pathways. One Calpain-specific proteolytic target is Junctophilin-2 (JP2), an important structural protein of Ca2+ release units required for the excitation-contraction coupling in cardiomyocytes. While downregulation of JP2 by Calpain cleavage in mouse models of heart failure has been reported previously, the precise molecular identity of the Calpain cleavage sites and the (patho-) physiological roles of the JP2 proteolytic products remain controversial. We systematically analyzed the JP2 cleavage fragments as function of Calpain-1 versus Calpain-2 proteolytic activities, revealing that both Calpain isoforms preferentially cleave mouse JP2 at R565 but subsequently also at three additional secondary Calpain cleavage sites. We identified the Calpain-specific primary cleavage products not only in mouse but also in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). Knockout of RyR2 in hiPSC-CMs destabilized JP2 resulting in an increase of the Calpain-specifc cleavage fragments. The primary N-terminal cleavage product (NT1) accumulated in the nucleus of mouse and human cardiomyocytes in a Ca2+ dependent manner, closely associated with DNA-rich chromosomal regions, where NT1 is proposed to function as a cardioprotective transcriptional regulator in heart failure. Taken together, our data suggest that stabilizing NT1 by preventing secondary cleavage events by Calpain and other proteases could be an important therapeutic target for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE on 4 to 12% bis-tris minigels followed by Coomassie blue staining. Detected gel slices were cut out, reduced with 1,4-dithiothreitol, alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. Trypsinized peptides were extracted and dried using SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched on a self-packed reversed-phase C18 precolumn (0.15 mm inside diameter × 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), followed by separation on an analytical reversed-phase C18 column (0.075 mm inside diameter × 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min−1. The eluent was analyzed using a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole/Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were measured for each experimental cycle in a scan mode ranging from 350 to 1600 mass/charge (m/z).

### Data Protocol
A custom database was compiled using the sequence information of mouse JP2 (NP_001192005.1). Raw data werre processed for band identification in MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry) using default paramters.

### Publication Abstract
Calpains are calcium-activated neutral proteases involved in the regulation of key signaling pathways. Junctophilin-2&#xa0;(JP2)&#xa0;is a Calpain-specific proteolytic target and essential structural protein inside Ca<sup>2+</sup> release units required for excitation-contraction coupling in cardiomyocytes. While downregulation of JP2 by Calpain cleavage in heart failure has been reported, the precise molecular identity of the Calpain cleavage sites and the (patho-)physiological roles of the JP2 proteolytic products remain controversial. We systematically analyzed the JP2 cleavage fragments as function of Calpain-1 versus Calpain-2 proteolytic activities, revealing that both Calpain isoforms preferentially cleave mouse JP2 at R565, but subsequently at three additional secondary Calpain cleavage sites. Moreover, we identified the Calpain-specific primary cleavage products for the first time in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. Knockout of RyR2 in hiPSC-cardiomyocytes destabilized JP2 resulting in an increase of the Calpain-specific cleavage fragments. The primary N-terminal cleavage product NT<sub>1</sub> accumulated in the nucleus of mouse and human cardiomyocytes in a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent manner, closely associated with euchromatic chromosomal regions, where NT<sub>1</sub> is proposed to function as a cardio-protective transcriptional regulator in heart failure. Taken together, our data suggest that stabilizing NT<sub>1</sub> by preventing secondary cleavage events by Calpain and other proteases could be an important therapeutic target for future studies.

### Keywords
Junctophilin, Ryanodine, Calcium, Cardiomyocyte, Calpain

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


