### Accession
PXD029500

### Title
SP3-enabled rapid and high coverage chemoproteomic identification of redox-sensitive cysteines

### Description
Cysteine residues undergo various oxidative modifications, acting as key sensors of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). Given that ROS and RNS have known roles in many pathophysiological processes, numerous proteome-wide strategies to profile cysteine oxidation state have emerged in the last decade. Recent advancements to traditional redox profiling methods include incorporation of costly isotopic labeling reagents to allow for more quantitative assessment of oxidation states. These methods are typically carried out by using sequential thiol capping and reduction steps in order to label redox-sensitive cysteines, often found in di-cysteine motifs (‘CXXC’ or ‘CXXXC’). Tailored, pricy  algorithms are commonly used to analyze redox-profiling datasets, the majority of which cannot accurately quantify site-of-labeling in redox-motifs; moreover, accurate quantification is confounded by excess labeling reagents during sample preparation. Here, we present a low-cost redox-profiling workflow using newly synthesized isotopic reagents compatible with SP3-bead technology, termed SP3-ROx, that allows for high throughput, rapid identification of redox-sensitive cysteines. We optimize cysteine labeling quantification using the FragPipe suite, an open source GUI for MSfragger-based search algorithm. Application of SP3-ROx to naive and activated T cells identifies redox-senstive cysteines, showcasing the utility of this workflow to study biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled with a High Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) Interface. Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and fractionated online using a 18cm long, 100 μM inner diameter (ID) fused silica capillary packed in-house with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The 70-minute water acetonitrile gradient was delivered using a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-nLC™ 1200 system at different flow rates (Buffer A: water with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 80% acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). The detailed gradient includes 0 – 5 min from 3 % to 10 % at 300 nL/min, 5 – 64 min from 10 % to 50 % at 220 nL/min, and 64 – 70 min from 50 % to 95 % at 250 nL/min buffer B in buffer A. Data was collected with charge exclusion (1, 8,>8). Data was acquired using a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) method comprising a full MS1 scan (Resolution = 120,000) followed by sequential MS2 scans (Resolution = 15,000) to utilize the remainder of the 1 second cycle time. Time between master scans was set 1 s. HCD collision energy of MS2 fragmentation was 30 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected by LC-MS/MS and converted to mzML format with peakPicking for MS levels 1 and 2 using MSConvert (ProteoWizard release 3.0.20287) were searched using FragPipe GUI v16.0 with MSFragger (version 3.3) [3-7], Philosopher (version 4.0.0) and IonQuant (version 1.7.5) enabled. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Missed cleavages were allowed up to 2. Peptide length was set 7 - 50 and peptide mass range was set 500 - 5000. Cysteine residues were searched with variable modifications at cysteine residues for carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146), IPIAA-L (+463.2366), and IPIAA-H (+467.2529) labeling allowing for 3 max occurrences and all mods used in first search checked. Permissive IonQuant parameters allowed minimum scan/isotope numbers set to 1. PTM-prophet information was obtained from psm.tsv using ‘heavy’ and ‘light’ localizations scores.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteines, Chmoproteomics, Redox, Isotopic, Quantitation, T cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UCLA
Biological Chemistry Department, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA

### Submitter
Heta Desai

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann Backus
Biological Chemistry Department, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA


