### Accession
PXD026874

### Title
ABPP-LC/MS results of covalent inhibitor targeting LC3A/B in HeLa cells

### Description
The autophagic ubiquitin-like protein LC3 functions through interactions with LC3-interaction regions (LIRs) of other autophagy proteins including autophagy receptors, which stands out as a promising protein-protein interaction (PPI) target for the intervention of autophagy. Through screening covalent compounds, we discover a small molecule modulator of LC3A/B that covalently modifies LC3A/B protein at Lys49. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) based evaluations reveal that a derivative molecule DC-LC3in-D5 exhibits a potent covalent reactivity and selectivity to LC3A/B in HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: the click reactions were conducted as Zheng B.H. described (J Am Chem Soc 2013, 135) and the pull down of probe-labelled proteins was performed as Chan P.Y. described (Nat Chem Biol 2016, 12).  Protein Digestion: 100 uL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin (10ng/uL) was added to each sample which was then incubated at 37℃ for 16h. The tryptic peptide mixtures were collected by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10 min and desalted by C18 tip as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software MaxQuant  (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.1.0). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a uniprot human proteome database. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptides of minimum 6 amino acids and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed for the analysis. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The autophagic ubiquitin-like protein LC3 functions through interactions with LC3-interaction regions (LIRs) of other autophagy proteins, including autophagy receptors, which stands out as a promising protein-protein interaction (PPI) target for the intervention of autophagy. Post-translational modifications like acetylation of Lys49 on the LIR-interacting surface could disrupt the interaction, offering an opportunity to design covalent small molecules interfering with the interface. Through screening covalent compounds, we discovered a small molecule modulator of LC3A/B that covalently modifies LC3A/B protein at Lys49. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) based evaluations reveal that a derivative molecule DC-LC3in-D5 exhibits a potent covalent reactivity and selectivity to LC3A/B in HeLa cells. DC-LC3in-D5 compromises LC3B lipidation in&#x2005;vitro and in HeLa cells, leading to deficiency in the formation of autophagic structures and autophagic substrate degradation. DC-LC3in-D5 could serve as a powerful tool for autophagy research as well as for therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Covalent, Lc3, Autophagy, Abpp

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science
The Center for Chemical Biology, Drug Discovery and Design Center, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng Luo
The Center for Chemical Biology, Drug Discovery and Design Center, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China


