### Accession
PXD012461

### Title
The potential role of the collagen gene family in congenital Zika syndrome: A systems biology approach

### Description
In this study, we have generated genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data from the blood and post-mortem brain samples of eight neonates with confirmed ZIKV infection during pregnancy and with no congenital genetic diseases nor another STORCH group vertical transmission.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction and alkylation of 100 μg of soluble proteins used 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 30 oC and 40 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. Samples were diluted 1:10 with triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) 100 mM pH 8.5 and digested with trypsin (1:25, w/w) for 18 hours at 35 o C. Addition of a final concentration of 1% TFA stopped digestion and two centrifugations for 15 min, 4 °C at 20,000 g removed SDC. Finally, samples were desalted in Macro SpinColumns C18 (Harvard Apparatus) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Martin Christ). Peptides were suspended in 15 μl of formic acid 0.1% and quantified by the Qubit ® protein assay as described by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
For database search raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD2.1) software (Thermo Scientific) and the SuperQuant strategy performed by nodes MSn-Deconvolution and Complementary Finder. Search performed against all virus and all reviewed human entries present in the UniProt Database (Jan/2017) used Sequest HT algorithm. The parameters used for search were full tryptic peptides, two missed cleavages allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, 0.1 Da product ion mass tolerance, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. To estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1% we used the node Percolator present in the PD2.1 using maximum parsimony. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the protein and peptide level, and proteins were grouped in master proteins using the maximum parsimony principle.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zika; microcephaly; systems biology; collagen

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Proteomics Unit, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


