### Accession
PXD003329

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals the flooding tolerant mechanism in soybean mutant and ABA treated soybean

### Description
Soybean, which provides abundant proteins and edible oil, is an important crop; however, it is very sensitive to flooding stress. The growth and grain yields of soybean are seriously reduced by flooding stress. To explore the initial flooding-tolerant mechanism of soybean, flooding-tolerant mutant line and ABA treated soybean were used. Because both material and treatment showed the flooding tolerance, the commonly changed proteins in plants under initial flooding stress were identified. To identify the common proteins, gel free/label free proteomic technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of soybean (Glycine max L. cultivar Enrei) were sterilized with 1% sodium hypochlorite solution and rinsed in water. For initial flooding stress, seeds were sown on 400 mL of silica sand with 120 mL of water in a plastic case (180 mm x 140 mm x 45 mm). Two-day-old soybeans were treated with water for 3 h. For survival stages from flooding stress, seeds were sown on 450 mL silica sand wetted with 100 mL of water in a plastic case (150 mm x 60 mm x 100 mm). Two-day-old soybeans were treated with water for 1, 2, 3, and 4 days. Soybeans were grown in a growth chamber illuminated with white fluorescent light (160 μmol m-2s-1, 16 h light period/day) at 25C. For ABA treatment, at the same time as flooding stress, 10 μM ABA was supplied. For mutant line, flooding-tolerant mutant line (Komatsu et al., 2013a) was used after backcrossed with wild type soybean. Proteins (150 μg) were purified by phase separation in the organic layer.Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysylendopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme / protein concentration at 37°C for 16 h.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 nano liquid chromatography (LC) system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. The peptide ions in the spray were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap MS over 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy (Olsen et al., 2005). Protein identification was performed using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.1, http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) (Schmutz et al., 2010). DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to MASCOT generic files using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The parameters used in the MASCOT searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass precursor tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charges were set at +2, +3, and +4. False discovery rates (false positive/ (false postive+true postive) ) for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p<0.05) were used for protein identification. MASCOT search results were exported in XML format for comparison analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Flooding negatively affects the growth of soybean, and several flooding-specific stress responses have been identified; however, the mechanisms underlying flooding tolerance in soybean remain unclear. To explore the initial flooding tolerance mechanisms in soybean, flooding-tolerant mutant and abscisic acid (ABA)-treated plants were analyzed. In the mutant and ABA-treated soybeans, 146 proteins were commonly changed at the initial flooding stress. Among the identified proteins, protein synthesis-related proteins, including nascent polypeptide-associated complex and chaperonin 20, and RNA regulation-related proteins were increased in abundance both at protein and mRNA expression. However, these proteins identified at the initial flooding stress were not significantly changed during survival stages under continuous flooding. Cluster analysis indicated that glycolysis- and cell wall-related proteins, such as enolase and polygalacturonase inhibiting protein, were increased in abundance during survival stages. Furthermore, lignification of root tissue was improved even under flooding stress. Taken together, these results suggest that protein synthesis- and RNA regulation-related proteins play a key role in triggering tolerance to the initial flooding stress in soybean. Furthermore, the integrity of cell wall and balance of glycolysis might be important factors for promoting tolerance of soybean root to flooding stress during survival stages.

### Keywords
Root, Stress tolerance., Mutant, Abscisic acid, Flooding stress, Soybean

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


