### Accession
PXD002134

### Title
RDEB Mouse Model -  Losartan ameliorates dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa and uncovers new disease mechanisms

### Description
Expression proteomics of back skin of collagen VII (C7) hypomorphic and WT mice was performed to detect differences in the skin proteome dependent on the presence of collagen VII and the treatment with losartan.

### Sample Protocol
Whole skin lysate (3 WT mice, 3 C7 hypomorphic mice,  2 C7 hypomorphic mice treated with losartan (2 biol. replicates each)) in 4% SDS, SDS-PAGE, gel lanes were cut into 11 pieces each, in gel digest using trypsin, STAGE tip of resulting peptide mixtures, LC-MSMS on LTQ Orbitrap-XL

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 using label-free quantification algorithm, 1% FDR on peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic loss of collagen VII causes recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB)-a severe skin fragility disorder associated with lifelong blistering and disabling progressive soft tissue fibrosis. Causative therapies for this complex disorder face major hurdles, and clinical implementation remains elusive. Here, we report an alternative evidence-based approach to ameliorate fibrosis and relieve symptoms in RDEB. Based on the findings that TGF-&#x3b2; activity is elevated in injured RDEB skin, we targeted TGF-&#x3b2; activity with losartan in a preclinical setting. Long-term treatment of RDEB mice efficiently reduced TGF-&#x3b2; signaling in chronically injured forepaws and halted fibrosis and subsequent fusion of the digits. In addition, proteomics analysis of losartan- vs. vehicle-treated RDEB skin uncovered changes in multiple proteins related to tissue inflammation. In line with this, losartan reduced inflammation and diminished TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-6 expression in injured forepaws. Collectively, the data argue that RDEB fibrosis is a consequence of a cascade encompassing tissue damage, TGF-&#x3b2;-mediated inflammation, and matrix remodeling. Inhibition of TGF-&#x3b2; activity limits these unwanted outcomes and thereby substantially ameliorates long-term symptoms.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Epidermolysis bullosa, Losartan, Skin, Hypomorphic mouse, Collagen vii

### Affiliations
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center ZBSA Center for Biological Systems Analysis University of Freiburg
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center ZBSA Center for Biological Systems Analysis University of Freiburg


