### Accession
PXD007858

### Title
Asc1p-dependent phosphorylation of Ubp3p-associated Bre5p

### Description
The phosphorylation of Bre5p was analyzed in ASC1 wild-type and Δasc1 cells. Bre5p was co-purified from cell extracts with its GFP-tagged interaction partner Ubp3p in GFP-trap experiments. Trapped proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed with the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Protein and phospho-peptide identification and calculation of LFQ intensities were done with the MaxQuant software. For validation of phospho-peptides/-sites single ion monitoring by tSIM analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Ubp3p-GFP was purified from ASC1 wild-type and Δasc1 cells using GFP-trap_A beads (ChromoTek; Schmitt et al., 2017).  Yeast cells were cultivated in 150 ml synthetic complete medium to mid-log phase. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed in 250 µl breaking buffer (8 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM NaF, 8 mM β-glycerol phosphate 0.5 mM sodium vanadate, and 1 tablet of Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor [Sigma-Aldrich] per 50 ml) with glass beads. After cell lysis, further 250 µl breaking buffer were added, and samples were centrifuged at 16,200 x g at 4°C to clear the lysate. GFP-trap beads were equilibrated by washing five times with 1 ml washing buffer (8 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100). The beads were collected by centrifugation at 400 x g at 4°C for 2 min. 10 µl slurry of GFP-trap beads was used for each sample. The cell lysates were incubated with the beads for 2 h at 4°C with rotation. The beads were washed five times with 1 ml breaking buffer. To elute the proteins from the beads, 40 µl loading dye for SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was added to the beads and samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C.  Protein digests were performed in gel according to Shevchenko et al. (1996). Subsequently, peptides were purified with C18 stop and go extraction (stage) tips according to Rappsilber et al. (2003) and Rappsilber et al. (2007) and analyzed with nanoflow LC coupled to nano ESI mass spectrometry. Nano LC - RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific): Peptides of 1 µl sample solution were loaded with 0.07% TFA on an Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min for 3 min. Analytical peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography was performed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Acclaim® PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). A gradient from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 55% B was applied within 30 min and was followed by 90% B for 4 min (Optima® LC/MS solvents and acids were purchased from Fisher Chemical). Nano ESI mass spectrometry – Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific): Chromatographically eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and continuously transferred into the mass spectrometer. Full scans within the mass range of 300-1,800 m/z were taken from the Orbitrap-FT analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 with parallel data-dependent top 10 MS2-fragmentation (HCD). The resolution was set to 60,000 for tSIM scans and to 15,000 for dd-MS2 scans. The maximum ion time was 50 ms for tSIM scans (AGC target 1e6) and 1,000 ms for dd-MS2 (AGC target 1e5). The loop count equaled the number of m/z values on the inclusion list. LCMS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the software XCalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific).   References: Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., and Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75, 663-670. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007). Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906. Schmitt, K., Smolinski, N., Neumann, P., Schmaul, S., Hofer-Pretz, V., Braus, G.H., and Valerius, O. (2017). Asc1p/rack1 connects ribosomes to eukaryotic phospho-signaling. Mol Cell Biol 37, e00279-16 Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., and Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68, 850-858.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against an S. cerevisiae specific database (Uniprot, Proteome ID UP000002311) using the MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 software (Cox and Mann, 2008). The programs default parameters were used. The digestion mode was trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. FTMS recalibration and label-free-quantification were enabled. Mass tolerances of precursors and fragment ions were 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively.   Reference: Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372.

### Publication Abstract
The Asc1 protein of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is a scaffold protein at the head region of ribosomal 40S that links mRNA translation to cellular signaling. In this study, proteins that colocalize with Asc1p were identified with proximity-dependent <i>Bio</i>tin <i>ID</i>entification (BioID), an <i>in vivo</i> labeling technique described here for the first time for yeast. Biotinylated Asc1p-birA*-proximal proteins were identified and quantitatively verified against controls applying SILAC and mass spectrometry. The mRNA-binding proteins Sro9p and Gis2p appeared together with Scp160p, each providing ribosomes with nuclear transcripts. The cap-binding protein eIF4E (Cdc33p) and the eIF3/a-subunit (Rpg1p) were identified reflecting the encounter of proteins involved in the initiation of mRNA translation at the head region of ribosomal 40S. Unexpectedly, a protein involved in ribosome preservation (the clamping factor Stm1p), the deubiquitylation complex Ubp3p-Bre5p, the RNA polymerase II degradation factor 1 (Def1p), and transcription factors (Spt5p, Mbf1p) colocalize with Asc1p in exponentially growing cells. For Asc1<sup>R38D, K40E</sup>p, a variant considered to be deficient in binding to ribosomes, BioID revealed its predominant ribosome localization. Glucose depletion replaced most of the Asc1p colocalizing proteins for additional ribosomal proteins, suggesting a ribosome aggregation process during early nutrient limitation, possibly concomitant with ribosomal subunit clamping. Overall, the characterization of the Asc1p microenvironment with BioID confirmed and substantiated our recent findings that the &#x3b2;-propeller broadly contributes to signal transduction influencing phosphorylation of colocalizing proteins (<i>e.g.</i> of Bre5p), and by that might affect nuclear gene transcription and the fate of ribosomes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ubp3, Asc1/rack1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Bre5

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of Microbiology and Genetics


