### Accession
PXD033647

### Title
Proteomic profile of rats’ periodontal tissues with mechanical orthodontic force on health or obesity

### Description
The prevalence of obesity has significantly increased worldwide. Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the influence of obesity in the proteomic profile of periodontal ligament (PDL) tissues of rat first maxillary molars submitted to orthodontic tooth movement. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee on Animal Experimentation of the Sao Paulo State University, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, Brazil (protocol number 16/2015) and followed the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments guidelines. Therefore, for this study, we used ten male adult Holtzman rats (weight average – 300 g, approximately 8 weeks old). Animals were randomly assigned to one of the following experimental groups: 1 – M group: animals received a standard diet and 75 days after that, the first maxillary molar was randomly selected to be submitted to OTM for 15 days (n=5), and 2 – OM group: animals received a high-fat diet to induce obesity, and 75 days after that the first maxillary molar was randomly selected to be subjected to OTM for 15 days (n=5). All animals were kept under controlled temperature (22-25 °C), receiving water ad libitum with a 12-hour light/dark cycle. To induce obesity, animals of the OM group received a high-fat diet. In contrast to the standard diet (Labina/Purina, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil) administered to the M group. The high-fat diet contained around 3.82 kcal/g and was composed of 27.5 % of standard rat chow plus 25 % of peanuts, 25 % of milk chocolate, and 12.5 % sweet biscuits and contained 20 g of protein, 48 g of carbohydrate, 20 g of total fat, and 4 g of fiber per 100 g of diet. This feed was daily replaced and had started 75 days before baseline (M initiation). The procedure to induce OTM was by a closed coil nickel-titanium spring (Sentalloy, GAC Central Slip, New York, EUA) connected the maxillary first molar and central incisors with a steel wire (CrNi, 0.20 mm, 55.01.208; Morelli, Sorocaba, Brazi). Fifteen days after OTM, animals were euthanized by anesthetic overdose.

### Sample Protocol
After the euthanasia, the maxilla of each animal was collected and histologically processed. Tissues were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin (Fisher Diagnostics. Middletown, VA, USA) at 4 oC for 24 hours, rinsed 3 times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS - pH 7.4, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) for 30 min at 4 oC and decalcified in 20 % ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, Merck/Millipore, Burlington, MA, EUA) for 30 days at 4 oC under agitation. Maxillae were trimmed, washed in PBS for 30 minutes at 4 oC, dehydrated in 100 % ethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, San Luis, MO, EUA) at 4 oC for 30 minutes, diaphanized in xylene (Arcturus Bioscience, San Francisco, CA, USA) for 20 minutes at room temperature, and embedded in paraffin (Merck/Millipore, Burlington, MA, EUA). Serial parasagittal 5 μm thick sections of the first molar were obtained and mounted on polyethylene naphtholate membrane glass slides (PEN, Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA, USA) (Fig. 1B). Sections were deparaffinized in 2 changes of xylene (Arcturus Bioscience, San Francisco, CA, USA) for 2 minutes and one change for 5 minutes and air-dried for 5 minutes. Sections were then immediately used for microdissection. PDL tissues were microdissected as follows. Eight to ten sections per sample were microdissected and the total captured area was calculated and used to normalize the amount of tissue/protein for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Caps containing the captured tissues were incubated with 30 μL of 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, San Luis, MO EUA) for 30 minutes at room temperature for protein extraction. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged briefly. Whole protein extracts were reduced by incubation in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, San Luis, MO EUA), alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, San Luis, MO EUA), and digested by 2 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The resulting tryptic peptide samples were equilibrated to pH 2.0 with formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, San Luis, MO EUA). Peptide mixtures were desalted and purified using microcolumns (ZipTip® C18, P10 Pipette Tips, Merck Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA), dried in a vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in the BIOMASS Core Facility for Scientific Research of the University of São Paulo, Brazil. Peptide mixtures were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ETD (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) mass spectrometer coupled with Easy NanoLC II (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) ion source. Peptides were separated by a 2-95 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid using a C18 PicoFrit analytical column (C18 PepMap, 75 µm id × 10 cm, 3.5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; New Objective, Ringoes, NJ, USA), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 105 minutes. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with a data-dependent acquisition. The full scan was obtained in the Orbitrap with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 10e6 ions and a maximum fill time of 500 ms. Each precursor ion scan was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM in the 400–1500 m/z mass range. Peptide ions were fragmented by CID MS/MS using a normalized collision energy of 35. The 20 most abundant peptides were selected for MS/MS and dynamically excluded for a duration of 30 seconds. The samples were analyzed in two technical replicates that were combined to perform the database search.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were accessed in the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA). The MS/MS spectra (msf) generated from raw files were searched against the UniProt Rattus_norvegicus_Protein Database (released 2020_01 (26-Feb-2020); 178,316,438 entries), assuming trypsin digestion with parameters set to a maximum of two missing cleavages, with a parent ion tolerance of  20.0 ppm for MS search and a fragment ion mass tolerance of  0.6 Da. Oxidation of methionine (+ 16 Da) was set as a  dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation in cysteine residues (+ 57 Da) was set as a static modification. Proteins with at least two valid values in at least two samples were considered for further analysis. Independent samples t-test was applied for testing for differences in protein intensities between the M and OM sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of obesity has increased significantly worldwide. Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the influence of obesity on the proteomic profile of periodontal ligament (PDL) tissues of rat first maxillary molars (1&#xa0;M) submitted to orthodontic tooth movement (OTM). Ten Holtzman rats were distributed into two groups (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;5): the M group (OTM), and the OM group (obesity induction plus OTM). Obesity was induced by a high-fat diet for the entire experimental periods After that period, the animals were euthanized and the hemimaxillae removed and processed for laser capture microdissection of the PDL tissues of the 1&#xa0;M. Peptide extracts were obtained and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033647. Out of the 109 proteins with differential abundance, 49 were identified in the OM group, including Vinculin, Cathepsin D, and Osteopontin, which were selected for in situ localization by immunohistochemistry analysis (IHC). Overall, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that enriched proteins were related to the GO component cellular category. IHC validated the trends for selected proteins. Our study highlights the differences in the PDL proteome profiling of healthy and obese subjects undergoing OTM. These findings may provide valuable information needed to better understand the mechanisms involved in tissue remodeling in obese patients submitted to orthodontic treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: The prevalence of obesity is increasing worldwide. Emerging findings in the field of dentistry suggest that obesity influences the tissues around the teeth, especially those in the periodontal ligament. Therefore, evaluation of the effect of obesity on periodontal tissues remodeling during orthodontic tooth movement is a relevant research topic. To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate proteomic changes in periodontal ligament tissue in response to the association between orthodontic tooth movement and obesity. Our study identified a novel protein profile associated with obesity by using laser microdissection and proteomic analysis, providing new information to increase understanding of the mechanisms involved in obese patients undergoing orthodontic treatment which can lead to a more personalized orthodontic treatment approach.

### Keywords
Proteomics; obesity; orthodontic tooth movement; vinculin; osteopontin; cathepsin d

### Affiliations
Department of Diagnosis and Surgery, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, São Paulo State University, Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil.
Department of Diagnosis and Surgery, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Camila Chierici Marcantonio

### Lab Head
Dr Joni Augusto Cirelli
Department of Diagnosis and Surgery, School of Dentistry at Araraquara, Sao Paulo State University - UNESP, Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil.


