### Accession
PXD013796

### Title
AZD4573 is a highly selective CDK9 inhibitor that suppresses Mcl-1 and induces apoptosis in hematological cancer cells

### Description
Phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II by cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) is crucial for transcriptional regulation, and acute inhibition of CDK9 results in the rapid downregulation of genes with short-lived transcripts and labile proteins. Multiple non-selective CDK9 inhibitors have progressed clinically but were limited by a narrow therapeutic window. This work describes a novel, potent, and highly selective CDK9 inhibitor, AZD4573. Using integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, loss-of-function pathway interrogation, and pharmacological comparisons, Mcl-1 depletion was identified as a major mechanism through which AZD4573 induces cell death in tumor cells.  AZD4573 suppresses Mcl-1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner that causes caspase-3 cleavage in sensitive cancer cells, most notably in hematological malignancies. This pharmacodynamic response is observed in vivo as well, which leads to regressions in both subcutaneous tumor xenografts and disseminated models at tolerated doses as monotherapy or in combination with venetoclax. Fully understanding the mechanism, exposure, and anti-tumor activity of AZD4573 also informed the development of a robust PK/PD/efficacy model that helped select and predict the starting and efficacious dose range in man. Accordingly, AZD4573 is currently being evaluated in a phase I clinical trial for patients with hematological malignancies (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT03263637).

### Sample Protocol
Sample dissolution, TMT labelling and Reverse-Phase fractionation  The cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma), 0.1% SDS followed by heating at 90°C for 5 min and probe sonication. Protein concentration was estimated using Bradford assay according to manufacturer’s instructions (BIO-RAD-Quick start).  90ug of total protein were reduced with 2ul of 50mM tris-2-caraboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) for 1 hour at 60°C followed by alkylation with 1ul of 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma) for 10min at room temperature (RT). Then protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin solution at ratio protein/trypsin ~ 1:30. The next day, protein digest was labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched with 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) for 15 min at room temperature (RT). All the samples were mixed and dried with speed vac concentrator. The dry TMT mix was fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system at high pH using the X-Bridge C18 column (3.5 μm, 2.1x150mm, Waters) with 90min linear gradient from 5% to 95% acetonitrile contained 20mM ammonium hydroxide at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Peptides fractions were collected between 20-55 minutes and were dried with speed vac concentrator. Each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the nano-ESI source Fusion Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 100μm ID X 2 cm microcapillary C18 column (5µm, 100A) followed by 2h elution using 75μm ID X 25 cm C18 RP column (3µm, 100A) at 300nl/min flow rate. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (380–1,500 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (120K resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 3×105 and Maximum Injection Time (MIT) of 100 ms). The subsequent MS2 was conducted with a top speed approach using a 3-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting of 1×104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a MIT of 35ms. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 45s. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and isolated using a 2.0Da m/z window. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 settings. HCD was used for the MS3, it was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap (50K resolution, an AGC setting of 5×104 and MIT of 86 ms).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of CID tandem mass spectra. The SequestHT search engine was used and all the spectra searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens FASTA database (taxon ID 9606 - Version February 2017). All searches were performed using as a static modification TMT6plex (+229.163 Da) at any N-terminus and lysines and Methylthio at Cysteines (+45.988Da). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984) were included as dynamic modifications. Mass spectra were searched using precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. For peptide confidence, 1% FDR was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Azd4573, Targets mcl-1, A selective cdk9 inhibitor

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Research Assistant

### Submitter
Valar Nila Roamio Franklin

### Lab Head
Dr Clive D'Santos
Cambridge University


