### Accession
PXD005272

### Title
Colocalisation (COLA) analysis of RPE cells untreated or treated with Blebbistatin

### Description
To analyse protein-protein interactions on a global scale, we devised a methodology termed COLA, which uses subcellular fractionation combined with quantitative proteomics to generate multivariate subcellular localisation signatures for cellular proteins. Bootstrapped clustering was then used to match proteins with significant similarity in their localisation signatures. We utilised SILAC labeled human Retinal Pigment Epithelial-1 (RPE1) cells. Heavy and light labelled cells were fractionated using 4 parallel subcellular fractionation procedures, resulting in a total of 12 fractions. The majority of fractions come from two procedures, one using serial solubilisation (resulting in fractions for cytosol, total membrane, nuclear lumen,chromatin-bound nuclear, as well as two cytoskeletal fractions) and the other using centrifugation coupled with aqueous biphasic extraction (resulting in a total nuclear fraction, intracellular membranes fraction, plasma-membrane fraction, and a cytosol + microsomes fraction). The third fractionation procedure separated cellular protrusions using porous transwell membranes, and finally the fourth procedure separated the extracellular compartment by collecting conditioned media. Fractions from each SILAC  label were then mixed with equal amounts of total cell lysate from the oposite label to generate fraction/lysate SILAC SILAC mixes. Two repicrocally labelled biological replicate experiments were performed. In addition to untreated RPE1 cells, we also analysed RPE1 cells pre-teated with the Myosin-II inhibitor Blebbistatin for 4 hours prior to fractionation to reveal changes in the protein localisation profiles upon Myosin-II inhibition, as Myosin-II is a key regulator of the cytoskeleton as well as intra-cellular trafficking (Note that the blebbistatin set is not included in the associated manuscript).

### Sample Protocol
Fraction-lysate mixes were trypsinised using the FASP protocol (Wisniewski, et al., 2011, Analytical biochemistry). Following digestion, peptides were purified by zip-tip C18 clean-up tips (Millipore), lyophilised used in a speedvac, and the dried before being reconstituted in 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry was performed by Institute of Cancer Research's proteomics core facility as described before (Mardakheh et al., 2015, Developmental Cell), with minor modifications. Briefly, Reversed phase LC was performed using an HP1200 platform (Agilent, Wokingham, UK). One third of each sample was analysed as a 6 μL injection. Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. 15 cm C18 packed emitter column (3 μm particle size; NIKKYOTECHNOS CO.,LTD, Tokyo, Japan) over 240 mins using a three-step gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (t = 0 min 4% B, 0.5 min 4% B, 40.0 min 10% B, 170.0 min 25% B, 240.0 min 50% B)  (buffer A: 1% acetonitrile/3% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/3% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid) at 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately pre-column via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was injected into an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) directly from the end of the tapered tip silica column (6-8 μm exit bore). The ion transfer tube was heated to 275°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition based on a full 30,000 resolution FT-MS scan with preview mode disabled. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation and analysed using normal ion trap scans. Precursor ions with unknown or single charge states were excluded from selection. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT- MS maximum inject time was 500 ms and normalised collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10 ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count acquired after 8 s delay followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10 ppm mass window for 60 s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries

### Data Protocol
Fraction-lysate mixes were trypsinised using the FASP protocol (Wisniewski, et al., 2011, Analytical biochemistry). Following digestion, peptides were purified by zip-tip C18 clean-up tips (Millipore), lyophilised used in a speedvac, and the dried before being reconstituted in 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry was performed by Institute of Cancer Research's proteomics core facility as described before (Mardakheh et al., 2015, Developmental Cell), with minor modifications. Briefly, Reversed phase LC was performed using an HP1200 platform (Agilent, Wokingham, UK). One third of each sample was analysed as a 6 μL injection. Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. 15 cm C18 packed emitter column (3 μm particle size; NIKKYOTECHNOS CO.,LTD, Tokyo, Japan) over 240 mins using a three-step gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (t = 0 min 4% B, 0.5 min 4% B, 40.0 min 10% B, 170.0 min 25% B, 240.0 min 50% B)  (buffer A: 1% acetonitrile/3% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/3% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid) at 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately pre-column via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was injected into an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) directly from the end of the tapered tip silica column (6-8 μm exit bore). The ion transfer tube was heated to 275°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition based on a full 30,000 resolution FT-MS scan with preview mode disabled. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation and analysed using normal ion trap scans. Precursor ions with unknown or single charge states were excluded from selection. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT- MS maximum inject time was 500 ms and normalised collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10 ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count acquired after 8 s delay followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10 ppm mass window for 60 s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries

### Publication Abstract
Localisation and protein function are intimately linked in eukaryotes, as proteins are localised to specific compartments where they come into proximity of other functionally relevant proteins. Significant co-localisation of two proteins can therefore be indicative of their functional association. We here present COLA, a proteomics based strategy coupled with a bioinformatics framework to detect protein-protein co-localisations on a global scale. COLA reveals functional interactions by matching proteins with significant similarity in their subcellular localisation signatures. The rapid nature of COLA allows mapping of interactome dynamics across different conditions or treatments with high precision.

### Keywords
Cola; spatial proteomics; protein-protein interactions; interactome;

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham road, London SW3 6JB, UK.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham road, London SW3 6JB, UK.


