### Accession
PXD016086

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling in of CA-074me

### Description
We performed thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to study changes to protein thermal stability and abundance of CA-074me (cathepsin inhibitor) in RAW264.7 macrophages after Salmonella typhimurium infection.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
The interplay between host and pathogen relies heavily on rapid protein synthesis and accurate protein targeting to ensure pathogen destruction. To gain insight into this dynamic interface, we combined Click chemistry with pulsed stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture to quantify the host proteome response during macrophage infection with the intracellular bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. We monitored newly synthesized proteins across different host cell compartments and infection stages. Within this rich resource, we detected aberrant trafficking of lysosomal proteases to the extracellular space and the nucleus. We verified that active cathepsins re-traffic to the nucleus and that these are linked to cell death. Pharmacological cathepsin inhibition and nuclear targeting of a cellular cathepsin inhibitor (stefin B) suppressed S. enterica Typhimurium-induced cell death. We demonstrate that cathepsin activity is required for pyroptotic cell death via the non-canonical inflammasome, and that lipopolysaccharide transfection into the host cytoplasm is sufficient to trigger active cathepsin accumulation in the host nucleus and cathepsin-dependent cell death. Finally, cathepsin inhibition reduced gasdermin&#x2009;D expression, thus revealing an unexpected role for cathepsin activity in non-canonical inflammasome regulation. Overall, our study illustrates how resolution of host proteome dynamics during infection can drive the discovery of biological mechanisms at the host-microbe interface.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Thermal proteome profiling, Target engagement, Cathepsin inhibitor

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Athanasios Typas
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


