### Accession
PXD016794

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 under exposure of disinfectants

### Description
The goals of this study are to use SWATH-MS to detect bacterial proteomic profiles of wild-type Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, and its protein response under the exposure of disinfectants, including chloramine and free chlorine. The concentrations of disinfectants were 10 mg/L. The group without dosing disinfectant was the control group. Each concentration was conducted in triplicate. By comparing the proteomic profiles of experimental groups and control group, the effects of disinfectants on translational levels can be revealed.

### Sample Protocol
5 mL of bacteria Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 (10^8 cfu/mL) were exposed to 10 mg/L chloramine or free chlorine. The bacteria without any disinfectant dosage were the control group. After 8 hours, bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min. Total bacterial protein was extracted from these cell pellets using the B-PER method, followed by reduction, alkylation, digestion and ziptip clean-up procedures. Afterwards, 5 μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were applied for mass spectrometry analysis and for construction of protein libraries by information dependent analysis (IDA). Another 5μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were used for SWATH-MS analysis. Samples were pooled into a Triple-T of 5600 instrument (ABSciex, USA) equipped with a Nanospray III interface.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from IDA were combined and searched using ProteinPilot software (ABSciex, Forster City CA). The searched database was Acinetobacter baylyi (strain ATCC 33305 / BD413 / ADP1) (received from Uniprot on 12th of March 2019). The search setting for enzyme digestion was set to Trypsin and alkylation was set to iodoacetamide. Afterwards, the constructed IDA library and SWATH-MS data were loaded into PeakView v2.1 for further processing, with the peptide confidence threshold of 99%, number of peptides per protein of 5, and number of transitions per peptide of 3. A minimum of 2 peptides and 3 transitions was used for quantitative analysis. A stringency cut-off of q value less than 0.01 was used to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels. Afterwards, R-based package MSstats was applied to compare the difference of translational levels in each group.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial infection that involves antimicrobial resistance is a rising global threat to public health. Chlorine-based water disinfection processes can inactivate antibiotic resistant bacteria. However, at the same time, these processes may cause the release of antibiotic resistance genes into the water as free DNA, and consequently increase the risk to disseminate antibiotic resistance via natural transformation. Presently, little is known about the contribution of residual chlorine affecting the transformation of extracellular antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). This study investigates whether chloramine and free chlorine promote the transformation of ARGs and how this may occur. We reveal that both chloramine and free chlorine, at practically relevant concentrations, significantly stimulated the transformation of plasmid-encoded ARGs by the recipient Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, by up to a 10-fold increase. The underlying mechanisms underpinning the increased transformations were revealed. Disinfectant exposure induced a series of cell responses, including increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), bacterial membrane damage, ROS-mediated DNA damage, and increased stress response. These effects thus culminated in the enhanced transformation of ARGs. This promoted transformation was observed when exposing disinfectant-pretreated A. baylyi to free plasmid. In contrast, after pretreating free plasmid with disinfectants, the transformation of ARGs decreased due to the damage of plasmid integrity. These findings provide important insight on the roles of disinfectants affecting the horizontal transfer of ARGs, which could be crucial in the management of antibiotic resistance in our water systems.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baylyi adp1, Disinfectants, Bacteria, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland


