### Accession
PXD030506

### Title
Activated SUMOylation restricts the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway to confer immune evasion in cancer

### Description
Activated SUMOylation is a hallmark of aggressive cancers. Starting from a targeted screening for SUMO-regulated immune evasion mechanisms, we identified an evolutionary conserved function of activated SUMOylation, which attenuates the immunogenicity of tumor cells. Activated SUMOylation allows cancer cells to evade CD8+ T-cell immunosurveillance by repressing the MHC-I antigen processing and presentation machinery (APM). While loss of the MHC-I APM is a frequent cause of resistance to cancer immunotherapies, the pharmacological inhibition of SUMOylation (SUMOi) restored the expression of the MHC-I APM and enhanced the susceptibility of tumor cells to CD8+ T-cell mediated killing. Importantly, SUMOi also triggered the activation of CD8+ T-cells itself and thereby drives a feed-forward loop amplifying the specific anti-tumor immune response. In summary, we show that activated SUMOylation converts tumor cells into a state of immune evasion, and identify SUMOi as rational therapeutic strategy for enhancing the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies.   

### Sample Protocol
SUMO Immunoprecipitation (IP). SUMO2/3 specific 8A2 hybridoma clone A11 (kindly received from Frauke Melchior) were harvested as described by Barysch et al. 2014. Subsequent western blot analysis was performed by a previously published protocol. Mass spectrometry based SUMOylome analysis was done as described by Hendriks et al. 2018.  Desalting, TMT labelling and high pH fractionation.  For proteome analysis cells were lysed, reduced and alkylated in SDS-lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.5, protease inhibitor tablet, 5mM TCEP, 40mM CAA). After boiling and sonicating, samples were precipitated using MeOH/Chloroform precipitation. The Pellte was then resolved in Urea digestion buffer (8M urea, 50mM TrisHCl, pH 8.2). Digestion of proteins was performed in 1M urea, 50mM TrisHCl, pH 8.2, using Trypsin and Lys-C in 1:100 enzymes to protein ratio. Peptides were subsequently desalted using C18 Sep-Pak-Cartridges. 10g of digested peptides was dried and reconstituted in 10 µl 200 mM EPPS pH 8.2; 20 % ACN. TMT labelling was performed using TMT reagents supplied by ThermoFisherScientific2. Peptides were purified through another round of Stage Tipping or high pH fractionation. Therefore, peptides were fractionated using High pH Reversed phase fractionation kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). The latter was used according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis. All RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.432,3. Unless stated otherwise, default MaxQuant settings were used. SUMOylome analysis was performed as described by Hendriks et al. 20181. Proteome analysis was performed using default MaxQuant settings, beside specification of TMT correction factors and enzyme cleavage specificity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, B-cell lymphoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Medical School, University Hospital Building 75, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Medical School, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Paul Hotz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Medical School, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany


