### Accession
PXD004954

### Title
Proteomics and metabolomics reveal changes in cancer cells after alternation of SHMT2 expressions

### Description
In order to understand the underline mechanism of SHMT2 (serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2) effect on tumor growth, proteome and metabolome analysis were carried on a engineered HeLa cell line (HeLa-SHMT2-shSHMT2, short as HeLa-Ss), which has inducible SHMT2 over-expression or suppression by treating cell with tetracycline or IPTG, respectively.  SHMT2 over-expression in HeLa-ss cell increased cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo, deceased expression of several mitochondrial complex I and III proteins, and increased glycine and glutathione levels in cells.  BioID method identified more than 20 SHMT2 associated proteins that are involved in oxidation-reduction process.  These results indicate SHMT2 involves in the regulation of cellular redox balance. SHMT2 repression only reduced growth of cells under glycine depletion condition. It increased expression of several proteins involved in glutaminolysis and amino acid transporters, and elevated metabolites related to glutamine metabolism.  These results indicate tumor cells have a compensatory reaction after SHMT2 suppression.  Further reducing glycine levels in cells by sodium benzoate caused cell death in cultured cell and slightly reduced tumor growth in vivo.  Benzoate treatment induces more changes in protein expressions and metabolite levels and may be a new approach to inhibit tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation was performed essentially as described previously{Li, 2014;Tong, 2014 ;Wei, 2015}. Tryptic peptides were concentrated and purified on homemade C18 columns or C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  For MS analysis, peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a nanoflow UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient. Ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) was coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite or QE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files acquired from the MS analyzer were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) according to the standard workflow{Cox, 2008 #54} or by Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Inc., Oregon, USA) for TMT labeled samples. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human proteome (release 2015) containing 87,656 entries (including common contaminants) by the Andromeda search engine{Cox, 2011 #53}.  For statistical evaluation of the data, a false discovery rate of 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identification. Protein LFQ intensity obtained from MaxQuant was chosen as the quantitative value representing protein abundance, and used for calculation of protein differential expression. For quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitates from Flag-tagged SHMT2, protein LFQ intensities across different samples were first normalized by the intensities of bait SHMT2. Normalized LFQ intensities were then used for determination of specific protein-protein interactions by Perseus tools available in the MaxQuant environment.  For AP-MS and BioID assays, the logarithmic ratio of protein intensities between two samples and the negative logarithmic p-values of the Welch t test performed from biological triplicates between two samples were calculated for Volcano plot by Perseus and exported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis. Cytoscape version 3.2.0 {Shannon, 2003 #55} was used for visualization of protein interaction networks.  For TMT labeled proteomic data, protein fold changes, extracted from Scaffold Q (Proteom Software, USA), were clustered with Euclidean average by Perseus (perseus-framework.org/).  All proteins identified by TMT methods have more than 95% probability in peptide and protein identification and at least two peptides per protein, which was a standard parameter in Scaffold software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sodium benzoate, Quantitative proteomics, Shmt2, Interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Program in Cell Biology Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, SPARC BioCentre Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, 8Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F Moran
Program in Cell Biology Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, SPARC BioCentre Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, 8Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


