### Accession
PXD024435

### Title
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 1 causes impaired anti-microbial immunity  through a pathogenic lipid metabolism-mTOR circuit

### Description
Mendelian diseases that present with immune-mediated disorders can provide insights into the molecular mechanisms that drive inflammation. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) types 1 and 4 are caused by defective vesicle trafficking involving the BLOC-3 complex. The presence of inflammatory complications such as Crohn’s disease-like inflammation and lung fibrosis in these patients remains enigmatic. Using mass cytometry we observe an augmented inflammatory monocyte compartment in HPS1 patient peripheral blood that may be associated with a TNF - and IL-1α-dominated cytokine dysregulation. HPS1 patient monocyte-derived macrophages express an inflammatory TNF-OSM mRNA gene signature and changes in lipid metabolism. Using stimulation experiments and lysosomal proteomics we show that defective lipid metabolism drives RAB32-dependent mTOR signaling, facilitated by the accumulation of mTOR on lysosomes. This pathogenic circuit translates into aberrant bacterial clearance, which can be rescued with mTORC1 inhibition. We reveal that a pathogenic lipid-mTOR signaling circuit acts as a metabolic checkpoint for defective anti-microbial activity. This mechanism may be relevant to the complex pathology of HPS1 patients featuring macrophage lipid accumulation, granuloma formation, defective anti-microbial activity and tissue inflammation. Lastly, this circuit may be present in a wider group of disorders with defective lipid metabolism and cholesterol accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomal proteins phosphorylated in vitro were subjected to SMART Trypsin  digest (Thermo Fisher) treatment according to the manufacturer’s instructions, desalted using SepPak reversed phase columns (Waters), and injected into an LC-MS/MS platform (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC and Q-Exactive). Sample separation was undertaken using a 50-cm-long EasySpray column (ES803; Thermo Fisher) with a 75-μm inner diameter and a gradient of 2 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and 5 % DMSO with a 250 nL/min flow rate for 60 minutes. MS1 spectra with a resolution of 70,000 and an ion target of 3e6 were acquired for a maximum of 100 ms. MS/MS data were acquired after isolation with a mass window of 1.6Th and fragmentation at 28 % normalized collision energy (HCD, Resolution 17,500).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS V.8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions) and a Uniprot/Trembl database  (UP000005640 [homo sapiens] and UP000054420 [salmonella enterica]) were used to analyze the LC-MS/MS data set to identify phosphorylation (S, T, Y), as well as oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor and 0.05 Da for fragment mass, 3 missed cleavages with a peptide level false discovery rate set to 1 %. Freestyle 1.3 (Thermo Fisher) was used to generate extracted ion chromatograms of relevant peptides that were quantified after Gaussian smoothing (five data points). Progenesis QI (Waters) based label-free quantitation results were imported into Perseus 1.5.2.4 . Quantitative data was log2 transformed and normalized by median substraction and missing values were imputed based on normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) types 1 and 4 are caused by defective vesicle trafficking. The mechanism for Crohn's disease-like inflammation, lung fibrosis, and macrophage lipid accumulation in these patients remains enigmatic. The aim of this study is to understand the cellular basis of inflammation in HPS-1. We performed mass cytometry, proteomic and transcriptomic analyses to investigate peripheral blood cells and serum of HPS-1 patients. Using spatial transcriptomics, granuloma-associated signatures in the tissue of an HPS-1 patient with granulomatous colitis were dissected. In vitro studies were conducted to investigate anti-microbial responses of HPS-1 patient macrophages and cell lines. Monocytes of HPS-1 patients exhibit an inflammatory phenotype associated with dysregulated TNF, IL-1&#x3b1;, OSM in serum, and monocyte-derived macrophages. Inflammatory macrophages accumulate in the intestine and granuloma-associated macrophages in HPS-1 show transcriptional signatures suggestive of a lipid storage and metabolic defect. We show that HPS1 deficiency leads to an altered metabolic program and Rab32-dependent amplified mTOR signaling, facilitated by the accumulation of mTOR on lysosomes. This pathogenic mechanism translates into aberrant bacterial clearance, which can be rescued with mTORC1 inhibition. Rab32-mediated mTOR signaling acts as an immuno-metabolic checkpoint, adding to the evidence that defective bioenergetics can drive hampered anti-microbial activity and contribute to inflammation.

### Keywords
Hps-1, Lipid metabolism, Mtor

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


