### Accession
PXD003085

### Title
Selection of reference peptides for absolute quantification of budding yeast proteome

### Description
Absolute quantification of proteome is one of the most important tasks in proteomic research. The aim in this analysis is selection of reference tryptic peptides used for stable isotope-labeled standard, based on their spectral peak intensities. Approximate abundance is also calculated by label-free quantitative method, in which identification frequency (counts of peptide spectral matchings) in each protein is normalized by observability of peptide ions to calculate relative copy number of proteins. For proteins with higher relative copy number, peptide ions that fulfill following criteria — 2- or 3-charge state, without methionine residues and well known post-translational modification sites — are selected as reference tryptic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from cultured budding yeast were digested into peptides with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin. Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses with LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher scientific) mass spectrometry in a data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of acquired MS/MS spectra were subjected to database search toward protein sequence fasta file containing ORF of the budding yeast (S. cerevisiae from Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/)) plus trypsin and keratin sequences as contaminants. Mass-to-charge ratio from 400 to 1500 and up to one missed cleavages on tryptic peptide and cleavage at K-P site were considered for calculation of theoretical peptide mass. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were allowed at 10 ppm and 1 Da, respectively. Mass shift dependent on modifications were set as follows; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021) as static modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.995) as dynamic modifications. Resultant peptide spectra matches (PSMs) that fulfill false discovery rate with less than 1% were considered as identification list for peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The accurate and precise absolute abundance of proteins can be determined using mass spectrometry by spiking the sample with stable isotope-labeled standards. In this study, we developed a strategy of hierarchical use of peptide-concatenated standards (PCSs) to quantify more proteins over a wider dynamic range. Multiple primary PCSs were used for quantification of many target proteins. Unique "ID-tag peptides" were introduced into individual primary PCSs, allowing us to monitor the exact amounts of individual PCSs using a "secondary PCS" in which all "ID-tag peptides" were concatenated. Furthermore, we varied the copy number of the "ID-tag peptide" in each PCS according to a range of expression levels of target proteins. This strategy accomplished absolute quantification over a wider range than that of the measured ratios. The quantified abundance of budding yeast proteins showed a high reproducibility for replicate analyses and similar copy numbers per cell for ribosomal proteins, demonstrating the accuracy and precision of this strategy. A comparison with the absolute abundance of transcripts clearly indicated different post-transcriptional regulation of expression for specific functional groups. Thus, the approach presented here is a faithful method for the absolute quantification of proteomes and provides insights into biological mechanisms, including the regulation of expressed protein abundance.

### Keywords
Budding yeast, Absolute quantification, Peptide-concatenated standard (pcs)

### Affiliations
Meiji University
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan

### Submitter
Keiji Kito

### Lab Head
Dr Keiji Kito
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan


