### Accession
PXD036679

### Title
Macrophage infectivity potentiator protein, a peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerase, essential for Coxiella burnetii growth and pathogenesis

### Description
Coxiella burnetii is a Gram-negative intracellular pathogen that causes the debilitating disease Q fever, which affects both animals and humans. The only available vaccine, Q-Vax, is effective but has a high risk of severe adverse reactions, limiting its use as a countermeasure to contain outbreaks. Therefore, it is essential to identify new drug targets to treat this infection. Macrophage infectivity potentiator (Mip) proteins catalyze the folding of proline-containing proteins through their peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) activity and have been shown to play an important role in the virulence of several pathogenic bacteria but to date its role in C. burnetii pathogenesis has not been investigated. This study demonstrates that CbMip is likely to be an essential protein in C. burnetii. Pipecolic acid derived compounds, SF235 and AN296 demonstrate inhibitory activities against CbMip and these compounds were found to significantly inhibit intracellular replication of C. burnetii in both HeLa and THP-1 cells. Furthermore, SF235 and AN296 were also found to exhibit antibiotic properties against both the virulent (Phase I) and avirulent (Phase II) forms of C. burnetii Nine Mile Strain RSA439 in axenic culture with comparative proteomic demonstrating selective alterations in response to these agents. This study also showed that exposure of C. burnetii to Mip inhibitors resulted in increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. Furthermore, compounds SF235 and AN296 demonstrated protective activity in vivo and significantly improved the survival of Galleria mellonella infected with C. burnetii. These results suggest that unlike in other bacteria, Mip in C. burnetii is required for growth and replication and that inhibitors against CbMip offer potential as novel therapeutics against C. burnetii.

### Sample Protocol
Stationary phase ACCM-2 cultures of C. burnetii-NMII grown up directly from glycerol stocks were quantified using the PicoGreen assay and appropriately diluted to 1 × 106 genome equivalents (GE)/mL into 20 mL of fresh ACCM-2. Cultures were incubated for 72 h prior to the addition of 100 µM AN296 or vehicle control. Final DMSO concentration was kept at 0.2 % for all cultures. After 24 h, cultures were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS. Total protein was extracted from C. burnetii cell pellets using chloroform and methanol, following previously published procedures. Total protein content was assessed using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Quantified precipitated samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 5% SDS by boiling for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were then reduced with 10 mM DTT for 10 min at 95°C and then alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 1 h in the dark. Reduced/alkylated samples were then clean up using Micro S-traps (https://protifi.com/pages/s-trap) according to the manufactures instructions. Samples were then digested for 4 h with trypsin/lys-c (~1:25 protease/protein ratio), collected and dried. Dried samples were then further cleaned up with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3 M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and conditioned with Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) prior to use. Acidified samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Dried proteome digests were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nL/min via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 135-min analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 105 min, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 min before being held at 2% B for another 8 min. The Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (375-1400 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) set to a maximum of 3 × 106 ions and a resolution of 70k) and 15 Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans (stepped NCE of 28;30;34, a maximal injection time of 65 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1 × 105 ions and a resolution of 17.5k).   Proteome datasets were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0.) and searched against the C. burnetii strain RSA 493 / Nine Mile phase I and Dugway 5J108-111 proteomes (Uniprot accession: UP000002671 and UP000008555, respectively). Both the Dugway 5J108-111 and RSA 493 / Nine Mile phase I proteomes were included to enable the mapping / incorporation uniprot assignment from both strains. Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 min and an alignment window of 20 min with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled. The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.6.0.7) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to further analysis. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and missing values were then imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.5σ using Perseus. Student t-tests were undertaken to compare the proteomes between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coxiella, Proteomics, Peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerase

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Marshall Centre for Infectious Disease Research and Training, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, 6009, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mitali Sarkar-Tyson
Marshall Centre for Infectious Disease Research and Training, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, 6009, Australia


