### Accession
PXD032739

### Title
Characterization vy crosslinking-mass spectrometry of plastid-encoded RNA polymerase purified from Sinapis alba.

### Description
RNA polymerases (RNAPs) transcribe DNA into RNA and are found in all living organisms with several degrees of complexity from single polypeptide chain to multimeric enzymes. In chloroplast of angiosperms, two RNAPs are involved in plastid gene transcription: the nuclear-encoded RNA polymerase (NEP) and the plastid-encoded RNA polymerase (PEP). The PEP is a prokaryotic-type multimeric RNAP found in different states depending on light stimuli and cell identity. One of these active states requires the assembly of nuclear-encoded proteins named PEP-Associated Proteins (PAPs) with the catalytic core, triggering the timely transcription of photosynthesis-associated plastid genes in cells acquiring their photosynthetic apparatus. A purification procedure was used to enrich native PEP from Sinapis alba chloroplasts. Crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry provided initial structural information about the relative position of PEP subunits within the complex.

### Sample Protocol
6 to 7-day-old Sinapis alba cotyledons were collected and homogenized using a blender with short pulses (3 × 2-3 s); 100 g approximately of fresh material in 200 mL homogenization buffer containing 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 0.3 M sorbitol, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EDTA and 0.3 mM DTT. The suspension obtained was then filtered through muslin and centrifuged 3 min at 6084.1g at 4°C. The pellet was recovered, resuspended in homogenization buffer and poured in a potter to remove all the chloroplast aggregates. The suspension was then loaded on a linear percoll gradient (35 % percoll, 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 0.3 M sorbitol, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EDTA and 0.3 mM DTT) and centrifuged 50 min at 4696g, 4°C. The fractions containing the chloroplasts were then pooled, diluted in homogenization buffer and centrifuged 10 min at 4000g, 4°C to remove percoll. The pellet containing the chloroplasts was solubilized in the lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 25 % glycerol (w/v), 10 mM NaF, 4 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 % Triton (w/v) and poured in potter for homogenization. The suspension was then centrifuged 50 min, at 15000g, 4°C and the supernatant frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C before using to purify the PEP. After thawing, the chloroplast lysate was mixed overnight at 4°C with heparin resin equilibrated with 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 10 % (w/v) glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 80 mM (NH4)2SO4, 4 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0,1 % (w/v) Triton. The resin was extensively washed with 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 10 % (w/v) glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 80 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 % Triton (w/v) before elution over 10 fractions of 1 mL with 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 10 % (w/v) glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 1.2 M (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 % Triton (w/v). The fractions were then subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western-Blot analyses with anti-PAP8 antibodies. The fractions containing PAP8, and therefore the PEP, were pooled, loaded on a 35%-15% glycerol gradient (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 35 to 15 % (w/v) glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.01 % (w/v) Triton), and centrifuged at 97083g on a SW55-Ti rotor (Beckmann Coulter) during 16 h at 4°C.  The gradient was then analyzed using SDS-PAGE and Western-Blot. The fractions containing the PEP were pooled before the last step of purification, or frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The pool containing the PEP was mixed overnight with Q-sepharose resin (Amersham) pre-equilibrated in 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 10 % glycerol (w/v), 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.01 % (w/v) Triton). The complex was eluted using a 0-1 M NaCl gradient. The fractions containing the PEP were pooled and concentrated at 2,000g on a 100-kDa cutoff membrane. The purified PEP was then frozen in liquid nitrogen and keep at -80°C before analyses. A few micrograms of two PEP preparations from independently grown plant batches (replicates 2 and 3) were cross-linked during 1h at room temperature using 100 µM of DSBU in HEPES buffer pH 7.8. To quench the cross-linking reaction, one μL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added and the sample incubated for 15 min at room temperature. To reduce disulfide bonds, 100 mM DTT solution was added to obtain a final concentration of 3.5 mM and the mixture was incubated at 56°C for 30 min in a ThermoMixer. For alkylation of cysteines, 50 mM IAA solution was added to a final concentration of 8 mM and the mixture was incubated at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. Freshly prepared trypsin solution to an enzyme/protein ratio of ~1:50 was added and the digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. To quench the enzymatic digestion, a final TFA concentration of 1% (vol/vol) was added. Micro spin columns (Harvard Apparatus) were then used to desalt the samples using 5 % ACN, 0.1% TFA as washing solution and 75 % ACN, 0.1% TFA as elution buffer. The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Orbitrap Exploris 480 for replicate 2, and Q-Exactive HF for replicate 3, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated using a Pharmafluidics μPAC™ column of 200 cm length (with pillar array backbone at interpillar distance of 2.5 μm) using a 240 min method. Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode with stepped higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and normalized collision energies (20%, 25%, 35% for Orbitrap Exploris 480, and 22%, 27%, and 30% for Q-Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was conducted using MeroX 2.0 (Iacobucci et al., 2018). The following settings were applied: proteolytic cleavage: C-ter at Lys and Arg with 3 missed cleavages allowed, peptide length 4 to 30 aa, fixed modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of Met, cross-linker: DSBU with specificity towards Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, N-ter for site 1 and 2, analysis mode: RISEUP mode, maximum missing ions: 2, precursor mass accuracy: 10 ppm, product ion mass accuracy: 30 ppm, signal-to-noise ratio: 2, precursor mass correction activated, prescore cutoff at 10% intensity, FDR cut-off: 1%, and minimum score cut-off: 30. Each spectrum corresponding to inter-protein link were manually checked.

### Publication Abstract
RNA polymerases (RNAPs) are found in all living organisms. In the chloroplasts, the plastid-encoded RNA polymerase (PEP) is a prokaryotic-type multimeric RNAP involved in the selective transcription of the plastid genome. One of its active states requires the assembly of nuclear-encoded PEP-Associated Proteins (PAPs) on the catalytic core, producing a complex of more than 900 kDa, regarded as essential for chloroplast biogenesis. In this study, sequence alignments of the catalytic core subunits across various chloroplasts of the green lineage and prokaryotes combined with structural data show that variations are observed at the surface of the core, whereas internal amino acids associated with the catalytic activity are conserved. A purification procedure compatible with a structural analysis was used to enrich the native PEP from <i>Sinapis alba</i> chloroplasts. A mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analysis revealed the core components, the PAPs and additional proteins, such as FLN2 and pTAC18. MS coupled with crosslinking (XL-MS) provided the initial structural information in the form of protein clusters, highlighting the relative position of some subunits with the surfaces of their interactions. Using negative stain electron microscopy, the PEP three-dimensional envelope was calculated. Particles classification shows that the protrusions are very well-conserved, offering a framework for the future positioning of all the PAPs. Overall, the results show that PEP-associated proteins are firmly and specifically associated with the catalytic core, giving to the plastid transcriptional complex a singular structure compared to other RNAPs.

### Keywords
Chloroplast biogenesis, Transcription, Nanolc-ms/ms, Plastid-encoded rna polymerase, Pep associated proteins, Crosslinking, Photosynthesis, Photomorphogenesis

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


