### Accession
PXD013440

### Title
Characterisation of a novel glycosylated glutathione transferase of Onchocerca ochengi, closest relative of the human river blindness parasite

### Description
Filarial nematodes possess glutathione transferases (GSTs), ubiquitous enzymes with potential to detoxify xenobiotic and endogenous substrates, and modulate the host immune system, which may aid worm infection establishment, maintenance and survival in the host. Here we have identified and characterised a sigma class glycosylated GST (OoGST1), from the cattle-infective filarial nematode Onchocerca ochengi, which is homologous (99% amino acid identity) with an immunodominant GST and potential vaccine candidate from the human parasite, O. volvulus, (OvGST1b). O. ochengi native GSTs were purified using a two-step affinity chromatography approach, resolved by 2D and 1D SDS-PAGE and subjected to enzymic deglycosylation revealing the existence of at least four glycoforms. A combination of lectin-blotting and mass spectrometry (MS) analyses of the released N-glycans indicated that OoGST1 contained mainly oligomannose Man5GlcNAc2 structure, but also hybrid- and larger oligommanose-type glycans in a lower proportion. Furthermore, purified OoGST1 showed prostaglandin synthase activity as confirmed by Liquid Chromatography (LC)/MS following a coupled-enzyme assay. This is only the second reported and characterised glycosylated GST and our study highlights its potential role in host-parasite interactions and use in the study of human onchocerciasis.

### Sample Protocol
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) 20 µg of native purified GSTs (S-hexylglutathione-binding proteins) was resuspended into immobilised pH gradient (IPG) rehydration buffer (6 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 3% w/v CHAPS, 66 mM DTT, 0.5% v/v ampholytes pH 3–10 (Pharmalytes, Amersham BioSciences, UK)) to a final volume of 300 µl. In-gel passive rehydration and isoelectric focusing of IPG gel strips with protein samples was at 20 °C with mineral oil overlay according to IPG strip manufacturer's instructions (Bio-Rad, UK). Isoelectric focused strips were equilibrated, in two stages: a ‘reducing stage’ for 15 min in ‘equilibration buffer’ (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS) containing 1% (w/v) DTT, followed by a 15 min ‘alkylating stage’ in ‘equilibration buffer’ containing 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide replacing 1% DTT (LaCourse, Hernandez-Viadel et al. 2009). Gels were then fixed overnight in 40% methanol/10% acetic acid, stained in colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 overnight and then de-stained in 1% acetic acid. Quadrupole Time of Flight (QToF) Tandem Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis of OoGST peptides Tryptic peptides were generated as previously described (LaCourse, Hernandez-Viadel et al. 2009). Peptide mixtures from trypsin digested gel spots were separated using a LC Packings Ultimate nano-HPLC System. Sample injection was via an LC Packings Famos auto-sampler and the loading solvent was 0.1% formic acid. The pre-column used was a LC Packings C18 PepMap 100, 5 mm, 100A and the nano HPLC column was a LC Packings PepMap C18, 3 mm, 100A. The solvent system was: solvent A 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B, 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid. The LC flow rate was 0.2 ml/min. The gradient employed was 5% solvent A to 100% solvent B in 1 hour.  The HPLC eluent was sprayed into the nano-ES source of a Waters Q-TOFµ MS via a New Objective Pico-Tip emitter.  The MS was operated in the positive ion ES mode and multiple charged ions were detected using a data-directed MS-MS experiment. Collision induced dissociation (CID) MS-MS mass spectra were recorded over the mass range m/z 80-1400 Da with scan time 1 s. The raw MS-MS spectral data files were processed using Waters ProteinLynx software (Waters, UK) to produce Sequest dta file lists which were then merged into a Mascot generic format (mgf) file.

### Data Protocol
All tandem MS data generated were searched against partially revised Onchocerca ochengi gene models based on data downloaded from WormBase ParaSite (Armstrong, Xia et al. 2016) and a Bos taurus reference proteome (UniProt UP000009136, March 2019) (37957 sequences, 17775113 residues in total) using the search engine MASCOT (version 2.3.02, Matrix science) Search parameters were a precursor mass tolerance of ±1.2 Da and fragment mass tolerance of ±0.6 Da. One missed cleavage was permitted, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) were included as variable modifications. Individual ion scores ≥39 were considered to indicate identity or extensive homology (p <0.05), using MudPIT scoring. Only proteins with >2 peptides were used for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Filarial nematodes possess glutathione transferases (GSTs), ubiquitous enzymes with the potential to detoxify xenobiotic and endogenous substrates, and modulate the host immune system, which may aid worm infection establishment, maintenance and survival in the host. Here we have identified and characterized a &#x3c3; class glycosylated GST (OoGST1), from the cattle-infective filarial nematode Onchocerca ochengi, which is homologous (99% amino acid identity) with an immunodominant GST and potential vaccine candidate from the human parasite, O. volvulus, (OvGST1b). Onchocerca ochengi native GSTs were purified using a two-step affinity chromatography approach, resolved by 2D and 1D SDS-PAGE and subjected to enzymic deglycosylation revealing the existence of at least four glycoforms. A combination of lectin-blotting and mass spectrometry (MS) analyses of the released N-glycans indicated that OoGST1 contained mainly oligomannose Man5GlcNAc2 structure, but also hybrid- and larger oligommanose-type glycans in a lower proportion. Furthermore, purified OoGST1 showed prostaglandin synthase activity as confirmed by Liquid Chromatography (LC)/MS following a coupled-enzyme assay. This is only the second reported and characterized glycosylated GST and our study highlights its potential role in host-parasite interactions and use in the study of human onchocerciasis.

### Keywords
Detoxification, Onchocerca, Gsts, Glycosylation, Glycans, Immune modulation, Prostaglandin synthase

### Affiliations
Tropical Disease Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr James LaCourse
Tropical Disease Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool UK


