### Accession
PXD011802

### Title
Makorin 1 controls embryonic patterning by alleviating Bruno-mediated repression of oskar translation

### Description
Makorins are an evolutionary conserved family of proteins that contain C3H-type zinc finger modules and a RING E3 ubiquitin ligase domain. Previous analysis indicated a maternal role for Makorin 1 (Mkrn1) in Drosophila embryonic patterning and germ cell specification, but the underlying mechanism has remained elusive. Here, we show that Mkrn1 is specifically required for translational activation of oskar, which encodes a critical regulator of axis specification and germ plasm assembly. We demonstrate that Mkrn1 interacts with poly(A) binding protein (pAbp) and specifically binds osk 3’ UTR adjacent to A-rich sequences. The binding of Mkrn1 to osk 3’UTR occurs in a region that overlaps with Bruno responsive elements (BRE), previously shown to have a dual role in regulating osk translation. We observe an increased association of the translational repressor Bruno (Bru) with osk mRNA upon depletion of Mkrn1, implying that both proteins compete with each other for osk binding. Consistently, reducing Bru dosage is sufficient to partially rescue osk translation and the embryonic lethality associated with Mkrn1 alteration. Thus, we conclude that Mkrn1 controls embryonic patterning and germ cell formation by specifically activating osk translation via displacing Bru from its 3’ UTR

### Sample Protocol
To identify binding partners of Mkrn1, either Myc-GFP as control or Myc-Mkrn1 were ecopically expressed in S2R cells. Upon lyses, Myc-GFP or Myc-MKRN1 were immunoprecipitated as described above (see IP methods) with small adjustments: The IP buffer was additionally supplemented with 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide, 1 mM sodium orthovandate, 5 mM β-glycerophophoate and 5mM sodium flouride. After IP, samples were eluted in LDS buffer supplemented with 1mM dithiotheitol for 10 min at 70°C and incubated with 5.5 mM 2-chloracetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. All samples were prepared in parallel. Conventional interactome analysis of the IP samples was performed as described before (Hildebrandt et al., 2017) with following changes: The enriched proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE with a 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific) and stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies). Subsequently, proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin and digested peptides were then extracted from the gel. Concentration, clearance and acidification of peptides, mass spectrometry analysis, and peptide identification were performed as described before (Hildebrandt et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification in MaxQuant (version 1.5.28), the DROME database from UniProtKB (release May 2016) was used. For label-free quantification (LFQ) at least 2 LFQ ratio counts (without fast LFQ) were activated. The data table of LFQ values resulting from MaxQuant was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse binders and protein groups only identified by site. Furthermore, protein groups with less than two peptides and less than 1 unique peptide were also removed from further analysis. After log-transforming all remaining LFQ values, missing values were imputed by beta distributed random numbers between 0.1% and 1.5% of the lowest measured values. As a final filtering step, only protein groups having measured values for at least two replicates of least one experimental condition were kept for further analysis. All filter and imputing steps were done with an in-house R script.

### Publication Abstract
Makorins are evolutionary conserved proteins that contain C3H-type zinc finger modules and a RING E3 ubiquitin ligase domain. In Drosophila, maternal Makorin 1 (Mkrn1) has been linked to embryonic patterning but the mechanism remained unsolved. Here, we show that Mkrn1 is essential for axis specification and pole plasm assembly by translational activation of oskar (osk). We demonstrate that Mkrn1 interacts with poly(A) binding protein (pAbp) and binds specifically to osk 3' UTR in a region adjacent to A-rich sequences. Using Drosophila S2R+ cultured cells we show that this binding site overlaps with a Bruno1 (Bru1) responsive element (BREs) that regulates osk translation. We observe increased association of the translational repressor Bru1 with osk mRNA upon depletion of Mkrn1, indicating that both proteins compete for osk binding. Consistently, reducing Bru1 dosage partially rescues viability and Osk protein level in ovaries from Mkrn1 females. We conclude that Mkrn1 controls embryonic patterning and germ cell formation by specifically activating osk translation, most likely by competing with Bru1 to bind to osk 3' UTR.

### Keywords
Oogenesis, Drosophila, Polyadenylation, Mkrn1, Pole plasm, Germ cell specification

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology Mainz
RNA epigenetics, Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Annabelle Dold

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Yves Roignant
RNA epigenetics, Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


