### Accession
PXD033168

### Title
Subtyping of cardiac amyloidosis by mass spectrometry-based proteomics of endomyocardial biopsies

### Description
Cardiac amyloidosis is a severe clinical condition leading to restrictive cardiomyopathy and heart failure. With increasing options for specific treatment of different cardiac amyloid diseases, correct amyloid subtyping is essential for clinical outcome. Mass spectrometry-based methods for cardiac amyloid subtyping have become important diagnostic tools but are currently used only in a few reference laboratories. Such methods typically include laser-capture microdissection to ensure the specific analysis of amyloid deposits. While this strategy effectively reduces background signals, it is a labor-intensive and costly procedure hampering the implementation of these methods into a wider group of laboratories. Here we introduce a more direct proteomics-based method for subtyping of cardiac amyloids. Endomyocardial biopsies were retrospectively analyzed from fresh frozen material of 78 patients with cardiac amyloidosis and from 12 biopsies of unused donor heart explants. Cryostat sections were directly digested with trypsin and analyzed with the nano-liquid chromatography (nLC-MS/MS), and the data were evaluated by a proteomic software. With a diagnostic threshold set to 70% for each of the four most common amyloid proteins affecting the heart (LC k, LC l, TTR and SAA), 65 of the cases (87%) could be diagnosed, and of these, 61 cases (94%) were in concordance with the original diagnoses. The specimens were also analyzed for the summed intensities of the amyloid signature proteins (ApoE, ApoA-IV and SAP). The summed intensities were significantly higher (p<0.001) for all assigned amyloid cases, whereas unassigned cases were not significantly different from controls and had lower signals than the assigned cases (p<0.001), suggesting that signature proteins can serve as in situ quality markers of cardiac amyloid deposits. We argue that this efficient workflow can be useful for disseminating proteomics for cardiac amyloid subtyping into accredited clinical laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
The cryostat sections were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) with Lysing Matrix D (1/3 of the beads) for five repeated cycles (speed 6.5 m/s, 40 sec/cycle) in 150 µL lysis buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Lysed samples were centrifuged at 16 000 x g for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The original tubes were washed with additional 50 µL of the lysis buffer and the Fast Prep procedure was repeated followed by centrifugation at 16 000 x g for 10 min and the supernatants combined. Protein concentration in the combined lysates was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) and a Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Thirty microgram of homogenized protein material were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method[21]. Briefly, 30 µg from each sample were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM TEAB) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB for 20 min at room temperature. Digestions were performed by addition of 0.3 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DB at 37°C and incubated overnight. An additional portion of 0.3 µg trypsin was added and incubated for another four hours at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Traces of SDC were removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation and samples were further purified with Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried and reconstituted in 20 mL of water with 3% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid just prior to the nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed with Orbitrap mass spectrometers, either QExactive HF or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 precolumn (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch). The nanoLC gradient was run at 300 nL/min from 7-35% solvent B in solvent A during 67 min, 35-48% B during 8 min followed by an increase to 100% B during 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min alternatively from 6-35% B during 77 min up to 100% during 3 min, and 100% B for 10 min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid in water and solvent  B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid in water. The instrument operated in global data-dependent positive mode where the precursor (peptide) ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120 000, m/z range 400-1600 or m/z 375-1375 with Automatic gain control (AGC) 300 000-400 000 during 30-50 ms. The 7 most intense ions or the most intense ions during a 1 s cycle time, with charge states 2-5, were selected for fragmentation using HCD at collision energy setting of 28% (NCE). The isolation window was set to 0.7 or 1.2 Da and dynamic exclusion during 20-60 s at 10 ppm was used. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15 000 or 30 000 with maximum injection time set to 30 or 110 ms. Samples were injected in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectrum Files RC node was used to apply non-linear precursor mass recalibration with 20 ppm initial mass tolerance for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragments. The processed files were matched against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (December 2019) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) as a search engine and trypsin without missed cleavages as an enzyme rule. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment tolerance to 0.02 Da; oxidation on methionine and acetylation at the N-termini of proteins were set as variable modifications, methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Quality of peptide matches was assessed using Percolator node with the target False Discovery Rate (FDR) (Strict) set to 0.01.  LC-MS features were quantified by the Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Chromatographic alignment and feature mapping were enabled with maximum RT shift of 5 min, mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a minimal Signal-to-noise threshold of 5. Primary ion intensity values at peak maximum for all unique and shared peptides were used to calculate the corresponding protein abundances. The resulting tables were exported from Proteome Discoverer and processed using a Python script as follows: values for the 3 injection replicates were averaged for each protein and sample, and the averaged values were normalized on sum total protein abundance in each sample. The values of two technical replicates (where applicable) were then averaged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac amyloidosis, Proteomics, Endomyocardial biopsies, Subtyping, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


