### Accession
PXD046358

### Title
The virulence regulator VirB from Shigella flexneri uses a CTPdependent switch mechanism to activate gene expression

### Description
The transcriptional antisilencer VirB acts as a master regulator of virulence gene expression in the human pathogen Shigella flexneri. It binds defined sequences (virS) upstream of VirB-dependent promoters and counteracts their silencing by the nucleoid-organizing protein H-NS. However, its precise mode of action remains unclear. Notably, VirB is not a classical transcription factor but related to DNA partitioning pro- teins of the ParB family, which have recently been recognized as DNA-sliding clamps using CTP binding and hydrolysis to control their DNA entry gate. Here, we show that VirB binds CTP, embraces DNA in a clamp-like fashion upon its CTP-dependent loading at virS sites and slides laterally on DNA after clamp closure. Mutations that prevent CTP binding block the loading of VirB clamps in vitro and the formation of VirB nucleoprotein complexes in vivo. Thus, VirB represents a CTP-dependent molecular switch that uses a loading-and-sliding mechanism to control transcription during bacterial pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS (15,000 g, 10 min, 4°C) and resuspended in 300 μl lysis buffer (2% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Then samples were heated for 10 min at 90°C and sonicated with a vial tweeter after heating. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Thermo Fischer Scientific) at 90°C for 15 min and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamid (Sigma Aldrich) at 20°C for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with a 6-fold excess of ice cold acetone and incubation for 2h at -20°C, followed by two methanol washing steps. Dried proteins were reconstituted in 0.2 % SLS and the amount of proteins was determined by bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific). For tryptic digestion 50 µg protein was incubated in 0.5% SLS and 1 µg of trypsin (Serva) at 30°C over night.  After digestion, SLS was precipitated by adding a final concentration of 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were desalted by using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Macherey-Nagel). Cartridges were prepared by adding acetonitrile (ACN), followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded on equilibrated cartridges, washed with 5% ACN and 0.1% TFA containing buffer and finally eluted with 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA.  Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid and then analyzed using liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on a Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm; Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 94% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 6% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS raw data was acquired on an Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) in data independent acquisition mode with a method adopted from (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7124470/). In short, Spray voltage were set to 2.3 kV, funnel RF level at 40, 275 °C heated capillary temperature, and 445.12003 m/z was used as internal calibrant. For DIA experiments full MS resolutions were set to 120.000 at m/z 200 and full MS, AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target was 300% with an IT of 50 ms. Mass range was set to 350–1400. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 3000%. 45 windows of 14 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms. Stepped HCD collision energy of 25, 27.5, 30 % was used. MS1 data was acquired in profile, MS2 DIA data in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of DIA data was performed using DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6949130/) using a uniprot protein database from Escherichia coli or Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Full tryptic digest was allowed with two missed cleavage sites, and oxidized methionines and carbamidomethylated cysteins. Match between runs and remove likely interferences were enabled. The neural network classifier was set to the single-pass mode, and protein inference was based on genes. Quantification strategy was set to any LC (high accuracy). Cross-run normalization was set to RT-dependent. Library generation was set to smart profiling. DIA-NN outputs were further evaluated using the SafeQuant (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23017020/ & https://analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pmic.201300135) script modified to process DIA-NN outputs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parabs system, Shigella flexneri, Type iii secretion

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Marburg
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany


