### Accession
PXD004824

### Title
DISMS2: A flexible algorithm for direct proteome-wide distance calculation of LC-MS/MS runs

### Description
The classification of samples on a molecular level has manifold applications, from cancer biology, where the goal is to classify patients according to effective treatments, to phylogenetics to identify evolutionary relationships between species. In such scenarios modern molecular methods are based on the alignment of DNA or amino acid sequences, often only on selected parts of the genome, but also genome-wide comparisons of sequences are performed. Recently proteomics-based approaches have become popular. An established method for the identification of peptides and proteins is liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This technique is used to identify protein sequences from tandem mass spectra by means of database searches, given samples with known genome-wide sequence information, and then to apply sequence based methods. Alternatively, de novo peptide sequencing algorithms annotate MS/MS spectra and deduce peptide/protein information without the need of database. A newer approach independent of additional information is to directly compare unidentified tandem mass spectra. The challenge then is to compute the distance between pairwise MS/MS runs consisting of thousands of spectra.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic (tryptic) digests of five sequenced organisms i.e. (i) human (Homo sapiens, H), (ii) mouse (Mus musculus, M), (iii) yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Y), (iv) roundworm (Caenorhabditis elegans, C), and (v) fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster, D) and of four organisms without sequenced genome i.e. (v) fresh water snail Radix species: molecular operational taxonomic unit (MOTU) 2 (R2), 4 (R4) and (vi) foraminiferal protist Amphistegina species: A. lessonii (Al), A. gibbosa (Ag) were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to aQExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Each sample was measured in triplicate (1 μg each) resulting in a dataset of 27 MS/MS runs and the samples were analyzed in randomized order to minimize systematic errors.

### Data Protocol
MS data interpretation was conducted using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science). Database searches of the five model organisms (i.e. human, mouse, yeast, roundworm and fruit fly) were performed in a target/decoy mode against their respective protein sequence (FASTA) databases. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0:02 Da respectively, and only peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) with search engine rank 1 and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (Percolator setting) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Distance measurements, Lc-ms/ms, Spectral comparisions

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


