### Accession
PXD003471

### Title
Human AML secretome and exosomes and correlation with Anti-Apoptotic Index, part 2

### Description
Expression of proteins regulating apoptosis (BCL-2, MCL-1, BCL-X and BAX) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) blasts at diagnosis have been shown to be associated with disease-free survival. We previously found that the initially high apoptosis-resistance of AML cells decreased after therapy, while regaining high levels at relapse. This suggested a dynamic regulation of apoptosis. This data is from the lysate fraction of the secretomes described in PXD001476.

### Sample Protocol
AML patients and healthy controls A total of 61 newly diagnosed AML patients were included in the current study after obtaining a written informed consent. Complete remission was defined as less than 5% blasts present in the BM, absence of extramedullary disease with concomitant evidence of granulopoiesis and megakaryopoiesis: granulocytes and platelets in peripheral blood should be at least 1.5 x 109/L and 100 x 109/L, respectively. Relapse was defined as marrow infiltration by more than 5% blasts in previously morphologically normal BM.   Control BM samples, not infiltrated by tumor cells, were obtained after informed consent from healthy individuals or from patients undergoing cardiac surgery.  Secretome production Cryopreserved primary samples were thawed and washed twice in serum-free IMDM. Cells were resuspended in serum-free IMDM (lacking phenol red) at a concentration of 2 x 106/ ml and incubated at 37ºC in 5% CO2 for 18 hours. Cells were harvested harvested by centrifugation (10 min, 480xg) and lysed using reducing sample buffer (NuPAGE reducing agent 10x + NuPAGE LDS sample buffer 4x, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).  Protein fractionation  Proteins were resolved using 1D SDS-PAGE. For each sample, 60-80 μg of protein was loaded onto a pre-cast 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris 1.5mm mini gel (Invitrogen). Electrophoresis was carried out at 200V in NuPAGE MES SDS running buffer (50mM Tris base, 50mM MES, pH 7.3, 0.1% w/v SDS, and 1mM EDTA, Invitrogen) until the dye front reached the end of the gel. The gel was stained  with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).  In-gel digestion, nano-LC-MS/MS and database searching Proteomics analysis based on 1D gel-nanoLC-MS/MS was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19., Piersma et al Proteome Science 2013, 11-17). Shortly, the gel lanes were sliced into 9 pieces and subsequently digested in-gel with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel bands, separated on a C18 column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Peptides were measured on a LTQ-FTMS instrument (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed as described previously (Piersma et al Proteome Science 2013, 11-17). Shortly, MS/MS spectra were searched against the human International Protein Index (IPI) human 3.59 database using Sequest (version 27, revision 12) - a part of the BioWorks 3.3 data analysis package (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). Next, the DTA and OUT files were imported into Scaffold version 2.06.01  (Proteome software, Portland, OR, USA), used to organize the gel band data and to validate peptide identifications using the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications with a probability of >99% were retained if at least two peptides were identified (at 95% confidence) in minimally one sample. For each protein identified, the total number of MS/MS spectra detected (spectral counts) was exported to Excel 2003 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA).  Data mining Normalization was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19). A one-sided paired β-binomial test was applied to find proteins with statistically significant differences in spectral count numbers between the high and low AAI secretome (Pham et al Bioinformatics 2010;26:363–9). Proteins associated with a p value below 0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed. Hierarchical clustering was performed using R statistical software.

### Publication Abstract
Expression of apoptosis-regulating proteins (B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 - BCL-2, Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 - MCL-1, BCL-2 like 1 - BCL-X and BCL-2-associated X protein - BAX) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) blasts at diagnosis is associated with disease-free survival. We previously found that the initially high apoptosis-resistance of AML cells decreased after therapy, while regaining high levels at relapse. Herein, we further explored this aspect of dynamic apoptosis regulation in AML. First, we showed that the intraindividualex vivoapoptosis-related profiles of normal lymphocytes and AML blasts within the bone marrow of AML patients were highly correlated. The expression values of apoptosis-regulating proteins were far beyond healthy control lymphocytes, which implicates the influence of microenvironmental factors. Second, we demonstrated that apoptosis-resistant primary AML blasts, as opposed to apoptosis-sensitive cells, were able to up-regulate BCL-2 expression in sensitive AML blasts in contact cultures (p= 0.0067 andp= 1.0, respectively). Using secretome proteomics, we identified novel proteins possibly engaged in apoptosis regulation. Intriguingly, this analysis revealed that major functional protein clusters engaged in global gene regulation, including mRNA splicing, protein translation, and chromatin remodeling, were more abundant (p= 4.01E-06) in secretomes of apoptosis-resistant AML. These findings were confirmed by subsequent extracellular vesicle proteomics. Finally, confocal-microscopy-based colocalization studies show that splicing factors-containing vesicles secreted by high AAI cells are taken up by low AAI cells. The current results constitute the first comprehensive analysis of proteins released by apoptosis-resistant and sensitive primary AML cells. Together, the data point to vesicle-mediated release of global gene regulatory protein clusters as a plausible novel mechanism of induction of apoptosis resistance. Deciphering the modes of communication between apoptosis-resistant blasts may in perspective lead to the discovery of prognostic tools and development of novel therapeutic interventions, aimed at limiting or overcoming therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Acute myloid leukemia, Cell lysate

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


