### Accession
PXD015374

### Title
Functional analysis of phytoplasma effectors in Vitis vinifera pathogenesis

### Description
The aim of the experiment was to identify important protein targets of phytoplasma infection, by isolation of plant proteins, interacting with phytoplasma effectors. Nicotiana benthamiana plants were transformed with YFP (Yellow Fluorescent Protein) tagged phytoplasma effector PoStoSP28, the leaves of transformed plants were homogenized and the effector was extracted together with its interactors through the YFP tag with a pull-down assay. As a control, the same procedure was performed with mock transformed plants and the samples analyzed with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Nicotiana benthamiana leaves transiently expressing PoStoSP28-YFP phytoplasma effector and mock infiltrated plants were harvested five days after Agrobacterium tumefaciens infiltration, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground to fine dust with mortar and pestle. Ice cold protein extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF, 0.02 % (v/v) NP-40, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany)) was added to plant material in a 2.5 : 1 ratio and the samples mixed thoroughly. Protein extracts were centrifuged twice (20.000 x g, 30 min, 4 °C) to remove plant debris. 25 µl of prewashed GFP-Trap® magnetic bead slurry (ChromoTek GmbH, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany) was added to the clear supernatant. Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 2 h, mixing constantly. The supernatant was removed and the beads washed with ice cold dilution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany)). Proteins were eluted in 50 µl of 2x SDS-PAGE loading buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 6.8, 4 % (w/v) SDS, 20 % (v/v) glycerol, 0.02 % (w/v) bromophenol blue, 200 mM DTT) by heating the beads for 10 min at 95 °C. Samples were loaded onto Mini-PROTEAN® TGX Stain-Free™ Precast Gel (4-15 %) (BioRad, Hercules, California, USA). The gel was dyed with PageBlue™ Protein Staining Solution (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, USA) and a replicate with silver staining for comparison. Bands of 1x10 mm in size were excised from the PageBlue™ Protein Staining Solution stained gel, at approximately the same heights from the effector and mock sample lanes. In gel protein reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion procedures were performed as described in Olsen JV, et al. (2004). In short, gel bands were cut into 1x1 mm pieces and de-stained. Following protein reduction with dithiothreitol (20 min at 56 °C) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (20 min at room temperature in dark), the samples were digested with trypsin (Proteomics Grade, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) overnight at 37 °C. Gel protein digests were extracted with 30 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were desalted with Bond Elut OMIX C18 tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, California, USA) and dried down completely. Liquid chromatography–electrospray ionization–tandem MS  Gel protein digests were re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, ultrasonicated for 15 s, and centrifuged (10000 g, 5 min, 4 °C). An uHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 μl min-1 was used. The column (Thermo Scientific Easy Spray column) was loaded with the protein digests and peptides were eluted with a 90-min gradient from 2% to 90% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. MS analysis was carried out using a Thermo scientific Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a data-dependent top 20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (400-1800 m/z and a resolution of 30000). Default charge state was set to 2-fold charge; unassigned charge states as well as +1 charge states were rejected. Minimal required signal was set to 1000, size of exclusion mass list was set to 500 (with a duration of 60 s), and exclusion mass width was set to 4 ppm with one repeated count of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and mining  Analysis of mass spectral data was performed using MaxQuant (1.6.5.0). Raw files were searched against a FASTA file of the uniprot-proteome 7360 (AUP000084051 4097, Nicotiana tabaccum, July2019). Tryptic peptides were allowed a maximum of 2 missed cleavages as well as a maximum of three modifications per peptide (oxidation M and N-terminal acetylation). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (FTMS) and 0.6 Da (ITMS). To eliminate matching by chance, data was searched against a database of revert sequences in a target-decoy approach. Only high confidence peptides (FDR <0.01%), as well as proteins with at least two distinct identified peptides, passed the criteria for identification.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenicity of intracellular plant pathogenic bacteria is associated with the action of pathogenicity factors/effectors, but their physiological roles for most phytoplasma species, including '<i>Candidiatus</i> Phytoplasma solani' are unknown. Six putative pathogenicity factors/effectors from six different strains of '<i>Ca</i>. P. solani' were selected by bioinformatic analysis. The way in which they manipulate the host cellular machinery was elucidated by analyzing <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> leaves after <i>Agrobacterium</i>-mediated transient transformation with the pathogenicity factor/effector constructs using confocal microscopy, pull-down, and co-immunoprecipitation, and enzyme assays. Candidate pathogenicity factors/effectors were shown to modulate plant carbohydrate metabolism and the ascorbate-glutathione cycle and to induce autophagosomes. PoStoSP06, PoStoSP13, and PoStoSP28 were localized in the nucleus and cytosol. The most active effector in the processes studied was PoStoSP06. PoStoSP18 was associated with an increase in phosphoglucomutase activity, whereas PoStoSP28, previously annotated as an antigenic membrane protein StAMP, specifically interacted with phosphoglucomutase. PoStoSP04 induced only the ascorbate-glutathione cycle along with other pathogenicity factors/effectors. Candidate pathogenicity factors/effectors were involved in reprogramming host carbohydrate metabolism in favor of phytoplasma own growth and infection. They were specifically associated with three distinct metabolic pathways leading to fructose-6-phosphate as an input substrate for glycolysis. The possible significance of autophagosome induction by PoStoSP28 is discussed.

### Keywords
Phytoplasma effectors. yellow fluorescent protein (yfp), Nicotiana benthamiana, Pathogenesis, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
Devision of Molecular Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
Devision of Molecular Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria


