### Accession
PXD018968

### Title
Can Scoliotic Discs be Controls for Molecular Studies in Intervertebral Disc Research?- Insights from Proteomics.

### Description
Research on disc degeneration has been heterogeneous in their use of control discs used for comparison with diseased discs. Discs from scoliosis, cadavers and voluntary organ donors are the common controls used in intervertebral disc research. In order to find out the ideal control among these discs, the characters of scoliotic discs and discs from MRI normal voluntary organ donors controls used in disc research has been analysed using proteomics and to establish 'True Controls' that can be utilized for future Intervertebral disc (IVD) research.

### Sample Protocol
Eight lumbar discs from eight voluntary organ donors (ND) after MRI confirmation for the absence of degeneration and eight scoliotic discs (SD) from three patients who underwent anterior surgery for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis were harvested under sterile operating conditions and were subjected to protein extraction. Both hydrophilic and hydrophobic proteins of the disc tissues were separately extracted out using RIPA and 2%SDS buffers and purified using organic solvents for the removal of interfering salts and detergents. The purified protein samples were then pre-fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE.  Followingly, the protein bands were excised, chopped and digested using trypsin enzyme at a concentration of 600ng/fraction for converting into smaller units called peptides. Each of the three fractions were pooled, dried and resuspended in appropriate volume of 0.1% formic acid with 5% acetonitrile. Around 1000fm of tryptic peptide from each fraction were loaded to nano-LC and subjected to tandem mass spectrometric acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Each of the raw data files acquired from Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo, USA) were searched with Proteome Discoverer version 2.0 against human database using Mascot and SequestHT search engines with peptide tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da in SequestHT and 0.80 Da in Mascot, allowing two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation were considered as fixed modification whereas Methionine Oxidation and Lysine propionamide modifications were considered as variable modifications. Gene ontology was performed by DAVID database, and pathway analysis by ShinyGO vs 0.61 and statistical analysis was performed by SPSS software vs 25.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esi-lc-ms/ms, Human, Np, Control discs, Scoliosis, Ivd

### Affiliations
Research Scientist, 
Ganga Orthopedic Research and Education Foundation, 
187, Mettupalayam Road, 
Kavundampalayam, 
Coimbatore- 641030,
Tamil Nadu, India

Research Scientist,  Ganga Orthopedic Research and Education Foundation,  187, Mettupalayam Road,  Kavundampalayam,  Coimbatore- 641030, Tamil Nadu, India

### Submitter
Chitraa Tangavel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Chitraa Tangavel
Research Scientist,  Ganga Orthopedic Research and Education Foundation,  187, Mettupalayam Road,  Kavundampalayam,  Coimbatore- 641030, Tamil Nadu, India


