### Accession
PXD018403

### Title
Functional analysis of CNOT3 in pancreatic beta cells

### Description
Pancreatic β-cells are responsible for production and secretion of insulin in response to increasing blood glucose levels. Therefore, defects in pancreatic β-cell function lead to hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus. Understanding the molecular mechanisms governing β cell function is crucial for development of novel treatment strategies for this disease. The aim of this project was to investigate the role of Cnot3, part of CCR4-NOT complex, major deadenylase complex in mammals, in pancreatic β cell function. Cnot3βKO islets display decreased expression of key regulators of β cell maturation and function. Moreover, they show an increase of progenitor cell markers, β cell-disallowed genes and genes relevant to altered β cell function. Cnot3βKO islets exhibit altered deadenylation and increased mRNA stability, partly accounting for the increase of those genes.  Together, these data reveal that CNOT3-mediated mRNA deadenylation and decay constitute previously unsuspected post-transcriptional mechanisms essential for β cell identity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Samples were prepared for Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS) using the Phase-Transfer Surfactant Method 86,87, with minor modifications. First, proteins were extracted from the islets and solubilized using buffer containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium N-dodecanoylsarcosinate, and 100 mM Tris pH 9.0, with EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). Islet samples were sonicated for 10 min using a Bioruptor (Cosmo Bio, Japan) on high power with 1-min on/1-min off cycles. Cell debris was removed after centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. Protein concentrations were adjusted to a uniform concentration for a set of samples (0.5-1.0 μg/μL) and between 5-20 μg protein were used for peptide preparation. Cysteine-cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 30 min. Free thiol groups were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Alkylation reactions were quenched with 55 mM cysteine at room temperature for 10 min. Samples were diluted with 2.76 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako, Japan) and trypsin (Promega, USA) were added at a 50:1 ratio of sample protein:enzyme (w/w) and samples were digested for 14 hours at 37°C. Afterward, 1.77 volumes ethyl acetate were added, and samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), which was added to 0.46% (v/v). Following centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature, samples separated into two phases. The upper organic phase containing sodium deoxycholate was removed, and the lower aqueous phase containing digested tryptic peptides was dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Digested peptides were dissolved in 300 µL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA in 3% acetonitrile (v/v) and samples were desalted using MonoSpin C18 columns (GL Sciences Inc., Japan). Peptides were eluted from C18 columns using 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile for MS analysis. Mass spectrometry measurement Samples were measured using a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap LC-MS/MS System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source. The same amount of peptide was injected for each sample in a given set of samples, which was typically 300-600 ng in a volume of 2 to 5 µL. Peptides were separated on a 3-µm particle, 75 µm inner diameter, 12 cm filling length C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd., Japan). A flow rate of 300 nL/min was used with a 2-hr gradient (1% to 34% solvent B in 108 min, 34%  to 95% solvent B in 2 min, with a final wash at 95% solvent B for 10 min, where solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC/MS grade water and solvent B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer ion transfer tube temperature was 250°C and 2.0 kV spray voltage was applied during sample measurement.  For data-dependent acquisition (DDA), full MS spectra were acquired from 380 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The AGC target was set to 3e6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. MS2 scans were recorded for the top 20 precursors at 17,500 resolution with an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum IT of 60 ms. The first mass was fixed at 150 m/z. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 2. HCD fragmentation was set to normalized collision energy of 27%. The intensity threshold was set to 1.3e4, charge states 2–5 were included, and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. For data-independent acquisition (DIA), data were acquired with 1 full MS and 32 overlapping isolation windows constructed covering the precursor mass range of 400-1200 m/z. For full MS, resolution was set to 70,000. The AGC target was set to 5e6 and maximum IT was set to 120 ms. DIA segments were acquired at 35,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e5 and an automatic maximum IT. The first mass was fixed at 150 m/z. HCD fragmentation was set to normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Raw files from DDA measurements were searched against the Uniprot mouse database using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Modification included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionine and acetyl (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A decoy database was included to calculate the FDR. Search results were filtered with FDR 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels. The filtered output was used to generate a sample-specific spectral library using Spectronaut software (Biognosys, Switzerland). Raw files from DIA measurements were used for quantification data exaction with the generated spectral library. FDR was estimated with the mProphet approach 88 and set to 0.01 at both peptide precursor level and protein level 89. Data were filtered with FDR < 0.01 in at least half of the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells are responsible for production and secretion of insulin in response to increasing blood glucose levels. Defects in &#x3b2;-cell function lead to hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus. Here, we show that CNOT3, a CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex subunit, is dysregulated in islets in diabetic db/db mice, and that it is essential for murine &#x3b2; cell maturation and identity. Mice with &#x3b2; cell-specific Cnot3 deletion (Cnot3&#x3b2;KO) exhibit impaired glucose tolerance, decreased &#x3b2; cell mass, and they gradually develop diabetes. Cnot3&#x3b2;KO islets display decreased expression of key regulators of &#x3b2; cell maturation and function. Moreover, they show an increase of progenitor cell markers, &#x3b2; cell-disallowed genes, and genes relevant to altered &#x3b2; cell function. Cnot3&#x3b2;KO islets exhibit altered deadenylation and increased mRNA stability, partly accounting for the increased expression of those genes. Together, these data reveal that CNOT3-mediated mRNA deadenylation and decay constitute previously unsuspected post-transcriptional mechanisms essential for &#x3b2; cell identity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Islets

### Affiliations
Cell Signal unit, OIST Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan
OIST Graduate University

### Submitter
Dina Mostafa

### Lab Head
Dr Tadashi Yamamoto
Cell Signal unit, OIST Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan


