### Accession
PXD022068

### Title
Endothelial cells exposed to atheroprotective flow secrete follistatin-like protein 1 which reduces transcytosis and inflammation

### Description
Objective - When endothelium is cultured in wells swirled on an orbital shaker, cells at the well centre experience putatively proatherogenic flow whereas those near the edge experience putatively atheroprotective flow. Transcellular transport is decreased equally in both regions, consistent with it being reduced by a mediator released from cells in one part of the well and mixed in the swirling medium. Here we identify the mediator and the flow characteristics that stimulate its release. Approach and Results - Medium conditioned by cells swirled at the edge, but not by cells swirled at the centre or cultured under static conditions, significantly reduced transendothelial transport of a low density lipoprotein (LDL)-sized tracer. Mass spectrometry identified follistatin-like 1 (FSTL1) as a candidate mediator. Cells from the swirled edge produced more FSTL1 than cells from the swirled centre or from static wells. Exogenous FSTL1 reduced transendothelial transport of the LDL-sized tracer and of LDL itself. An inhibitor of transcytosis similarly inhibited tracer transport. Exogenous FSTL1 and medium conditioned by cells swirled at the well edge also inhibited TNF-α-induced VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 expression, phosphorylation of IκBα, nuclear translocation of NF-κB, and monocyte adhesion.  Conclusions - Putatively atheroprotective flow stimulates production of FSTL1 from cultured endothelial cells. FSTL1 reduces transcellular transport of LDL-sized particles and of LDL itself, and inhibits endothelial activation. If this also occurs in vivo, it may account for the atheroprotective nature of such flow. The identification of a mediator linking flow to LDL transport suggests novel therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
PAECs were seeded at the edge or centre of a 12-well plate and cultured with or without shear for 72 h. The monolayers were washed with serum-free PAEC medium three times and cultured with or without shear for a further 24 h in serum-free medium. Conditioned medium was collected, centrifuged (10 minutes at 2000 x g, 4 °C) and stored at -80 °C. Secretomes were concentrated using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters (UFC900324) and protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. 20 μg of protein extracts were denatured with urea and thiourea (final concentrations of 6 M and 2 M, respectively) and reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration 10 mM) for 1 h at 37 °C. The samples were then alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide (final concentration 50 mM) in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. Pre-chilled acetone (6x volume) was used to precipitate the samples overnight at -20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 14000 x g for 25 minutes at 4 °C and the protein pellets were dried under vacuum, re-suspended in 0.1 M TEAB buffer (pH 8.2) containing trypsin/LysC (1:50 protease:protein) and digested overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by acidification of the samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; final concentration 1%). Peptide samples were purified using a 96-well C18 spin plate (Harvard Apparatus). The resin was activated using 200 µl methanol and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 1 minute. Wash steps included 200 µl of 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA in H2O, and three equilibration steps using 200 µl of 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in H2O with centrifugation (1000 x g for 1 minute) after each step. Samples were loaded onto the resin and centrifuged at 1500 x g for 1 minute; the flow through was reloaded onto the resin a second time and centrifugation repeated. The resin was then washed three times with 200µl 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in H2O (centrifugation at 1500 x g for 1 minute). Finally, the samples were eluted with 170µl of 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA in H2O (centrifugation at 1500 x g for 1 minute) twice. The eluates were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 40 μL of 0.05% TFA in 2% ACN.  The peptide samples were separated on a nanoflow LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano). Samples were injected onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 Trap, 5mm x 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å), at a flow rate of 25 μL/min for 3 minutes, using 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O. The following nano LC gradient was then run at 0.3 μL/min to separate the peptides: 0−10 min, 4-10% B; 10−75 min, 10-30% B; 75-80 min, 30−40% B; 80-85 min, 99% B, 90-120 min 4% B, where A=0.1% FA in H2O, B=80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O. The nano column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm) was connected to an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Spectra were obtained with an Orbitrap mass analyser (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using full MS mode (resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z) over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 350–1600. Data-dependent MS2 scanning was performed using the top 15 ions in each full MS scan (resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z) with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against porcine Uniprot database (version 2020_01, 120,878 protein entries) combined with bovine database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot version 2020_01, 6,011 protein entries) using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4.0.305) and Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Trypsin was used as the enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and N-terminal acetylation were chosen as variable modifications. Data was further processed using Scaffold (version 4.8.6) and the following filters were used: Peptide probability > 95%, Protein probability > 99% and with at least 2 peptides. Total TIC was used for protein quantitation and normalized to total protein abundance then ANOVA p value was calculated for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transverse wall shear stress; transwss; multidirectional flow; vesicles; hemodynamics; permeability; endothelial activation; coronary artery disease

### Affiliations
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK


