### Accession
PXD024349

### Title
LC-MS Based Draft Map of the Arabidopsis thaliana Nuclear Proteome and Protein Import in Pattern Triggered Immunity

### Description
An LC-MS based discovery proteomics approach was used to measure the nuclear proteome fractions of Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture. An enrichment score based on the relative abundance of cytoplasmic, mitochondrial and golgi markers in the nuclear protein fraction allowed us to curate the nuclear proteome producing high quality catalogs of around 3,000 nuclear proteins under untreated and both PTI conditions (flg22 and nlp20). The measurements also covered low abundant proteins including more than 100 transcription factors and transcriptional co-activators. Here we sought to gain a broader impression of protein import to the nucleus upon stimulus with flg22 and nlp20. Furthermore, the abundance of 93 proteins changed significantly in the nucleus following elicitation of immunity. These results suggest promiscuous ribosome assembly and retrograde signaling from the mitochondrion to the nucleus including Prohibitins and Cytochrome C, in the two forms of PTI.

### Sample Protocol
We chose to expose Arabidopsis protoplasts released from cells in culture by enzymatic digestion of cell walls to the PTI elicitors. In order to specifically gain access to the nuclear proteome, nuclei were isolated from the protoplast incubated at 18 °C for 16 hours under 3 conditions: 1 µM flg22, 1 µM nlp20 and untreated in case of control. The cellular suspension resulting as a product of the isolation procedure was also retained and used to prepare the cellular protein fraction comprising all proteins with the exception of those in the nucleus. The isolated nuclei were characterized by fluorescence microscopy after DAPI staining which attested to their successful isolation in an intact and round form. Nuclear proteins were extracted and in-solution digested with trypsin along with the cellular proteins. The dissolved peptides were analyzed with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) scan strategy. A Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) scan strategy was used, where one MS full scan was followed by up to 10 MS2 scans of product ions from the 10 most abundant precursor ions. The MS full scan parameters were: AGC target 3E+06, resolution 70, 000 and max injection time (IT) 100 ms. The MS2 parameters were: resolution 17,500, Max IT 50 ms, dynamic exclusion duration 40 s, ACG target 5E+04 and isolation window 1.6 m/z. The samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY nanoLC-1000 liquid chromatography system. A flow rate of 250 nL /min was used. Peptides were separated using an analytical column ES803A and a gradient increasing from 5% to 40% of solvent B (ACN in 0.1% FA) in 540 minutes followed by 13 minutes of isocratic flow at 80% of solvent B (for Cellular proteins). On the other hand, the nuclear proteins peptide samples were separated using a gradient inclining from 5% to 35% of solvent B (ACN in 0.1% FA) in 450 minutes followed by 20 minutes of incline to 80% solvent B and finally fixed at 80% solvent B for 70 minutes. The spray voltage was set to 1.9 KV and the capillary temperature to 275°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and by inference protein identification was done by matching the MS raw data with in silico generated peptide ion m/z and MS2 spectral peak lists. The TAIR10 protein database (14486974 residues, 35394 sequences) was searched using the Mascot search engine V2.5.1 coupled to the Thermo proteome discoverer 2.1.1.21. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with tolerance of 2 missed cleavages. Ion m/z error tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Peptide spectral match (PSM), peptide and protein level false discovery rates (FDR) were determined by a decoy database search. A significance threshold of α= 0.01 was used for PSM and peptide level identifications. For the protein level an α of 0.05 was tolerated. The PSM count was used as protein abundance quantitative index (PQI)

### Publication Abstract
Despite its central role as the ark of genetic information and gene expression the plant nucleus is surprisingly understudied. We isolated nuclei from the <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> dark grown cell culture left untreated and treated with flg22 and nlp20, two elicitors of pattern triggered immunity (PTI) in plants, respectively. An liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based discovery proteomics approach was used to measure the nuclear proteome fractions. An enrichment score based on the relative abundance of cytoplasmic, mitochondrial and Golgi markers in the nuclear protein fraction allowed us to curate the nuclear proteome producing high quality catalogs of around 3,000 nuclear proteins under untreated and both PTI conditions. The measurements also covered low abundant proteins including more than 100 transcription factors and transcriptional co-activators. We disclose a list of several hundred potentially dual targeted proteins including proteins not yet found before for further study. Protein import into the nucleus in plant immunity is known. Here we sought to gain a broader impression of this phenomenon employing our proteomics data and found 157 and 73 proteins to possibly be imported into the nucleus upon stimulus with flg22 and nlp20, respectively. Furthermore, the abundance of 93 proteins changed significantly in the nucleus following elicitation of immunity. These results suggest promiscuous ribosome assembly and a role of prohibitins and cytochrome C in the nucleus in PTI.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana; nucleus; nuclear proteome; stress response; flg22; nlp20;

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions
IPB Halle

### Submitter
Steffen Neumann

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions


