### Accession
PXD020362

### Title
MS imaging-guided microproteomics for spatial omics on a single instrument

### Description
Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) allows investigating the spatial distribution of chemical compounds directly in biological tissues. As the analytical depth of MSI is limited, MSI needs to be coupled to more sensitive local extraction-based omics approaches to achieve a comprehensive molecular characterization.  For this it is important to retain the spatial information provided by MSI for follow-up omics studies. It has been shown that regiospecific MSI data can be used to guide a laser microdissection system (LMD) for ultra-sensitive LC-MS analyses. So far, this combination has required separate and specialized MS instrumentation. Recent advances in dual-source instrumentation, harboring both MALDI and ESI sources, promise state-of-the-art MSI and liquid-based proteomic capabilities on the same MS instrument.  In this study, we demonstrate that such an instrument can offer both, fast lipid-based MSI at high mass- and high lateral resolution, and sensitive LC-MS on local protein extracts from the exact same tissue section.

### Sample Protocol
MALDI-MSI was performed on a 12µm-thick section from a breast cancer sample, which was collected by the Tissue Biobank of the University of Liège. The consent form was obtained from the involved patient and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University Hospital Center of Liège. Importantly, the section was mounted on a PEN (Polyethylene Naphtalate) membrane slide, which is compatible with the employed MSI system and required for the later laser microdissection. The section was dried in a desiccator for 30 minutes at room temperature before being coated with norharmane (7 mg/ml in 2:1 Chloroform: methanol) for lipid MSI using the TM-sprayer (HTX technologies, Chapel Hill, NC, USA) with the following parameters: 12 layers, flow rate=0.120 ml/min, velocity=1200 mm/min, and nozzle temperature= 30°C. The MSI measurement was performed in positive ion mode at 50µm spatial resolution within a mass range of m/z 300–1600 at 25 pixels/second. After the MSI experiment, the sample was rinsed in 70% ethanol to remove the matrix and stained with only hematoxylin. After scanning of the slide with a high-resolution scanner (M8 scanner, Freising, Germany), the tumor area was delineatedby a trained pathologist. Three subregions (~2000 cells) from every segment were randomly selected and microdissected for further analysis, making a total of 9 samples. These samples were individually prepared for LC-MS as previously described

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v.1.6.10.43) was used for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ). Database search was performed using the SwissProt human database (downloaded on February 12, 2020, with 42368 entries including isoforms) with a parent mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 50 mDa, and a FDR≤0.01. Trypsin was chosen as proteolytic enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, acetylation of protein N termini and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The identification was first performed on individual replicates providing on average 2000 protein identifications per replicate, giving evidence of the high-sensitivity of the LC-MS setup for the analysis of minute amounts of samples, and then on all three replicates from every segment using the ‘matching between runs’ feature. Based on a control tissue experiment of the same region and involving the same number of technical replicates, we observed no detrimental effect of the lipid MSI experiment on the number of identified proteins. As expected when analyzing samples from the same tissue section, the overlap in identified proteins between the three segments was high with on average only 21.8% segment-exclusive identifications. LFQ calculations were performed on all replicates across all segments using the ‘matching between runs’ feature. Proteins identified as ‘reverse’, ‘only identified by site’ and ‘potential contaminants’, or with one or more zero-LFQ intensities across the replicates were removed from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) allows investigating the spatial distribution of chemical compounds directly in biological tissues. As the analytical depth of MSI is limited, MSI needs to be coupled to more sensitive local extraction-based omics approaches to achieve a comprehensive molecular characterization. For this, it is important to retain the spatial information provided by MSI for follow-up omics studies. It has been shown that regiospecific MSI data can be used to guide a laser microdissection system for ultra-sensitive liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analyses. So far, this combination has required separate and specialized mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation. Recent advances in dual-source instrumentation, harboring both matrix assisted laser/desorption ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) sources, promise state-of-the-art MSI and liquid-based proteomic capabilities on the same MS instrument. This study demonstrates that such an instrument can offer both fast lipid-based MSI at high mass and high lateral resolution and sensitive LC-MS on local protein extracts from the exact same tissue section.

### Keywords
Microproteomics, Laser microdissection, Mass spectrometry imaging, Spatial omics

### Affiliations
Maastricht University
M4I Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Benjamin Balluff

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Balluff
M4I Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht, The Netherlands


