### Accession
PXD025508

### Title
Oncogenic PKA signaling stabilizes MYC oncoproteins via an aurora kinase A-dependent mechanism

### Description
Genetic alterations that activate protein kinase A (PKA) signaling are found across many tumor types, but their downstream oncogenic mechanisms are poorly understood. We used global phosphoproteomics and kinome activity profiling to map the conserved signaling outputs driven by diverse genetic changes that activate PKA in cancer. We define two consensus networks of effectors downstream of PKA in cancer models including melanoma and fibrolamellar carcinoma [FLC]. One is centered on RAS/MAPK components and a second involves Aurora Kinase A (AURKA).  We find that AURKA stabilizes c-MYC and n-MYC protein levels and expression programs in PKA-dependent tumor models, in part via a positive feedback loop mediated by the oncogenic kinase PIM2. This process can be suppressed by conformation-disrupting AURKA inhibitors such as CD-532. Our findings elucidate two independent mechanisms of PKA-driven tumor cell growth and designate drug targets for study in FLC and other PKA-dependent malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics: Transgenic cell lines with doxycycline-controlled 3xFLAG-labelled PRKACA or PRKAR1AG325D constructs were treated with DMSO or doxycycline for 48 hours. Cells were then harvested in PBS, lysed in lysis buffer (8uM urea, 50mM Tris pH 8, 75mM NaCl, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and sonicated at 20% for 15 sec. Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay was performed to quantify protein lysates. Samples were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT), cooled to room temperature, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide, quenched with 15mM DTT, diluted with 50mM Tris pH 8 to <2M urea, and subjected to trypsin digestion at 37C overnight. Samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 50mg Seppak cartridges were set up on vacuum, and columns were washed with series of MS-grade acetonitrile (ACN), 70% ACN/0.25% acetic acid (AA), and 0.1% TFA buffers. After letting samples drip through columns, columns were washed with 0.1% TFA and 0.5% AA. Samples were eluted and ~30ug of each sample was aliquoted out for global protein analysis. Remaining aliquots were lyophilized in a speed vacuum concentrator, and phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with immobilized metal affinity chromatography following established protocols (Budzik et al., 2020). Phosphopeptides were eluted in 50% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) and dried on a speed vacuum concentrator. Enriched samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometry system with an Easy nLC 1200 HPLC interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and mobile phase B consisted of 80% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 2% to 18% mobile phase B over 94 minutes followed by an increase to 34% B over 40 minutes, then held at 90% B for 6 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. MS1 data was acquired with a 3e6 AGC target, maximum injection time of 100ms, and 70K resolution. MS2 data was for the 15 most abundant precursors using automatic dynamic exclusion, a normalized collision energy of 27, 1e5 AGC, a maximum injection time of 120ms, and a 17.5K resolution.  For MIBs: MIBs were performed as described previously (Donnella et al., 2018; Sos et al., 2014). Kinase inhibitor compounds were purchased or synthesized and coupled to sepharose beads using 1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide chemistry. Transgenic cell lines with doxycycline-controlled FLAG-labelled Tet-on PRKACA or PRKAR1AG325D constructs were treated with DMSO or doxycycline for 48 hours then collected in PBS. Samples were lysed in 150mM NaCl buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were diluted with 5M NaCl and high-salt binding buffer (50mM Hepes pH 7.5, 1M NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA). Pre-washed columns containing ECH sepharose 4B and EAH sepharose 4B beads were layered with kinase inhibitor-coupled beads as follows: 200uL JG-4, 100uL VI-16832, 75uL staurosporin, 100uL PP-hydroxyl, 100uL purvalanol B, 50uL GDC, 100uL dasatinib, 50uL sorafenib, 50uL crizotinib, 50uL lapatinib, 50uL SB202190, 50uL bisindolylmaleimide X. Columns were washed with high salt buffer without disturbing bead layers, and affinity purification was performed with gravity chromatography. Bound kinases were washed with high salt buffer, low salt buffer (50mM Hepes pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA), and 0.1% (w/v) SDS in high salt buffer. Samples were eluted twice by capping the column, applying 300uL of elution buffer (0.5% SDS/1% BME/0.1M Tris-HCL pH 6.8) to the column, vortexing, heating to 98C, removing caps, and allowing elution to flow through by gravity. Samples were frozen at -80C overnight, reduced with 500mM DTT, cooled to room temperature, and treated with 500mM iodoacetamide. Methanol/chloroform precipitation, trypsin digestion at 37C overnight, and desalting were performed on all samples. Enriched samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometry system with an Easy nLC 1200 HPLC. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and mobile phase B consisted of 80% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 32% mobile phase B over 100 minutes followed by an increase to 80% B over 8 minutes, and held at 80% B for 5 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. MS1 data was acquired with a 3e6 AGC target, maximum injection time of 100ms, and 70K resolution. MS2 data was for the 15 most abundant precursors using 30s dynamic exclusion, a normalized collision energy of 27, 1e5 AGC, a maximum injection time of 200ms, and a 17.5K resolution. All mass spectrometry was performed at the Thermo Fisher Scientific Proteomics Facility for Disease Target Discovery at UCSF and the J. David Gladstone Institutes.

### Data Protocol
For phosphoproteomics: Mass spectrometry data was assigned to human sequences and peptide identification and label-free quantification were performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Data were searched against the UniProt human protein database (downloaded 2017). Trypsin/P was selected allowing up to 2 two missed cleavages, and variable modification was allowed for methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, in addition to a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The other MaxQuant settings were left as default. Statistical analysis was performed using R (version 3.6.3), RStudio, and the MSstats Bioconductor package (Choi et al., 2014). Contaminants and decoy hits were removed, and samples were normalized across fractions by equalizing the median log2-transformed MS1 intensity distributions. Log2(fold change) for protein phosphorylation sites were calculated, along with p-values. Phosphoproteomic data was uploaded to the PhosFate profiler tool (Phosfate.com, Ochoa et al., 2016) to infer kinase activity.  For MIBs: Peptides were identified with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) and label-free quantification was performed with Skyline (Schilling et al., 2012), with Trypsin [KR|P] selected and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Full scan MS1 filtering was performed with 70,000 resolving power at 400 m/z using the Orbitrap. Statistical analysis was performed with R, RStudio, and MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) to calculate log2(fold change) and p-values of detected kinases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Myc, Pka, Pim2, Fibrolamellar carcinoma, Aurka

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine (GI Oncology), UCSF, United States
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
John Gordan

### Lab Head
Dr John Dozier Gordan
Department of Medicine (GI Oncology), UCSF, United States


