### Accession
PXD010071

### Title
Thylakoids of Picea abies -  The unique photosynthetic apparatus of Pinaceae - Analysis of photosynthetic complexes in Norway spruce (Piceaabies)

### Description
Analysis of the subunits composition of the thylakoids protein complexes in Picea abies (Norway spruce) by means of two-dimensional large-pore Blue-Native/sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D lpBN/SDS-PAGE) and in-gel tryptic digestion of single spots.

### Sample Protocol
Picea abies (L.) Karst. (spruce) trees grown in a natural forest in southern Finland, Turku (60°27′N, 22°16′E) were used to collect needles for all experiments. South-facing branches (up to 2 m height) were cut from 5 different trees during noon at 18.06.2014, 24.06.2015 and 09.06.2016. Cut branches were placed in a black plastic bag, transported to the laboratory and immediately used for thylakoid isolations. 
Non-current year needles, yet avoiding the oldest ones, were collected on ice and pooled from all 5 branches under dim light. 10 g (fresh weight) of needles were transferred into ice cold homogenizer (Omni Macro Homogenizer with 2 inch blades in a 200mL stainless steel chamber, Omni-Inc, GA, USA) and 100 mL of grinding buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5; 330 mM sorbitol, 5 mM MgCl2;10 mM NaF; 10% (w/v) polyethylene glycol, 6000 kDa; 0.075% (w/v) bovine serum albumin; 0.065% (w/v) Na-ascorbate) was added. All steps were performed in cold room at 4°C with ice-cold reagents. Needles were homogenized for 90 s at 8000 rpm, filtrated through two layers of miracloth and centrifuged at 4600 g for 6 min. The pellet was re-suspended with a brush in 25 mL shock buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl2; 10 mM NaF), transferred into a new centrifuge tube and the thylakoids were pelleted at 4600 g for 6 min. Thylakoids were re-suspended in 15 mL storage buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5; 5 mM MgCl2; 100 mM sorbitol; 10 mM NaF), starch and residual PEG were removed by short centrifugation (2 min, 200g) and the thylakoids were again pelleted at 4600 g for 6 min. Thylakoid pellet was re-suspended with a brush in 200µL storage buffer, aliquoted and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for later use.
Thylakoid proteins were separated in 2D lpBN/SDS-PAGE (acrylamide concentration: 3.5-12% in first dimension and 12% in second dimension, in presence of 6 M urea as described in Järvi et al., 2011) and after SYPRO Ruby and silver staining spots were excised from the gel. For mass spectrometry analysis excised spots were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Eluted peptides were identified by nLC-ESI-MS/MS using either a Q-Exactive or Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientifics) and applying a gradient from solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) of 8 to 43% for 10 minutes followed by a step to 100% for 2 minutes and 8 minutes 100% solvent B. The 10 most intense peaks in every full MS scan (range 300 to 2000 m/z) with a resolution of 120,000 were selected for fragmentation in MS2 with a dynamic exclusion window of 10 s.


### Data Protocol
Custom Database:
Although amino acid sequences for chloroplast- and nuclear-encoded proteins are available for the Picea abies genome (Nystedt et al., 2013), the publically available protein sequences, derived from nuclear-encoded gene models (Conifer Genome Integrative Explorer (ConGenIE), http://congenie.org/), do not always cover the full-length proteins. Yet, the identification of spruce thylakoid protein complexes via mass spectrometry requires full-length polypeptide sequences, hence it was necessary to build a curated custom database to complement the existing spruce protein database. This was accomplished using three different databases. Databases 1 and 2 are the publically available spruce peptide sequences, derived from chloroplast-encoded gene models (NCBI, NC_021456.1) and nuclear-encoded gene models (ConGenIE, http://congenie.org), respectively. As mentioned above, some protein sequences in Database 2 were only partial and therefore additional full-length polypeptide sequences were used to build a custom spruce thylakoid protein database, derived from transcript sequences (Database 3). Only transcripts from thylakoid associated proteins were included, since the MS analysis was to focus on this subset of proteins.
Candidate transcript sequences were identified using tBLASTn searches with Arabidopsis thaliana or Physcomitrella patens orthologue protein sequences as queries. The ten best tBLASTn hits (scoring matrix: Blossum 62, E-value cut-off: 1e-3) were then translated to candidate protein sequences and manually checked for redundancy, possible sequencing errors and sequence full length in comparison to the Arabidopsis thaliana or Physcomitrella patens reference sequences. Full length candidate protein sequences were trimmed to the first N-terminal methionine. Shorter candidate sequences were only kept in cases in which no full length protein sequences were found. To check the obtained candidate sequences and exclude possible contaminations (e.g. from lichens, Delhomme et al., 2015), phylogenies were reconstructed for each candidate protein sequence with orthologue sequences of representative model species of the green linage (Arabidopsis thaliana, Selaginella moellendorffii, Physcomitrella patens, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and Anabaena sp. PCC 7120). Algae or cyanobacterial orthologues, used as out-groups and candidate protein sequences falling into the same clade with either of the two orthologues, were removed. This procedure led in some cases to multiple unique protein sequence per protein in the spruce thylakoid protein database, as a priori all protein sequence variations were considered equally valid.
The merged custom database contained 169 unique polypeptide sequences from transcripts (spruce thylakoid protein database, File S1), 74 polypeptide sequences from the chloroplast encoded gene models (Database 1) and 66,632 polypeptide sequences from the nuclear-encoded gene models (Database 2). In total 66,875 spruce polypeptide sequences and 115 additional polypeptide sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) were used for identification via MS (merged protein database, File S2).

MS searches:
The acquired spectra were matched against a custom made database (see above) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientifics) with an in-house installation of the Mascot server (v. 2.5.1). Searches were performed with 10 ppm precursor and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, allowing as fixed modification Cys carboamidomethylation and as dynamic modification Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamination and N-terminal acetylation. Assigned peptides were filtered by a minimal peptide length of 5, at least medium confidence level and maximum 2 miscleavages. PSM confidence was assigned according to the Probability Based Mowse Score generated by Mascot.


### Publication Abstract
Pinaceae are the predominant photosynthetic species in boreal forests, but so far no detailed description of the protein components of the photosynthetic apparatus of these gymnosperms has been available. In this study we report a detailed characterization of the thylakoid photosynthetic machinery of Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst). We first customized a spruce thylakoid protein database from translated transcript sequences combined with existing protein sequences derived from gene models, which enabled reliable tandem mass spectrometry identification of P. abies thylakoid proteins from two-dimensional large pore blue-native/SDS-PAGE. This allowed a direct comparison of the two-dimensional protein map of thylakoid protein complexes from P. abies with the model angiosperm Arabidopsis thaliana. Although the subunit composition of P. abies core PSI and PSII complexes is largely similar to that of Arabidopsis, there was a high abundance of a smaller PSI subcomplex, closely resembling the assembly intermediate PSI* complex. In addition, the evolutionary distribution of light-harvesting complex (LHC) family members of Pinaceae was compared in silico with other land plants, revealing that P. abies and other Pinaceae (also Gnetaceae and Welwitschiaceae) have lost LHCB4, but retained LHCB8 (formerly called LHCB4.3). The findings reported here show the composition of the photosynthetic apparatus of P. abies and other Pinaceae members to be unique among land plants.

### Keywords
Spruce, 2d lpbn-sds-page, Thylakoids, Photosynthesis, Picea abies

### Affiliations
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Steffen Grebe

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Finland


