### Accession
PXD037336

### Title
PP6 interated proteins in HaCaT cells treated with L-menthol

### Description
Because HES1 maintained PP6 protein level without affecting its mRNA level, we asked if HES1 directly interacted with PP6 in keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
We treated PP6-overexpressing HaCaT cells with or without L-menthol in the presence of R848 and investigated PP6-interactive proteins.We performed spectrometry on immunoprecipitates pulled by PP6 antibodies.

### Data Protocol
Samples from immunoprecipitates pulled down with anti-PPP6c was analyzed using an Agilent 1290 HPLC that was coupled to an Agilent 6545 Quadrupole Time-of-flight (QToF) mass spectrometer (MS) with a Dual Jet Stream electrospray ionization (ESI) source. The samples were analyzed in positive-ion (ESI+) mode. Spectral peaks in the mass range from 50 to 1100 m/z were acquired. The run was performed at a flow rate of 300 μL/min and infused into the ion spray source held at 3.5 kV. Nitrogen was used as the drying gas at 325 °C at a flow rate of 8 L /min. The nebulizer pressure and fragmentor voltage were maintained at 45 psig and 110 V, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Igbp1, Pp6, Hacat, L-menthol

### Affiliations
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China

### Submitter
Zhikai Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Honglin WANG
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.


