### Accession
PXD022483

### Title
Global profiling of N-glycosylated proteins in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Description
N-glycosylation is an important posttranslational modification in all eukaryotes, but little is known about the N-glycoproteomes in microalgal systems. Here, N-glycoproteome of the model diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum was unveiled. Totally, 893 different N-glycosylated sites from 649 proteins were identified from P. tricornutum. The new synthesized N-glycans were principally transferred to asparagine residues within the conserved N-X-S/T (where X is a residue other than proline) sequence of nascent polypeptide chains. Functional annotation of N-glycosylated proteins showed that 70% N-glycoproteins were involved in vesicular transport and posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones, indicating the N-glycosylation was important for these functions. Of the all identified N-glycoproteins 45.3% were predicted to localize on chloroplast, which implied the widespread regulatory role of N-glycosylation in chloroplast. Furthermore, the enrichment results of N-glycoproteins indicated that compared to ‘Cellular component’ and ‘Biological process’ categories proteins related with the ‘Molecular function’ category were more prone to be N-glycosylated. And it was speculated that N-glycosylation played a vital regulatory role in catalytic activity of enzymes and metabolism processes of many small molecules. 47% of all enriched proteins were related with metabolic pathways. The functional annotation and enrichment of N-glycoproteins suggested that N-glycoproteins participated in a variety of important metabolic pathways and perform different functions in P. tricornutum. 12 proteins involved in the ER quality control mechanism and ER- associated degradation pathway were identified as N-glycosylated proteins, indicating that the N-glycosylated modification was important for their functions in the protein N-glycosylation pathway. Additionally, some interacted glycoproteins were classified from this study, which provided valuable information for studying the functions of these glycoproteins. In the study, the identification of N-glycosylation on nascent proteins expands our understanding of this PTM at a proteomics scale and may facilitate the elucidation of the precise function of proteins in this model diatom.

### Sample Protocol
1 Microalga and growth conditions  Phaeodactylum tricornutum Pt1 cells were cultured in Erlenmeyer flasks containing f/2 medium at 22℃ under 24 h light condition (50 μmol photons m−2 s−1). Algal cells were cultured for 5 days to exponential phase, and subsequently, were transferred into the f/2 medium. To obtain a large amount of the N-glycosylated proteome from P. tricornutum, cells in exponential phase were exposed to nitrogen deficiency for 24 hours 4. After the exposure, about 500 mg fresh algal cells (50% from wild type and 50% from nitrogen deficiency) were collected by centrifugation (1500 g, 10 min) for the next experiments.  2 Protein extraction  Algal cells were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to 5 mL Eppendorf tube. Subsequently, lysis buffer, including 8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC), was added to the algal powder in a ratio of 1:4. The mixture was then sonicated three to four times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). After the sonication, the debris was discarded by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 ℃ for 10 min. The protein from supernatant was precipitated with cold 20% TCA at -20℃ for 2 h. The supernatant was removed after the centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 ℃ for 10 min. The precipitation was washed three times with the cold acetone and then dissolved in 8 M urea. The concentration of protein was measured with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ab102536, Abcam, China).   3 Trypsin digestion  For digestion, 5 mM dithiothreitol was used to reduce the protein solution at 56 °C for 30 min and 11 mM iodoacetamide was used for the alkylation of protein at room temperature for 15 min in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added for the first digestion overnight at 1:50 (trypsin-to-protein) mass ratio and for a second 4 h-digestion at 1:100 (trypsin-to-protein) mass ratio.  4  HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  5 Enrichment of glycol-peptides Peptide mixtures were first dissolved in a loading buffer (80% acetonitrile/ 1% trifluoroacetic acid). The supernatant was transferred to HILIC microcolumn and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 15 min. After the three times washing with an enrichment buffer, glycol-peptides were collected from HILIC microcolumn by 10% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum freezing. After drying, the glycol-peptides were dissolved and digested in 50 μL 50 mM NH4CO3 buffer and 2 μL PNGase F at 37 °C overnight. The digested glycol-peptides were washed by C18 ZipTips and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.  6 LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile), and an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) at 0-24 min, 25% to 35% solvent B in 24-32 min and climbing to 35% to 80% in 33-36 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min (36-40 min), all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Signal threshold was set at 5,000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set at 200 ms. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8, http://www.maxquant.org/). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot_Phaeodactylum_tricornutum_strain_CCAP_1055 (10465 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and N-acetylated modification and Deamidation 18O (N), Deamidation (NQ) were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Motif analysis was carried out by MoMo (v5.0.2, http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo). Additionally, the annotations of GO and Domain were performed via InterProScan (v.5.14-53.0, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), and KEGG annotation were performed by KAAS (v.2.0, http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) and KEGG Mapper (V2.5, http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). Subcellular localization was predicted by Wolfsort (v.0.2, http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) and CELLO (v.2.5, http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/). Enrichment analysis was carried through the Perl module (v.1.31, https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::NSP::Measures::2D::Fisher). The heatmap of enrichment was predicted via R Package pheatmap (v.2.0.3, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/). Besides, the interaction of protein was analyzed by R package networkD3 (v.0.4, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/networkD3/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-glycosylation; glycoprotein; er quality control mechanism; er- associated degradation pathway

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Sciences, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and STU-UNIVPM Joint Algal Research Center, College of Sciences, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong, China; Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 515063, China.
Shantou University

### Submitter
Xiaojuan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaojuan Liu
Institute of Marine Sciences, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and STU-UNIVPM Joint Algal Research Center, College of Sciences, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong, China; Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 515063, China.


