### Accession
PXD032745

### Title
Copper metabolism in Naegleria gruberi and its deadly relative Naegleria fowleri.

### Description
Although copper is an essential nutrient crucial for many biological processes, an excessive concentration can be toxic and lead to cell death. The metabolism of this two-faced metal must be strictly regulated at the cell level. In this study, we investigated copper homeostasis in two related unicellular organisms: nonpathogenic Naegleria gruberi and the “brain-eating amoeba” Naegleria fowleri. We identified and confirmed the function of their specific copper transporters securing the main pathway of copper acquisition. Adjusting to different environments with varying copper levels during the life cycle of these organisms requires various metabolic adaptations. Using comparative proteomic analyses, measuring oxygen consumption, and enzymatic determination of NADH dehydrogenase, we showed that both amoebas respond to copper deprivation by upregulating the components of the branched electron transport chain: the alternative oxidase and alternative NADH dehydrogenase. Interestingly, analysis of iron acquisition indicated that this system is copper-dependent in N. gruberi but not in its pathogenic relative. Importantly, we identified a potential key protein of copper metabolism of N. gruberi, the homolog of human DJ-1 protein, which is known to be linked to Parkinson’s disease. Altogether, our study reveals the mechanisms underlying copper metabolism in the model amoeba N. gruberi and the fatal pathogen N. fowleri and highlights the differences between the two amoebas.

### Sample Protocol
N. gruberi and N. fowleri cells were grown in biological triplicates for each condition. After incubation,  cells were pelleted by centrifugation (1200 g, 10 min, 4 °C) and washed three times with phosphate193 buffered saline (PBS). Whole-cell label-free proteomic analysis followed by the same method as that  described in (Mach et al., 2018) was performed by applying nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC)

### Data Protocol
Data were evaluated with MaxQuant software (Cox et al., 2014)using the AmoebaDB N. fowleri database downloaded in August 2018 or the N. gruberi database  (downloaded from UniProt August 2018). Selected proteins (lacking annotation) were manually Copper metabolism in Naegleria This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article annotated using HHpred (Zimmermann et al., 2018) or NCBI BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990). The  resulting data were further processed by Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016). Potential  contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out. To evaluate significantly changed proteins at the level  of the false discovery rate, Student’s t test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction was used. Proteins  that were significantly changed and those found in only one condition (in at least two of three  replicates) were selected. Proteins identified by only one peptide and proteins with Q-value higher than  0 were excluded from the selection.

### Publication Abstract
Although copper is an essential nutrient crucial for many biological processes, an excessive concentration can be toxic and lead to cell death. The metabolism of this two-faced metal must be strictly regulated at the cell level. In this study, we investigated copper homeostasis in two related unicellular organisms: nonpathogenic <i>Naegleria gruberi</i> and the "brain-eating amoeba" <i>Naegleria fowleri</i>. We identified and confirmed the function of their specific copper transporters securing the main pathway of copper acquisition. Adjusting to different environments with varying copper levels during the life cycle of these organisms requires various metabolic adaptations. Using comparative proteomic analyses, measuring oxygen consumption, and enzymatic determination of NADH dehydrogenase, we showed that both amoebas respond to copper deprivation by upregulating the components of the branched electron transport chain: the alternative oxidase and alternative NADH dehydrogenase. Interestingly, analysis of iron acquisition indicated that this system is copper-dependent in <i>N. gruberi</i> but not in its pathogenic relative. Importantly, we identified a potential key protein of copper metabolism of <i>N. gruberi</i>, the homolog of human DJ-1 protein, which is known to be linked to Parkinson's disease. Altogether, our study reveals the mechanisms underlying copper metabolism in the model amoeba <i>N. gruberi</i> and the fatal pathogen <i>N. fowleri</i> and highlights the differences between the two amoebas.

### Keywords
Naegleria gruberi, Etc, Alternative nadh dehydrogenase, Ctr copper transporters, Alternative oxidase, Naegleria fowleri, Dj-1, Copper

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec, Czech Republic
BIOCEV, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague

### Submitter
Pavel Talacko

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Sutak
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec, Czech Republic


