### Accession
PXD005908

### Title
Proteomic Identification of Cereal Grains Associated with Archaeological Artefacts

### Description
The domestication and transmission of cereals is one of the most fundamental components of early farming, but direct evidence of their use in early culinary practices and economies has remained frustratingly elusive. Using analysis of a well-preserved Early Bronze Age wooden container from Switzerland, we propose novel criterial for the identification of cereal residues. Using gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS), we identified compounds typically associated with plant products, including a series of phenolic lipids (alkylresorcinols) found only at appreciable concentration in wheat and rye bran. The value of these lipids as cereal grain biomarkers were independently corroborated by the presence of macrobotanical remains embedded in the deposit, and wheat and rye endosperm peptides extracted from residue. These findings demonstrate the utility of a lipid-based biomarker for wheat and rye bran and offer a methodological template for future investigations of wider range of archaeological contexts. Alkylresorcinols provide a new tool for residue analysis which can help explore spread and exploitation of cereal grains, a economically fundamental component the advent and spread of farming.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were extracted using a protocol based on GASP9, modified for ancient samples. 4.0 mg of sample #137337 was ground using a sterile micropestle and 5 μL of SDS (20%) added with 45 μL of M-PER (Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent, Thermo Fisher), then shaken for 15 minutes at room temperature. 50 μL of DTT (1 M) was added and the sample shaken for a further 30 minutes at room temperature. 100 μL of Proto-Gel (37.5:1 Acrylamide to Bisacrylamide, National Diagnostics) was added and gently resuspended to mix, then left for 20 minutes. To polymerize the gel, 8 μL of tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) TEMED, followed by 8 μL of ammonium Persulfate (APS) was added and gently mixed. The polymerized gel was then shredded to increase the surface area by passing the gel through a plastic grid inset by pulse centrifugation. The gel pieces were fixed through the addition of methanol/water/acetic acid/ solution (50/40/10). The solution was centrifuged, and then the supernatant discard. 1 mL of acetonitrile was added to dehydrate the gel pieces. 1 mL of urea (6M) was added to the dehydrated gel pieces and rotated for 3 minutes. A series of washing and drying steps to exchange buffers and remove salts was then performed. For protein digestion, samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C in 200 μL of ammonium bicarbonate (0.05 M) and trypsin (5 μL of 0.5 μg/μL).  Following trypsin digestion, the gel pieces were dried with acetonitrile to extract peptides and the supernatant transferred into a fresh Eppendorf tube. 200 μL of 5% formic acid solution, followed by another drying step with acetonitrile, was added to the gel pieces to extract acidic peptides, and the supernatant transferred. To fully dehydrate the gel and remove remaining peptides, a further 200 μL of acetonitrile was added, rotated for 5 min, pulse centrifuged, and the supernatant transferred. The extracted peptides were then dried in a centrifugal evaporator, and desalted using C18 resin ZipTips (EMD Millipore) prior to MS/MS analysis.   Tandem Mass Spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratories of the Target Discovery Institute at the University of Oxford. Preceding injection into the nLC-MS/MS, dried peptides were resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1%Trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and 6 μL injected. Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved using a 50cm easy spray column (Thermo Scientific) and a linear Acetonitrile gradient from 2-35% in 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid. Precursor peptides were detected with up to 50 ms accumulation time for an ion target of 4E5, followed MS/MS data acquisition for up to 3 seconds and a maximum parallel injection time of 250 ms per precursor mass. Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with 1.2 Th and selected at an intensity of 5000 or higher following automatic exclusion for 60 seconds. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120.000, while MS/MS spectra were acquired after CID fragmentation (35% collision energy) in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) using Proteowizard MSConvert (version 3.0.4743) using the 100 most intense peaks in each MS/MS spectrum. MS/MS ion database searching was performed on Mascot (Matrix ScienceTM, version 2.4.01), against the UniProt database. Searches were performed against a decoy database to estimate a false discovery rate (FDR), which was subsequently adjusted to 1%. Propionamide (C) was set as a fixed modification and deamidation (NQ), methionine oxidation, propionamide (K) and propionamide (N-terminus) were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS/MS ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. Semi-tryptic peptides were searched with up to 2 missed cleavages. Results were adjusted to a 1% FDR and filtered to an ion score of >35, with a minimum of two peptides. Peptides identified by Mascot as being in the kingdom Plantae were aligned using BLASTp against all non-redundant nucleotide sequences and the taxonomy assessed using the BLAST Lineage Report. Protein expression data was retrieved, where available, from UniProtKB.

### Publication Abstract
The domestication and transmission of cereals is one of the most fundamental components of early farming, but direct evidence of their use in early culinary practices and economies has remained frustratingly elusive. Using analysis of a well-preserved Early Bronze Age wooden container from Switzerland, we propose novel criteria for the identification of cereal residues. Using gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS), we identified compounds typically associated with plant products, including a series of phenolic lipids (alkylresorcinols) found only at appreciable concentration in wheat and rye bran. The value of these lipids as cereal grain biomarkers were independently corroborated by the presence of macrobotanical remains embedded in the deposit, and wheat and rye endosperm peptides extracted from residue. These findings demonstrate the utility of a lipid-based biomarker for wheat and rye bran and offer a methodological template for future investigations of wider range of archaeological contexts. Alkylresorcinols provide a new tool for residue analysis which can help explore the spread and exploitation of cereal grains, a fundamental component of the advent and spread of farming.

### Keywords
Ancient proteins, Cereal, Wheat

### Affiliations
University of York
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Jessica Hendy

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom


