### Accession
PXD010677

### Title
Exosome-dependent immune surveillance at the metastatic niche requires BAG6

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by tumor cells are able to establish a pre-metastatic niche in distant organs, or on the contrary, exert anti-tumor activity. The mechanisms directing distinct EV functions are unknown. Using the B-16V transplantation mouse melanoma model we demonstrate that EVs from B-16V cells mobilize Ly6Clow patrolling monocytes and inhibit lung metastasis. Mechanistically, the formation of anti-tumor-EVs was dependent on the chaperone BAG6 and the acetylation of p53 by the BAG6/CBP/p300-acetylase complex, followed by the recruitment of components of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) via a P(S/T)AP double motif of BAG6. By contrast, deficiency of BAG6 led to the release of a distinct vesicle subtype with pro-tumorigenic activity, which recruited neutrophils to the pre-metastatic niche. In humans, BAG6 expression decreases in late-stage melanoma patients, correlating with an increase of the mRNA for the metastasis driver alpha-catulin in EVs, as observed in BAG6-deficient mouse EVs. We conclude that the BAG6/CBP/p300-p53 axis is a key pathway directing EV-formation and function.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were lysed in 8M Urea pH 8, reduced and alkylated followed by trypsin in-solution digestion over night at 37°C. Peptides were purified using StageTips. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using linear gradient (solvent B 0.1% formice acid in 80% acetonitrile) over 240 min (total proteome) and 150 min (EVs) gradients. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2 Da window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot MOUSE database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) was included as variable modification. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Downstream data processing was conducted within the Perseus computational platform. Briefly, protein groups flagged as „reverse“, „potential contaminant“ or „only identified by site“ were removed from the data. LFQ data were log2 transformed. Statistical analysis of differentially regulated proteins was performed using a two-sided t-test (fudge factor s0 was adjusted to 0.1). Resulting p.values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based FDR approach.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles released by tumor cells contribute to the reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment and interfere with hallmarks of cancer including metastasis. Notably, melanoma cell-derived EVs are able to establish a pre-metastatic niche in distant organs, or on the contrary, exert anti-tumor activity. However, molecular insights into how vesicles are selectively packaged with cargo defining their specific functions remain elusive. <b>Methods</b>: Here, we investigated the role of the chaperone Bcl2-associated anthogene 6 (BAG6, synonym Bat3) for the formation of pro- and anti-tumor EVs. EVs collected from wildtype cells and BAG6-deficient cells were characterized by mass spectrometry and RNAseq. Their tumorigenic potential was analyzed using the B-16V transplantation mouse melanoma model. <b>Results</b>: We demonstrate that EVs from B-16V cells inhibit lung metastasis associated with the mobilization of Ly6C<sup>low</sup> patrolling monocytes. The formation of these anti-tumor-EVs was dependent on acetylation of p53 by the BAG6/CBP/p300-acetylase complex, followed by recruitment of components of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) via a P(S/T)AP double motif of BAG6. Genetic ablation of BAG6 and disruption of this pathway led to the release of a distinct EV subtype, which failed to suppress metastasis but recruited tumor-promoting neutrophils to the pre-metastatic niche. <b>Conclusion</b>: We conclude that the BAG6/CBP/p300-p53 axis is a key pathway directing EV cargo loading and thus a potential novel microenvironmental therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Bag6, Evs, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Frese
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


