### Accession
PXD033955

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with HA-FLAG-Eya1

### Description
To explore the spectrum of Eya1-interacting partner proteins, we thus generated a stable HEK293 cell line that constitutively express the 2HA–3FLAG-Eya1 (HF-Eya1) protein, purified HF-Eya1 from the cell extracts by a tandem affinity purification protocol to reduce background (first with anti-FLAG and then with anti-HA to purify FLAG-elute) and analyzed 12bands (B1-B12) using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands of interest, separated by SDS/PAGE and visualized by silver staining, were excised from the gel and destained. The resulting gel slices were reduced with 10mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), alkylated by 50mM iodoacetamide, and then digested in situ by trypsin (100 ng per band in 50 mM ABC). The tryptic peptides were extracted by using POROS 20 R2 beads (Applied Biosystems) in the presence of 5% formic acid and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid, cleaned up by C18 ZipTips and the eluates were dried down by speed-vac.  The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) interfaced to a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Reversed-phase LC separation was performed on a Waters BEH130 C18 column (75 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size). Samples were trapped and washed on a Waters Symmetry® C18 trap column (180 µm x 100 mm, 5 µm particle size) prior to separation in the nanocolumn.  Gradient elution was performed with 0.1% formic acid in water as solvent A and in ACN as solvent B, with solvent B raised from 5 to 40% in 30 minutes then 40 to 85% in the next 10 min, at a flow rate of 0.3 uL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.0 kV, capillary voltage at 47 V and ion transfer tube temperature at 160 °C.   A normalized collision energy of 35% and activation time of 30 ms were applied in MS/MS acquisitions.  The top eight most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in theLTQ. The following dynamic exclusion settings were applied to precursor ions chosen for MS/MS analysis: repeat count – 1; repeat duration – 30 s and exclusion duration – 120 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0), Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version v.27, rev.11) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Peptide parent mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.8 Da. The enzyme was set to ‘‘trypsin’’ with two maximum missed cleavage sites and the search was against uniprot_Homo_sapiens_20140220 database (220634 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Pyroglutamic acid conversion of N-terminal glutamic acid or glutamine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of histidine, methionine and tryptophan and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. The output files were integrated into Scaffold (version Scaffold_ 4.11.0, Proteome Software) which was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription coactivator, Eya1, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, NY, USA
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Georgia Dolios

### Lab Head
Dr Pin-Xian Xu
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, NY, USA


