### Accession
PXD003689

### Title
A proteome analysis of freezing tolerance in red clover (Trifolium pratense L.)

### Description
Improvement of freezing tolerance of red clover (Trifolium pratense L.) would increase its persistence under cold climate. In this study, we assessed the freezing tolerance and compared the proteome composition of non-acclimated and cold-acclimated plants of two initial cultivars of red clover: Endure (E-TF0) and Christie (C-TF0) and of populations issued from these cultivars after three (TF3) and four (TF4) cycles of phenotypic recurrent selection for superior freezing tolerance. Through this approach, we wanted to identify proteins that are associated with the improvement of freezing tolerance in red clover.  Recurrent selection performed indoor is an effective approach to improve the freezing tolerance of red clover. Significant improvement of freezing tolerance by recurrent selection was associated with differential accumulation of a small number of cold-regulated proteins that may play an important role in the determination of the level of freezing tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins extraction Total soluble proteins were extracted from lyophilized material using a trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method followed by a sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and phenol extraction method as follows: 300 mg of ground lyophilized crowns was suspended in 1 mL of 20% (w/v) ice-cold TCA in acetone with 0.1% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) and kept for 60 min at -20°C to allow protein precipitation. Samples were centrifuged at 10000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The pellets were washed with 1.5 mL ice-cold acetone and centrifuged again at 10000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The washing step was repeated once and pellets were subsequently dried under vacuum. Pellets were re-suspended in 0.6 mL UltraPure™ Buffer-Saturated Phenol (Invitrogen) and 0.6mL SDS buffer [30% (w/v) sucrose, 2% (w/v) SDS, 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol]. Samples were shaken using an Eppendorf Thermomixer at 1400 rpm for 20 min at 20 °C and subsequently centrifuged at 10000 x g for 5 min at 20°C to allow the separation of the phenolic and the SDS-buffer phases.  For each sample, 300 μL from the phenolic phase were collected in 2 mL microtubes. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 1.5 mL ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and kept for 30 min at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 10000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the pellets were washed twice with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. Samples were washed two more times in ice-cold acetone/water (80/20 (v/v)) and re-suspended in labelling buffer [7 M urea, 2M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, 2% (w/v) 3-[(3-Chlolamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS)]. Samples were shaken on an Eppendorf Thermomixer at 700 rpm for 60 min at 20°C, centrifuged for 5 min at 14000 x g to remove insoluble material. Prior to quantification, the pH of the samples was adjusted to 8.5 using 1 M NaOH. The quantification of solubilized proteins was carried out with a Bradford protein assay using bovine serum albumin (2 mg mL-1) as standard. Protein analysis Two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) For each sample, 50 μg of proteins was labelled with 400 pmole of cyanine dyes Cy3 or Cy5 dyes LUMIPROBE LLC 25 nmol (Interchim®). Two samples were randomly assigned to each gel (Supplemental data Table S1). A pooled sample combining equal amounts of proteins from each of the 48 samples was labelled with 400 pmol of Cy2 dye and used as internal standard for gel normalization. Labelling of samples and the internal standard was carried out in the dark at 4°C. After 30 min of incubation, the reaction was quenched by adding 1μL of 10 mM lysine followed by further 10 min of incubation in the dark at 4°C. On each gel, the Cy2-labelled internal standard was mixed with the Cy3- and Cy5-labelled protein extracts (50 mg of each) and the volume was adjusted to 150 μL with a rehydration buffer [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.5% (w/v) CHAPS]. Samples were mixed with 3 μL of non-linear IPG immobilized pH gradient (IPG) buffer (pH 3-10 NL) (GE Healthcare) and then loaded by cup loading onto 24 cm ImmobilineTM DryStrip Gels (GE Healthcare) previously rehydrated overnight in 450 μL Destreak Rehydration Solution (GE Healthcare) mixed with 0.5 % non-linear IPG buffer (pH 3-10 NL) (GE Healthcare). The first dimension of the 2D gel electrophoresis involved the separation of proteins according to their isoelectric point (PI) by isoelectric focusing carried out at 20°C in an Ettan IPGphor III system (GE Healthcare)  following a 5-step program: (1) constant 150 V for 2 h, (2) 4 h linear gradient from 150 V to 1000 V, (3) constant 1000 V for 5 h, (4) 5 h linear gradient from 1000 V to 10000 V, (5) constant 10000 V voltage until reaching a total of around 90000 V-h. During IEF, the maximum current setting was 75 μA per strip. Prior to the second-dimension electrophoresis by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), IPG strips were equilibrated for 15 min in an equilibration buffer (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg) complemented with 6M Urea and 1% w/v DTT. This was followed by an additional 15 min in the same equilibration buffer containing 2.5% w/v iodoacetamide. Strips were subsequently loaded on 2D HPE™ Large Gels NF 12.5% w/v acrylamide (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH). SDS-PAGE was carried out using an HPE™ Flatbed Tower System according to manufacturer’s instructions. After the front reached the bottom of the gel, the proteins were fixed in a solution containing 15% v/v ethanol and 1% m/v of citric acid for at least 2 h and rinsed with MilliQ water (Millipore Corporation). Gels were subsequently scanned using a Typhoon FLA 9500 scanner (GE Healthcare) and quantitative analysis was carried out using the DeCyder software (v7.0, GE Healthcare).  Spots identified as changing significantly were picked and digested using standard laboratory practise.

### Data Protocol
All spectra, MS and MS/MS, were submitted for database-dependent identification using the NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) downloaded on June 6th, 2014 (40,910,947 sequences) reduced to the green plants Taxonomy (1,717,798 sequences) using an in-house MASCOT server (Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com, London, U.K.). A secondary search was also carried out against an EST fabaceae database downloaded from the NCBI server on December 17th, 2013 (19,932,450 sequences).The parameters used for these searches were mass tolerance MS 100 ppm, mass tolerance MS/MS 0.5 Da, fixed modifications cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications methionine oxidation, simple and double oxidation of tryptophan, tryptophan to kynurenine. Proteins were considered as identified when at least two peptides passed the MASCOT-calculated 0.05 threshold score of 40. However when a high-scoring peptide (>2 times the 0.05 threshold) was matched and a protein p -value of < 1 × 10e-5 was obtained, the protein was also retained. Subsequently the MASCOT-based results were manually validated. The list of matched peptides was compared to the MS spectrum in order to reduce ambiguities caused by non-identified proteins co-migrating with resolved peptides. When high-intensity peaks were not matched to the identified protein, the corresponding MS/MS spectra were researched and/or the sequence of the peptide was determined de novo. The eventual matching of peaks in the MS spectrum to a second protein excluded these spots from biological interpretation. The matching of a peptide containing one of the oxidized forms of tryptophan was likewise verified by the presence of peaks corresponding to the same peptide with the other oxidation products of this residue (Trp; Trp +4 Da = kynurenine, Trp +16 Da = oxidized Trp; Trp +32 Da = N -formylkynurenine). This likewise resulted in the delineation of several signal and transit peptides and the discovery of different molecular forms of the same protein in some of the spots. MS/MS spectra resulting in a score around the MASCOT threshold (P < 0.05) of 40 were validated by using the following criteria: high intensity peaks should be matched and well-known sequence-dependent characteristics should be present. These easy-to-recognize spectral features include the presence of a peak corresponding to the C-terminal arginine and the presence of the neutral loss of 64 Da from peptides containing oxidized methionine. Furthermore, the impact that specific residues (most notably proline and aspartic acid) have on the intensity of fragment peaks must be respected. In case high quality spectra did not result in significant identification, manual de novo sequence analysis was applied and/or extra peaks were fragmented to confirm near-to-threshold identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Red clover; cold acclimation; proteomic analysis;  recurrent selection; freezing tolerance; plant abiotic stress.

### Affiliations
LIST
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology “Environmental Research and Innovation” (ERIN) department 41, rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux LUXEMBOURG Tel +tel: +352 275 888- 860 Fax +352 275 885

### Submitter
Jenny Renaut

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Renaut
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology “Environmental Research and Innovation” (ERIN) department 41, rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux LUXEMBOURG Tel +tel: +352 275 888- 860 Fax +352 275 885


