### Accession
PXD005251

### Title
Architecture of the yeast Elongator complex

### Description
The highly conserved eukaryotic Elongator complex performs specific chemical modifications on wobble base uridines of tRNAs, which are essential for proteome stability and homeostasis. The complex is formed by six individual subunits (Elp1-6) that are all equally important for its tRNA modification activity. However, its overall architecture and the detailed reaction mechanism remain elusive. Here, we report the structures of the fully assembled yeast Elongator and the Elp123 sub-complex solved by an integrative structure determination approach showing that two copies of the Elp1, Elp2 and Elp3 subunits form a two-lobed scaffold, which binds Elp456 asymmetrically. Our topological models are consistent with previous studies on individual subunits and further validated by complementary biochemical analyses. Our study provides a structural framework on how the tRNA modification activity is carried out by Elongator.

### Sample Protocol
50 μg (1 mg/ml) of purified Elongator complex was cross-linked by addition of an iso-stoichiometric mixture of H12/D12 isotope-coded, di-succinimidyl-suberate (DSS) or di-succinimidyl-glutarate (DSG, Creative Molecules). Equal amounts of cross-linker were added ten times every 4 min to a final concentration of 0.5 - 2 mM. The cross-linking reactions were allowed to proceed for 30 min at 37°C and quenched by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM for 10 min at 37°C. Cross-linked proteins were denatured using urea and Rapigest (Waters) at a final concentration of 4 M and 0.05% (w/v), respectively. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 min at 37°C) and cysteines were carbamidomethylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark). Protein digestion was performed first using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 3.5 h at 37°C then finalized with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37°C, after the urea concentration was diluted to 1.5 M. Samples were then acidified with 10% (v/v) TFA and desalted using MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus). Cross-linked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography (Leitner et al., 2012). In brief, desalted peptides were reconstituted with SEC buffer (30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) TFA) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on a Ettan LC system (GE-Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 ml/min. Fractions eluting between 1 and 1.5 ml were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 50 µl 5% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Between 2% and 10% of the amount contained in the collected fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected online to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 mm x 250 mm, 1.7 mm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters) using a stepwise 60 min gradient between 3% and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed using a TOP-20 strategy where survey-MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap (R = 30,000) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 40, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. In order to focus the acquisition on larger cross-linked peptides, charge states 1, 2 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ± 15 ppm. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans. The sample was analyzed in technical duplicates (for DSG crosslinker) or triplicates (for DSS crosslinker).

### Data Protocol
To assign the fragment ion spectra, raw files were converted to centroid mzXML using the Mass Matrix file converter tool and then searched using xQuest (Leitner et al., 2014) against a fasta database containing the sequences of the cross-linked proteins. Posterior probabilities were calculated using xProphet and results were filtered using the following parameters: FDR = 0.05, min delta score = 0.95, MS1 tolerance window of 4 to 7 ppm, ld-score > 30.

### Publication Abstract
The highly conserved eukaryotic Elongator complex performs specific chemical modifications on wobble base uridines of tRNAs, which are essential for proteome stability and homeostasis. The complex is formed by six individual subunits (Elp1-6) that are all equally important for its tRNA modification activity. However, its overall architecture and the detailed reaction mechanism remain elusive. Here, we report the structures of the fully assembled yeast Elongator and the Elp123 sub-complex solved by an integrative structure determination approach showing that two copies of the Elp1, Elp2, and Elp3 subunits form a two-lobed scaffold, which binds Elp456 asymmetrically. Our topological models are consistent with previous studies on individual subunits and further validated by complementary biochemical analyses. Our study provides a structural framework on how the tRNA modification activity is carried out by Elongator.

### Keywords
Yeast, Elongator, Electron microscopy, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Trna modification

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Structural and Computational Biology Unit European Molecular Biology Laboratory Meyerhofstr. 1 69117 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
Structural and Computational Biology Unit European Molecular Biology Laboratory Meyerhofstr. 1 69117 Heidelberg Germany


