### Accession
PXD026608

### Title
Integrated analysis of proteomics and phosphoproteomics on rat hearts with aging and hypertension

### Description
Hypertension is a most important risk factor of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), and its incidence is greatest among older adults, which indicates that aging is an independent risk for both hypertension and CVD. To date, the studies on the proteomics and phosphoproteomics of the aged hypertensive hearts for studying their impacts on the pathogenesis of CVD are limited. Here we present a dataset by using proteomics and phosphor-proteomics analysis on young and aged healthy and spontaneous hypertensive (SHR) rats. The dataset has following features: 1) numerical description of average 4000 total proteins and 1500 phosphor-proteins of detectable proteins in each group; 2) proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of their expression patterns; 3) Pathways for individual factor (age or hypertension) and their interaction and association with CVDs. Therefore, the integrated analysis of the dataset revealed the underlying pathways of aging and/or hypertension and their interaction on cardiovascular remodelling. In summary, the dataset provides a searchable multi-omics for the researchers to explore the interaction of aging and hypertension on the pathogenesis of CVD.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol Heart samples acquired in each group was treated liquid nitrogen quickly and then kept in -80 °C fridge. Each group included three samples. About 150 mg heart tissue for each sample was extracted for protein and used to proteomics study. For total protein extraction, samples were minced individually with liquid nitrogen and lysed in lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 6 M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay. Extracts from each sample were reduced with 2mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient Iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then 4 times volume of precooled acetone was mixed with samples by well vortexing and incubated at -20°C for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged and the precipitation was collected. After washing twice with cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Protein concentration was determined again by Bradford protein assay. For peptide preparation, the supernatant from each sample, containing precisely 5 mg of protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. After 16 h of digestion at 37°C, peptides were desalted with C18 cartridge to remove the high urea, and desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Phosphopeptide enrichment using phos-select iron affinity gel The peptides obtained from the digestion step were dried down, and selected fractions were redissolved in 250 mM acetic acid with 30% acetonitrile and adjust pH to 2.5-3.0 with 1 M HCl. The enrichment was carried out using phos-select iron affinity gel (Sigma, P9740) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The bounded peptides were eluted, dried and desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher, 89852).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification.  For transition library construction, shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A sample volume containing 1 µg of total peptides reconstituted in 0.1% FA was injected onto a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×100 µm, 3 µm). Peptides were separated on a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 µm, 1.9 µm), using a 120 min linear gradient from 5 to 100% of eluent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) ineluent A (0.1% FA in H 2 O) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The detailed solvent gradient listed as follows: 5-10% B, 2 min; 10-40% B, 105 min; 40–50% B, 5 min; 50–90% B, 3 min; 90–100% B, 5 min. Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with spray voltage of 2.3 kV and capillary temperature of 320°C. Full MS scans range from 350 to 1500 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 60000 (at 200 m/z) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×10 6 and a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms. The 40 most abundant precursor ions from full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragment analysis at a resolution of 15000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 5e4, a maximum ion injection time of 80 ms, a normalized collision energy of 27%, an intensity threshold of 1.3e4, and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 30 s.  Raw data files for full phosphoproteome were processed using Proteome Discoverer2.2 software. The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the production scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched against the database (X101SC19101792-Z01+X101SC19101794-Z01-rat-NCBI.fasta; 56110 sequences). Oxidation of methionine (M), Phospho of serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y), acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 mis-cleavage sites were allowed. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Precursor quantification based on intensity was used for Label-free quantification. We only keep the credible peptide spectrum and proteins, and do FDR verification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, for proteins whose quantitation significantly different between experimental and control groups, (with P.Value < 0.05 and FC >1.5 or FC < 0.67), were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEP). Lists of DEPs were selected and used for downstream bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Aging and hypertension

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University

### Submitter
Tangting Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoqiu Tan
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University


