### Accession
PXD005921

### Title
Early-stage cancer biomarkers uncovered in the blood platelet proteome

### Description
Platelets play an important role in tumor growth and at the same time, platelet characteristics are affected by cancer presence. Therefore, we investigated whether the platelet proteome can be used as a source for biomarkers of early-stage cancer. Patients with early-stage lung (n=8) and head of pancreas cancer (n=4) were included, as were healthy sex- and age-matched controls for each subgroup. Blood samples were collected from controls and from patients before surgery. Furthermore, from six of the patients, a second sample was collected two months after surgery. NanoLC-MS/MS-based proteomics was used to quantify and compare the platelet proteome of patients to controls. Also, samples before surgery and after surgery were compared. Analysis revealed that the platelet proteome of patients with early-stage cancer is altered as compared to controls. In addition, the platelet proteome changed after tumor resection. Using the above data, in conjunction with quantitative filtering, we were able to select seven potential platelet-derived biomarkers of early-stage cancer. This pioneering study on the platelet proteome in cancer patients clearly identifies platelets as a new source of protein biomarkers of early-stage cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet isolation Blood samples were collected from patients one day before surgical removal of the tumor. From six patients (five with lung and 1 with head of pancreas cancer), a second sample was collected two months after surgery. Blood from healthy controls was collected once. In both patients and healthy individuals, blood samples were obtained from the antecubital vein and immediate sample preparation was performed in such a way that platelet-activating effects were minimal. The first 5 ml of blood was discarded, after which BD Vacutainer tubes containing 3.2% buffered sodium citrate (Becton Dickson, Breda, The Netherlands) were used to collect the blood samples (20 ml). After several washing steps, the platelet count in all samples was normalized (3E11/L). Subsequently, platelets were pelleted at 1600 g for 2 minutes. This platelet pellet was dissolved in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer containing DTT (10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), heated to 99°C for 5 minutes, and separated by a 12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad).  In-gel digestion Gel slices were cut from the Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gel and washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile. Subsequently, gel cubes were transferred to a 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tube, vortexed in 400 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min, and pelleted. The supernatant was removed and the gel cubes were vortexed in 400 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile for 10 min. After pelleting and removal of the supernatant, this wash-step was repeated. Subsequently, gel cubes were reduced in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hour, the supernatant was removed and gel cubes were alkylated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Next, gel cubes were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 50°C for 10 min, and covered with trypsin solution (6.25 ng/μl in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Following rehydration with trypsin solution and removal of excess trypsin, gel cubes were covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 25°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel cubes with 100 μl of 1% formic acid (once) and 100 μl of 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile (twice). All extracts were pooled and stored at −20°C until use. Prior to LC-MS, the extracts were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge at 50°C, volumes were adjusted to 50 μl by adding 0.05% formic acid  filtered through a 0.45 um spinfilter and transferred to an LC autosampler vial LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer A (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (release January 2014, 61552 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung cancer, Pancreatic cancer, Biomarkers, Platelets, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


