### Accession
PXD015138

### Title
Treacle controls the nucleolar response to rDNA breaks via TOPBP1 recruitment and ATR activation

### Description
Induction of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeats is associated with ATM-dependent repression of ribosomal RNA synthesis and large-scale reorganization of nucleolar architecture, but the signaling events that regulate these responses are largely elusive. Here we show that the nucleolar response to rDNA breaks is dependent on both ATM and ATR activity. We further demonstrate that ATM- and NBS1-dependent recruitment of TOPBP1 in the nucleoli is required for inhibition of ribosomal RNA synthesis and nucleolar segregation in response to rDNA breaks. Mechanistically, TOPBP1 recruitment is mediated by phosphorylation-dependent interactions between three of its BRCT domains and conserved phosphorylated Ser/Thr residues at the C-terminus of the nucleolar phosphoprotein Treacle. Our data thus reveal an important cooperation between TOPBP1 and Treacle in the signaling cascade that triggers transcriptional inhibition and nucleolar segregation in response to rDNA breaks.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric experiments were performed on a nanoscale UHPLC system (EASY-nLC1000 from Proxeon Biosystems) connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptideswere auto-sampled and separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm ID) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads using a 77 min gradient ranging from 5% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and all samples were analysed using a previously described ‘sensitive’ acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
All raw data analysis was performed with MaxQuant software suite 57 version 1.5.3.30 supported by the Andromeda search engine. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, a HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a fixed modification, whereas N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation (S, T, and Y), were included as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursors was set to 20 ppm in the first MS/MS search and 4.5 ppm in the main MS/MS search. Data was automatically filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match and the site-specific levels

### Publication Abstract
Induction of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeats is associated with ATM-dependent repression of ribosomal RNA synthesis and large-scale reorganization of nucleolar architecture, but the signaling events that regulate these responses are largely elusive. Here we show that the nucleolar response to rDNA breaks is dependent on both ATM and ATR activity. We further demonstrate that ATM- and NBS1-dependent recruitment of TOPBP1 in the nucleoli is required for inhibition of ribosomal RNA synthesis and nucleolar segregation in response to rDNA breaks. Mechanistically, TOPBP1 recruitment is mediated by phosphorylation-dependent interactions between three of its BRCT domains and conserved phosphorylated Ser/Thr residues at the C-terminus of the nucleolar phosphoprotein Treacle. Our data thus reveal an important cooperation between TOPBP1 and Treacle in the signaling cascade that triggers transcriptional inhibition and nucleolar segregation in response to rDNA breaks.

### Keywords
Treacle, Q exactive hf, Dna double.strand breaks

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Sara Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen


