### Accession
PXD027791

### Title
MS1Connect: a mass spectrometry run similarity measure

### Description
Researchers may be interested in finding proteomics runs, which have been deposited into online repositories, that are similar to their own data. However, it is difficult to measure the similarity of a pair of proteomics runs. Here, we present a new method, MS1Connect, that only uses intact peptide scans to calculate the similarity between a pair of runs. We show evidence that the MS1Connect score accurately measures the similarity between two proteomics runs. Specifically, we show that MS1Connect outperforms baseline methods for predicting the species a sample originated. In addition, we show that MS1Connect scores are highly correlated with similarities based o peptide fragment scans by observing a high correlation between MS1Connect scores and the Jaccard index between the sets of confidently detected peptides for a pair of runs.

### Sample Protocol
Lab 1. Liquid chromatography separation was performed using an Agilent 1200 HPLC instrument with a 40 cm long 0.15 mm ID fused silica packed with Jupiter 5 um C-18 resin. Mobile phase A was prepared with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in nano-pure H2O; mobile phase B was prepared with 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in nano-pure H2O. The flow rate was 2 uL per minute with a reversed phase gradient transitioning from 0% solution B to 45% solution B over the course of 60 min for separation followed by a wash and regeneration step. An Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Thousand Oaks, CA) was used to analyze the eluate from the HPLC, which was directly ionized and transferred into the gas phase with an electrospray emitter (operated at 3.5 kV relative to the mass spectrometer interface). The ion transfer tube on the Orbitrap system was maintained at 200 C and 200 V with an ion injection time set for automatic gain control with a maximum injection time of 200 ms for 5 x 10^7 charges in the linear ion trap. Ion selection was achieved using dynamic parent ion selection in which the five most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS using a 3 m/z window. Each sample was analyzed in technical triplicate. Lab 2. A Waters nano-Acquity dual pumping UPLC system (Milford, MA) was configured for on-line trapping of a 5 uL injection at 5 uL/min with reverse-flow elution onto the analytical column at 300 nL/min. Columns were packed in-house using 360 µm o.d. fused silica (Polymicro Technologies Inc., Phoenix, AZ) with 2-mm sol-gel frits for media retention and contained Jupiter C18 media (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA) in 5 um particle size for the trapping column (150 um i.d. x 4cm long), with 3um particle size for the analytical column (75 um i.d. x 70 cm long). Mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile with the following gradient profile (min, %B): 0,1;8,1; 10,8; 28,12; 83,30; 105,45; 108,95; 118,95; 122,50; 124,95; 126,1; 128,50; 130,50; 132,1; 152,1.  MS analysis was performed using an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) outfitted with a home-made nano-electrospray ionization interface. Electrospray emitters were prepared using 150 um o.d. x 20 um i.d. chemically etched fused silica. The ion transfer tube temperature and spray voltage were 325 C and 2.3 kV, respectively. Data were collected for 100 min following a 20 min delay from sample injection. FT-MS spectra were acquired from 400-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60k (AGC target 3e6) and while the top 12 FT-HCD-MS/MS spectra were acquired in data dependent mode with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and at a resolution of 15k (AGC target 1e5) using a normalized collision energy of 30 and a 45 sec exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
A database search was conducted using Crux version 3.2 using the combined p-value score function. The spectra were searched against a concatenated database containing the proteomes of the following species: Porphyrobacter sp. YT40 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000315943), Salmonella enterica (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000054420), Escherichia coli (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000558), Bacillus cereus (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001417), Bacillus thuringiensis (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000032057), and Nicotiana tabacum (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000084051). The proteomes were downloaded from Uniprot in April 2021. The protein database was digested into peptides using the tide-index tool, and the search was performed by the tide-search tool. All parameters were set to their default values except that “mz-bin-width" was set to 1.0005079, “score-function" was set to “both", “exact-p-value" was set to “True", and “top-match" was set to one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Similarity, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA
University of Washington

### Submitter
Andy Lin

### Lab Head
Dr William Noble
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA


### SDRF
- organism: Porphyrobacter, salmonella enterica, escherichia coli, bacillus cereus, Nicotiana tabacum, Bacillus thuringiensis serovar morrisoni, Bacillus thuringiensis str. Al Hakam
- organism 2: not applicable, bacillus cereus, Porphyrobacter, Bacillus thuringiensis str. Al Hakam, Nicotiana tabacum, escherichia coli, Bacillus thuringiensis serovar morrisoni  , salmonella enterica
- organism 3: not applicable, Bacillus thuringiensis serovar morrisoni, Nicotiana tabacum
- disease: not applicable
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap XL, Q Exactive HF

