### Accession
PXD029371

### Title
Label-free and targeted mass tandem (TMT-labelled) global proteomic analyses on mucus from the stomach, small and large intestine of pigLabel-free and targeted mass tandem (TMT-labelled) global proteomic analyses on mucus from the stomach, small and large intestine of pig

### Description
The gastrointestinal mucus is a hydrogel that lines the luminal side of the gastrointestinal epithelium, offering barrier protection from pathogens and lubrication of the intraluminal contents. These barrier properties likewise affect nutrients and drugs that need to penetrate the mucus to reach the epithelium prior to absorption. In order to assess the potential impact of the mucus on drug absorption, we need information about the nature of the gastrointestinal mucus. Today, most of the relevant available literature is mainly derived from rodent studies. In this work, we used a larger animal species; the pig model to characterize the mucus throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract. This is the first report of the physiological properties (physical appearance, pH and water content), composition and structural profiling of the porcine gastrointestinal mucus. Gastrointestinal mucus was collected from the stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum) and large intestine (cecum, proximal and distal colon) from slaughtered pigs. The composition of the mucus was characterized both with labelfree and TMT proteomics, with lipidomics and metabolomics. The structural profiling was determined with rheological measurements and cryo-Scanning Electron Microscopy.   These findings allow for direct comparisons between the characteristics of mucus from various segments and can be further utilized to improve our understanding of the role of the mucus on region dependent drug absorption. Additionally, the present work is expected to contribute to the assessment of the porcine model as a preclinical species in the drug development process.

### Sample Protocol
The GIT of crossbreed Landrace pigs (n = 6), 20-22 weeks of age and 100-110 kg of body weight, was collected from a local abattoi. The animals were slaughtered for commercial meat production and therefore no ethical permit was needed for the purpose of the present study. As per the abattoir’s standard routines, the animals were fasted ≥12h prior to slaughter and water allowed ad libitum. The dissection of the various segments was initiated within 1h after slaughter and the temperature of the GIT package was monitored throughout the sample collection process. The stomach pouch was dissected and mucus from the stomach was collected. The remaining intestinal tube was cut longitudinally and duodenal mucus was collected 1 cm below the pyloric sphincter. The jejunal and ileal mucus samples were collected from the middle of the small intestine and within 8 cm from the ileocecal valve, respectively. The cecum was dissected and quickly submerged into ice-cold isotonic buffer (10 mM MES buffer containing 1.3 mM CaCl2, 1.0 mM MgSO4 and 137 mM NaCl, pH 6.5) to remove remaining digesta, and after this mucus was collected. Proximal colonic mucus was collected from the first part of the large intestine (distal to the orifice of the cecum) and distal colonic mucus was collected at the beginning of the descendent colon. When necessary, these tissues were also quickly submerged into ice-cold MES buffer, to remove remaining digesta prior to mucus collection. For all tissue segments, the mucus was gently removed using a metallic spatula, to exclude epithelium. All samples were directly placed on ice to limit bacterial degradation. At least one mucus sample was collected from each GIT segment of the six pigs. The sample collection was completed within 1h. All samples were stored on ice until further aliquoting. Samples were aliquoted within 5 hours after collection, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately thereafter, and stored at -80° C until further analysis.  Sample isolation for proteomics The label-free analysis was performed on mucus samples from the stomach (pylorus and fundus), duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, proximal and distal colon from one pig, while the TMT-labelled analysis was performed on mucus samples from the jejunum (n=4), proximal (n=3), and distal colon (n=3). These samples were aliquoted from bulk mass within 5 hours after collection, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately thereafter, and stored at -80° C until further analysis. Samples were transported to proteomics facility stored on dry ice.  Sample preparation for label-free mass spectrometry analysis 8 samples collected from pig, were analysed by label free quantification. The sample was dissolved in Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT) and the total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Protein digestion (PNGase, LysC and trypsin, sequencing grade modified, Pierce) was performed using a modified protocol for SP3 protein clean up followed by SP3 peptide clean up.  Sample preparation for TMT labeled mass spectrometry analysis Samples   were lysed by and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean up and digestion protocol. Peptides were labelled with TMT10 plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Q-Exactive Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 5 uL was injected from each sample. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å), and separated on a 50 com long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µmx15cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6%B up to 43%B in 240 min, followed by a steep increase to 100%B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used. Peptide and protein identification. The MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator or Target Decoy PSM Validator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) against Sus scrofa Uniprot (unreviewed) and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off.

### Publication Abstract
The gastrointestinal mucus is a hydrogel that lines the luminal side of the gastrointestinal epithelium, offering barrier protection from pathogens and lubrication of the intraluminal contents. These barrier properties likewise affect nutrients and drugs that need to penetrate the mucus to reach the epithelium prior to absorption. In order to assess the potential impact of the mucus on drug absorption, we need information about the nature of the gastrointestinal mucus. Today, most of the relevant available literature is mainly derived from rodent studies. In this work, we used a larger animal species, the pig model, to characterize the mucus throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract. This is the first report of the physiological properties (physical appearance, pH and water content), composition (protein, lipid and metabolite content) and structural profiling (rheology and gel network) of the porcine gastrointestinal mucus. These findings allow for direct comparisons between the characteristics of mucus from various segments and can be further utilized to improve our understanding of the role of the mucus on region dependent drug absorption. Additionally, the present work is expected to contribute to the assessment of the porcine model as a preclinical species in the drug development process.

### Keywords
Porcine, Composition, Mucus, Gastrointestinal, Healthy, Pig

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Xiaofang Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden


