### Accession
PXD046873

### Title
Multiple plex quantitative proteomic analysis of neuroserpin-deficient and control mice, for the murine brain, retain and optic nerve

### Description
Neural regeneration and neuroprotection represent promising therapeutic approaches for neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's disease (AD) or glaucoma. However, the molecular mechanisms that lead to neuroprotection are not clearly understood. One of the promising candidates to revive physiological function is neuroserpin (Serpini1), a serine protease inhibitor expressed by neurons which selectively inhibits extracellular tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA)/plasmin and plays a neuroprotective role during ischemic brain injury. Abnormal function of this protein has been implicated in stroke, glaucoma, AD and FENIB. Here we report proteome changes by neuroserpin modulation in brains, retinas, and optic nerves from 12-month C57BL6/J neuroserpin deficient mice (NeuS-/-).

### Sample Protocol
A total of 10 mice (5 in each group) consisting of 12-month old NS-/-and their wildtype littermates were used in this study. All mice were euthanized using cervical dislocation technique, followed by transcardial saline perfusion and then brains were harvested and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for further dissection. Brains were later dissected into frontal cortex, visual cortex and cerebellum and again were stored at −80◦C after for protein extraction. The retinas and optic nerves were extracted from the mice eyes using winkling technique employing curved forceps. tissues were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails and sonicated using a probe sonicator (3 pulses/15 s) at 50 Hz frequency on ice. Insoluble materials were removed by centrifugation at 15,000g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected and transferred to new tubes. Extracted proteins were reduced with 5 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 min at room temperature, and then alkylated with 10 mM of iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 4 °C. The alkylation reaction was then quenched with the addi- tion of 5 mM DTT for 15 min in the dark. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, USA) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. Dual digestion was carried out on 50 μg of protein using S-Traps, initially with Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at room temperature. Samples were then acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1% (pH 2 to 3) and desalted using SDB-RPS (3M-Empore) stage Tip columns. Before tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, the dried peptides reconstituted with hydroxyethyl piperazine-ethane-sulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer (100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Five separate 10-plex TMT experiments were designed to accommodate 5 tissues of neuroserpin knockout and wildtypes animals, as outlined in Fig 1. Briefly, dried peptides from each sample were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.2) buffer and peptide concentrations were measured using the MicroBCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific- Rockford,IL) and subjected to TMT labelling with 0.8 mg of each 10-plex TMT reagent per tube. Labelling procedure was carried out at room temperature for 1 h with continuous vortexing. The reaction was quenched by addition of 8 μL of 5% fresh hydroxylamine to samples. For each TMT experiment, ten labeled samples were pooled together and dried completely using a speed vacuum. After resuspension in 1% formic acid, labeled samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Subsequently, peptides were fractionated using high pH reversed phase fractionation (HpH), and pooled into 8 fractions. The fractions were dried and reconstituted in 1% formic acid and desalted again using SDB-RPS stage tips.Fractionated and dried peptides were reconstituted in 40 μL of 0.1% formic acid and analysed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was performed on an in-house packed reverse-phase column (75 μm× 10 cm Halo® 2.7 μm 160 Å ES-C18, Advanced Materials Technology). Labelled peptides were separated for 2 h using a gradient of 1–30% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid) and Solvent A (97.9% water/2% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full MS and MS/MS acquisition. Following the Full MS scan from m/z 350–1850, MS/ MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and an automatic gain control target value of 1 × 106 ions. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected with precursor isolation width of 0.7 m/z for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. HCD-normalised collision energy was set to 35% and fragmentation ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Target ions that had been selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer V2.1 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK). Data were matched against the reviewed SwissProt Mus musculus protein database (Feb 2022). The MS1 tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.02Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as static modification, while TMT 10-plex (N-term, K), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and Acetylation (Protein NTerminus) were set as dynamic modifications. The percolator algorithm was used to discriminate correct from incorrect peptide-spectrum matches, and calculate statistics including q value (FDR) and posterior error probabilities (PEPs). Search results were further filtered to retain protein with FDR of < 1% and only master proteins assigned via protein grouping algorithm were retained. Relative quantitation of proteins was achieved by pairwise comparison of TMT reporter ion signal to noise (S/N) ratios, for example, the ratio S/N of the labels for each of the treatment replicates (numerator) versus the labels of their corresponding control replicates (denominator). Proteins were further analysed using the TMTPrepPro analysis pipeline. The TMTPrepPro scripts are implemented in the R programming language and are available as an R package, which was accessed through a graphical user interface provided via a local GenePattern server. All protein ratios with respect to the reference (label-131) were extracted. In pairwise comparison tests, relative quantitation of protein abundance was derived from the ratio of the TMT label S/N detected in each condition (NS-/-and WT), and differentially expressed proteins were identified based on Student t tests between NS-/- vs. WT ratios (log-transformed). The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric means of the respective ratios. Differential expression required the proteins to meet both a ratio fold change (> 1.2 (upregulated) or < 0.83 (down-regulated)) and a p value below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Brain, Visual cortex, Optic nerve, Retina, Neuroserpin, Frontal cortex, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Shahab Mirshahvaladi

### Lab Head
Professor Vivek Gupta
Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia


