### Accession
PXD031610

### Title
Searching for the interaction partners in yeast cytosol of newly synthesized mitochondrial signal-anchored proteins

### Description
The aim of the mass spectrometry analysis was to identify interaction partners of newly synthesized precursors of mitochondrial outer membrane proteins. To that aim, HA-tagged proteins were synthesized in vitro in extract of yeast cells and pull-down with anti-HA beads was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down assays were performed with extract of yeast cells where mitochondrial HA-tagged proteins were synthesized. Anti-HA magnetic beads were added to the samples and after washing steps bound proteins were eluted with sample buffer. Proteins were purified by SDS-PAGE (short run) and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin. Desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using a 57min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. In each scan cycle, the 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105charges, and for the MS scan 3x106 charges.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.6.7.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Saccharomyces cerevisiae database obtained from Uniprot. Full trypsin digestion specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. The iBAQ algorithm was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Signal-anchored proteins, Chaperones

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University of Tuebingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Proteome Center Tuebingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Maček
University of Tuebingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Proteome Center Tuebingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


