### Accession
PXD009297

### Title
INPP5K and SIL1 associated pathologies with overlapping clinical phenotypes converge through dysregulation of PHGDH

### Description
In this study, we describe new patients suffering from INPP5K mutations and hereby expand the mutational and clinical spectrum of the underlying disease. Pathogenicity of a new INPP5K missense mutation has been functionally confirmed. In addition, we systematically addressed the need to identify common molecular key players to link phenotypically similar rare diseases. For this purpose, utilizing cells derived from INPP5K and SIL1 patients, we performed proteomic profiling and identified PHGDH, as a protein significantly altered in abundance in the in vitro systems of both diseases. Prompted by the striking molecular link between MSS, INPP5K- and PHGDH-phenotypes and the fact that PHGDH-patients notoriously respond to L-serine treatment, respective zebrafish models have been generated and responseto L-serine treatment has been addressed in vivo. Apart from the biochemical link between MSS, INPP5K-and PHGDH-phenotypes, affection of CDK9, a protein modulating the activity of CTDP1 biochemically links the INPP5K-phenotype to CCFDN. Thus, our study not only allowed to build molecular bridges between four phenotypically overlapping rare diseases but more importantly allowed to transfer the acquiredmolecular knowledge to the pre-clinical testing of a therapeutic intervention concept.

### Sample Protocol
Skin biopsies of MSS2 patient and control were dissected under sterile conditions and isolated primary human dermal fibroblast cells were cultured in FibroGRO™ (Millipore) culture medium supplemented with 10% Penicillin-Streptomycin. Cells were lysed with 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.8 and 150 mM NaCl buffer with complete Mini. Benzonase and 2 mM MgCl2 were added and lysates were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Afterwards, the samples were clarified by centrifugation at 4°C and 18,000 rcf for 30 min. Finally, the clear supernatant was collected in a LoBind Eppendorf tube and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) as per manufacturer's instructions. Cysteines were reduced with 10 mM DTT and incubation at 56°C for 30 min. The free thiol (-SH) groups were subsequently alkylated (carbamidomethylation) by the addition of 30 mM IAA and incubation at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark. Sample clean-up and proteolysis after carbamidomethylation were performed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (30 kDa MWCO) with slight modifications. Tryptic peptides were desalted using SPEC followed by iTRAQ 4-plex labeling (AB SCIEX) as per manufacturer's instructions. Multiplexed sample was subjected to OFFGEL fractionation (24 in total). Each fraction was desalted using SPE and the eluates were completely dried in a SpeedVac and resolubilized in 0.1% TFA prior to nano-LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All iTRAQ raw data were processed simultaneously using the MudPIT option with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 30th of July 2012, containing 20,232 target sequences). To maximize the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), we included two different search algorithms (Mascot, SEQUEST) using the same set of parameters i.e. precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys, iTRAQ-4plex on N-terminus and Lys as fixed and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (Thermo Scientific) with Mascot and SEQUEST search engines. All data from PD software were exported with the following filter criteria: peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (high confidence PSM Validator setting), search engine rank 1. To normalize the iTRAQ ratio data, which is inherently asymmetrical (i.e. skewed), the ratio data was transformed into log values to a base of 2. Values with a log2-ratio of zero represent equal expression; values of -1 and 1 represent twofold down- and twofold upregulation, respectively. As a general assumption, in most cases, only a relatively low subset of proteins is expected to be differentially regulated and therefore the majority of the log-ratios are expected to be centered around zero. However, due to the experimental bias e.g. pipetting errors or deviating BCA assay results, the median of the log-transformed ratios might differ from zero (Fig. 3.2 MD1). In such cases, the individual channel log2-transformed ratios of each protein were zero-centered by subtracting the protein specific medians taken across all the samples to compensate for the systematic errors. In PD, four different ratios were generated by using two replicates of MSS2 patient and healthy controls i.e. MSS2.1/Healthy.1, MSS2.1/Healthy.2, MSS2.2/Healthy.1 and MSS2.2/Healthy.2. Firstly, the individual channel ratios of each protein were log2-transformed and for each channel an overall median (MD1) of all proteins was calculated. Secondly, each channel MD1 was subtracted from log2-transformed ratio of each protein to get normalized ratios, which were then averaged to get a final MSS2/healthy ratio. Thirdly, a global median ratio (MDglobal) and standard deviation (SDglobal) were calculated by considering all corresponding protein ratios (MSS2/Healthy). Lastly, relative standard deviations (RSD) were calculated for each protein by using the normalized ratios of the four individual ratios. Only proteins with RSD values ≤ 20% and with log2-ratios ≥ 2*SDglobal away from the MDglobal were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome is a rare human disorder caused by biallelic mutations in SIL1 characterized by cataracts in infancy, myopathy and ataxia, symptoms which are also associated with a novel disorder caused by mutations in INPP5K. While these phenotypic similarities may suggest commonalties at a molecular level, an overlapping pathomechanism has not been established yet. In this study, we present six new INPP5K patients and expand the current mutational and phenotypical spectrum of the disease showing the clinical overlap between Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and the INPP5K phenotype. We applied unbiased proteomic profiling on cells derived from Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and INPP5K patients and identified alterations in d-3-PHGDH as a common molecular feature. d-3-PHGDH modulates the production of l-serine and mutations in this enzyme were previously associated with a neurological phenotype, which clinically overlaps with Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome and INPP5K disease. As l-serine administration represents a promising therapeutic strategy for d-3-PHGDH patients, we tested the effect of l-serine in generated sil1, phgdh and inpp5k a+b zebrafish models, which showed an improvement in their neuronal phenotype. Thus, our study defines a core phenotypical feature underpinning a key common molecular mechanism in three rare diseases and reveals a common and novel therapeutic target for these patients.

### Keywords
L-serine, Bip, Phgdh, Sil1, Inpp5k

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.  Tel: ++49-231-13924232; Fax: ++49-231-13924850

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andreas Roos
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.  Tel: ++49-231-13924232; Fax: ++49-231-13924850


