### Accession
PXD036272

### Title
Comparison of OMV to membrane proteomes across different media (membrane experiments)

### Description
This project examines the impact of different growth media on the protein compositions of membranes of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.

### Sample Protocol
Acetone precipitated samples were resuspended in 100ul of 5% SDS by boiling for 10minutes at 95C. Samples were then quantified by BCA and 100ug of samples reduced/alkylated with DTT 10mM and IAA 40mM. Reduced/alkylated samples were then clean up using Micro S-traps (https://protifi.com/pages/s-trap) according to the manufatures instructions Samples were digested overnight with 3ug of trypsin/lys-c (1:33 protease/protein ratio) and then collected. Samples were dried down and then further cleaned up with home made C18 Stage tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter.   Proteomic analysis of the 35 samples was undertaken using LFQ analysis: Each of the 35 samples cleaned up samples were re-suspended in Buffer A_star and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 um trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 um analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 3 uL/min for 7 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 95 minutes, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes before being held at 2% B for another 8 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode at two different FAIMS CVs -45 and -65 as previously described. For each FAIMS CV a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an AGC of maximum of 4ˆ10_5 ions and a resolution of 60k) was acquired every 1.5 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE 35%, maximal injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1.25ˆ10_5 ions and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
Datafiles were separated into individual FAIMS fractions using the FAIMS MzXML Generator and processed with Maxqunt (v2.0.2.0) using the Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 proteome (Uniprot: UP000001414) allowing for oxidation on Methionine. The LFQ and “Match Between Run”" options were enabled to allow comparsion of samples. The resulting data files were then processed using Perseus to filter proteins not observed in atleast four biological replciates of a single group and undertake anova analysis to compare groups as well as Pearson correlation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Omv, Bacteria, Membrane

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.


