### Accession
PXD027750

### Title
VCP D1 ATPase activation enhances both autophagic and proteasomal neurotoxic protein clearance

### Description
Autophagy upregulation enhances the clearance of various neurotoxic proteins and ameliorates their toxicities in disease models. Thus, autophagy activators may have therapeutic utility. Here, we have identified the essential protein VCP/p97 as a target of the autophagy-inducing molecule SMER28, providing a mechanism for a molecule that has shown promising results in animal models of neurodegeneration. SMER28 stimulates VCP D1 ATPase activity to activate autophagy by enhancing interactions of PI3K complex components to increase PI(3)P production and consequent autophagosome formation. Interestingly, SMER28-mediated increase in VCP D1 ATPase activity also enhances degradation of short-lived misfolded and aggregate-prone proteins through the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). We further show that another recently described activator of VCP induces autophagy and UPS flux in a comparable manner, providing additional evidence that targeting VCP D1 ATPase domain could be a useful approach for clearance of aggregate-prone proteins by both autophagy-lysosome and proteasomal routes.

### Sample Protocol
Limited Proteolysis under native conditions for global analysis of small molecule binding events E.coli cells were kept on ice or at 4°C throughout sample preparation. Bacteria was lysed in 500 µl of LiP buffer (100mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2) using a Precellys Evolution tissue homogenizer using Precellys’ micro-organism lysing VK01 tubes (Bertin Corp, cat #P000914-LYSK0-A). The following program was used: 9000 rpm, 6x 30s, 1 minute break, 4°C. Lysate was spun at 10,000g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was retained for the LiP protocol. Protein amount was determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat #23225) according to manufacturer's instructions. The E.coli protein lysate was aliquoted to three independent replicates (100 µg per replicate) and incubated at room temperature (RT) with SMER28 (dissolved in DMSO) for 10 minutes. A 10-concentration dose response was used (7 10-fold compound dilutions from a high of 2 mM plus two intermediate concentrations of 1 mM and 100 µM and additionally a vehicle control). The intermediate concentrations were added to provide additional data points to better fit dose response curves during analysis. Proteinase K (1:100 ratio of enzyme to protein) from Tritirachium album (Sigma Aldrich) was added and samples were incubated for a further 4 minutes and were then transferred to a 98°C heat block for 1 minute. After 1 minute at 98°C an equal volume of 10% deoxycholate (to a final concentration of 5%) was added to quench proteinase K activity. This mixture was incubated for a further 15 minutes at 98°C. Proteome preparation in denaturing conditions  After incubation at 98°C samples were reduced for 1 hour at 37°C with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride followed by a 30 minute incubation at RT in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Subsequently, samples were digested for 2 hours at 37°C with lysyl endopeptidase (1:100 enzyme: substrate ratio) in 2 additional volumes of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate (final pH of 8). Following this, samples were further digested for 16 hours at 37°C with trypsin (1:100 enzyme: substrate ratio). Formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1.5% to precipitate the deoxycholate, the samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. An equal volume of formic acid was added again and the centrifugation step was repeated. Digests were desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (The Nest Group) following the manufacturer's instructions and after drying resuspended in 1% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid. Biognosys’ iRT kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all samples according to the manufacturer's instructions. Mass spectrometric acquisition All samples were acquired by DIA (Data Independent Acquisition). Block randomization of samples was performed prior to acquisition. 2 µg of LiP reaction from each sample was separated using an in-house analytical column (75 µm x 60 cm, PicoFrit PicoTip SELF/P Tip 10 µm Emitters (New Objective, Littleton, MA) packed with CSH-C18 beads (1.7 µm; Waters, Millford MA)) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and recorded on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a 1-hour segmented gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with increasing solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN) mixed into solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 1% ACN). Solvent B concentration was increased from 1% according to the following gradient: 6% over 1 minute and 36 seconds, 8% over 3 minutes and 12 seconds, 22% over 24 minutes and 24 seconds, 30% over 10 minutes and 24 seconds, 32% over 2 minutes and 24 seconds, 34% over 2 minutes, 35% over 1 minute and 18 seconds, 37% over 1 minute and 36 seconds, 41% over 1 minute and 36 seconds, 47% over 50 seconds, 59% over 40 seconds and 90% in 10 seconds. This final concentration was held for 7.5 minutes followed by a rapid decrease to 1% over 10 seconds, which was then held for 4 minutes to finish the gradient. A full scan was acquired between 330 and 1650 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 (20 ms maximal injection time, AGC was set to 300%). A total of 22 DIA segments were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (54 ms maximal injection time, AGC was set to 1000%). The normalized collision energy was 27% and the first mass was fixed at 250m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data analysis DIA spectra were analyzed with Spectronaut 14 (Biognosys AG) (Bruderer, R. et al. Extending the Limits of Quantitative Proteome Profiling with Data-Independent Acquisition and Application to Acetaminophen-Treated Three-Dimensional Liver Microtissues. Mol Cell Proteomics mcp.M114.044305 (2015). doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044305) using the direct DIA default settings with several modifications. First, in the quantification settings the minor (peptide) grouping was adjusted to ‘Modified Sequence’ and data filtering was set to ‘Qvalue sparse’ with global imputing. Second, in the post analysis perspective the differential abundance grouping was set to ‘Minor Group’ and ‘All Ions’ were used as the smallest quantitative unit. Digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and semi-specific. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation of methionine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Files were simultaneously searched against the e.coli UniProt fasta database with isoforms (updated 2020-07-01) and a custom human UniProt fasta including exclusively VCP (updated 2020-07-01), as well as the Biognosys' iRT peptides fasta database (uploaded to the public repository). Further, in brief, retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT (adapted variable iRT extraction width for varying iRT precision during the gradient) and correction factor for window 1. Mass calibration was set to local mass calibration. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the mProphet approach (Reiter, L. et al. mProphet: automated data processing and statistical validation for large-scale SRM experiments. Nature methods 8, 430-U85 (2011).) and set to 1% at both the peptide precursor and protein level. Statistical comparisons were performed on the modified peptide level using fragment ions as quantitative input.  Dose response analysis and binding site prediction Data was first analyzed for differentially regulated peptides between the three concentrations above the estimated IC50 of the compound (2 µM, 20 µM and 100 µM) and vehicle using Spectronaut's statistical testing performed on the modified peptide sequence level using all (fragment) ions as the smallest quantitative units. This candidate peptide list was filtered based upon q-value < 0.01 and an absolute log2 fold-change > 0.46. Each peptide in this filtered list was then analyzed using an in-house R script typically used to compute LiP scores. Here, the script was truncated so that data was only subjected to dose response correlation testing (using the "drc" package (https://www.r-project.org)) on all peptides (modified sequence with fragments ions as quantitative units) at every drug concentration to establish a sigmoidal correlation coefficient. Peptides were then ranked based upon the highest dose response correlations. The necessary output files from Spectronaut are outlined in the docstring at the start of the R script. To predict the binding site of SMER28 in VCP we used the triangulation approach previously published for LiP-Quant (Piazza et al., 2020) and a previously published structure of VCP (pdb: 5ftk). In brief, the top 3 peptides by dose response correlation were identified in PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC.) and the center of mass of all atoms assigned to the aforementioned peptides was calculated and plotted.

### Publication Abstract
Fucoxanthin chlorophyll (Chl) a/c-binding proteins (FCPs) function as light harvesters in diatoms. The structure of a diatom photosystem II-FCPII (PSII-FCPII) supercomplex have been solved by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) previously; however, the FCPII subunits that constitute the FCPII tetramers and monomers are not identified individually due to their low resolutions. Here, we report a 2.5&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution structure of the PSII-FCPII supercomplex using cryo-EM. Two types of tetrameric FCPs, S-tetramer, and M-tetramer, are identified as different types of hetero-tetrameric complexes. In addition, three FCP monomers, m1, m2, and m3, are assigned to different gene products of FCP. The present structure also identifies the positions of most Chls c and diadinoxanthins, which form a complicated pigment network. Excitation-energy transfer from FCPII to PSII is revealed by time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy. These structural and spectroscopic findings provide insights into an assembly model of FCPII and its excitation-energy transfer and quenching processes.

### Keywords
Vcp, Atpase, Neurodegeneration, Beclin 1, Limited proteolysis, Lip-ms, Protein quality control, Smer28, Ubiquitin-proteasome system, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Professor of Molecular Neurogenetics CIMR Deputy Director Cambridge Institute of Medical Research (CIMR) University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Nigel Beaton

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Rubinsztein
Professor of Molecular Neurogenetics CIMR Deputy Director Cambridge Institute of Medical Research (CIMR) University of Cambridge


