### Accession
PXD038109

### Title
Stable Isotope Labeling using Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) (local data base)

### Description
Stable Isotope Labeling using Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) of CT26 control and IF1-ablated cells

### Sample Protocol
CT26 cells were incubated for 24 hours with a medium supplemented with 13C-15N-arginine (SILANTES) and 13C-15N-lysine (SILANTES). After 24 hours, mitochondria were isolated and lysed in T-PER supplemented with complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma) for obtaining an enriched mitochondrial protein extract. Mitochondria were resuspended in 0.2% Rapigest SF solution (in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 10 mM CaCl2). In-gel digestion of protein extracts, reverse phase-liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis and protein identification and quantitation were performed as described in the proteomic analysis by the Proteomic Facility (CBMSO, Spain).

### Data Protocol
In-Gel Digestion. Protein extracts (30 μg) were suspended in a volume up to 50 µl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). The run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel to concentrate the proteome. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), were reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (Esparza-Molto et al., 2021). Gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10 mM CaCl2 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:enzyme (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37 °C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) or ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (MilliporeSigma) until the mass spectrometric analysis. Reverse Phase-Liquid Chromatography RP-LC−MS/MS Analysis. The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Fisher), and then separated using a 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Phenomenex) operating at 0.25 μl min-1 (proteomics).  Peptides were eluted using a 180-min dual gradient and the gradient profile was set as follows: 5−25% solvent B for 135 min, 25−40% solvent B for 45 min, 40−100% solvent B for 2 min and 100% solvent B for 18 min. (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface at 2.1 kV spray voltage with S-Lens of 60%. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000 (Esparza-Molto et al., 2021). Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35-40%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 60 seconds periods. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged protonated ions. Quantitative Data Analysis. Peptide identification was essentially as described for the proteomic analysis. Quantitation of SILAC labeled peptides was performed with PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine, selected “Precursor Ion Quantification eg SILAC” under the “Quantifications” options with 1 min for retention time range. We used no normalization mode. The -10LgP, Quality and Avg. Area were used for Spectrum filter and Significance was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. For protein quantification we consider protein groups for peptide uniqueness.

### Publication Abstract
ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 (IF1) regulates the activity of mitochondrial ATP synthase. The expression of IF1 in differentiated human and mouse cells is highly variable. In intestinal cells, the overexpression of IF1 protects against colon inflammation. Herein, we have developed a conditional IF1-knockout mouse model in intestinal epithelium to investigate the role of IF1 in mitochondrial function and tissue homeostasis. The results show that IF1-ablated mice have increased ATP synthase/hydrolase activities, leading to profound mitochondrial dysfunction and a pro-inflammatory phenotype that impairs the permeability of the intestinal barrier compromising mouse survival upon inflammation. Deletion of IF1 prevents the formation of oligomeric assemblies of ATP synthase and alters cristae structure and the electron transport chain. Moreover, lack of IF1 promotes an intramitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> overload in vivo, minimizing the threshold to Ca<sup>2+</sup>-induced permeability transition (mPT). Removal of IF1 in cell lines also prevents the formation of oligomeric assemblies of ATP synthase, minimizing the threshold to Ca<sup>2+</sup>-induced mPT. Metabolomic analyses of mice serum and colon tissue highlight that IF1 ablation promotes the activation of de novo purine and salvage pathways. Mechanistically, lack of IF1 in cell lines increases ATP synthase/hydrolase activities and installs futile ATP hydrolysis in mitochondria, resulting in the activation of purine metabolism and in the accumulation of adenosine, both in culture medium and in mice serum. Adenosine, through ADORA2B receptors, promotes an autoimmune phenotype in mice, stressing the role of the IF1/ATP synthase axis in tissue immune responses. Overall, the results highlight that IF1 is required for ATP synthase oligomerization and that it acts as a brake to prevent ATP hydrolysis under in vivo phosphorylating conditions in intestinal cells.

### Keywords
Ct26, Silac, Colon, Cells

### Affiliations
Professor
PhD Student

### Submitter
Sonia Domínguez

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel Cuezva
Professor


