### Accession
PXD006279

### Title
Competition-based, quantitative chemical proteomics in breast cancer cells identifies new target profiles for sulforaphane

### Description
Sulforaphane is a small molecule isothiocyanate which exhibits anticancer potential, yet its biological targets remain poorly understood. Here we employ a competition-based chemical proteomics strategy to profile sulforaphane’s targets and identify over 500 targets along with their relative affinities. These targets provide a new set of mediators for sulforaphane’s bioactivity, and aid understanding of its complex mode of action.

### Sample Protocol
Compound treatment of cells and cell lysis MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells were grown in 10 cm plates under standard cell culture conditions. Cells were incubated with D,L-sulforaphane (0 μM, 5 μM, 25 μM or 100 μM) in cell media (0.2% DMSO final) for 30 min. The media was aspirated and replaced with fresh media (0.2% DMSO final) containing D,L-sulforaphane and 2 (5 μM) for 30 min. The media was aspirated and the cells washed three times with PBS. Cells were then lysed using a fractionation protocol as described. Cells were lifted from the plate into PBS using a cell scraper and transferred to low protein binding tubes (ProteinLoBind tubes, Eppendorf). Cells were pelleted by centrifugation (2000 × g, 5 min). The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet re-suspended in Buffer A (400 μL, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1 × Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) and shaken at 4 ˚C for 15 min. Samples were then centrifuged (600 × g, 2 min) and the supernatant (cytosolic fraction) transferred to a new tube. The pellet was then washed with Buffer A (100 μL) then incubated with Buffer B (200 μL, 350 mM NaCl, 10% sucrose, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1 × Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) for 1 h at 4 ˚C. The sample was then centrifuged (17,000 × g, 10 min, 4 ˚C) and the supernatant (nuclear fraction) transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined for the cytosolic and nuclear fraction for each sample. CuAAC, affinity enrichment and on-bead reduction, alkylation and trypsin digest Cytosolic fraction lysates (300 μL, 2 mg/mL) had added to them cytosolic master ‘spike-in’ SILAC lysate (100 μL, 2 mg/mL). Nuclear fraction lysates (90 μL, 1 mg/mL) had added to them nuclear master ‘spike-in’ SILAC lysate (30 μL, 1 mg/mL). Lysates were then subjected to CuAAC functionalisation with click reaction master mix containing azide capture reagent (24 μL for cytosolic lysates, 7.2 μL for nuclear lysates). Lysates were left to shake at room temperature for 1 h before being quenched and the protein precipitated. The protein pellet was then re-suspended in 2% SDS in PBS (80 μL), 100 mM EDTA (80 μL), 100 mM DTT (8 μL), 1 × Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor, and PBS (507 μL) (final volume 675 μL) for the cytosolic samples, and in 2% SDS in PBS (12 μL), 100 mM EDTA (12 μL), 100 mM DTT (1.2 μL), 1 × Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor, and PBS (74.8 μL) (final volume 100 μL) for the nuclear samples. Samples were centrifuged (17,000 × g, 3 min) after re-suspension and transferred to new tubes. Neutravidin sepharose resin was washed with 3 × 0.2% SDS in PBS and to cytosolic samples resin slurry (125 μL) was added (800 μL volume, protein concentration 1 mg/mL, 0.2% SDS final), and to nuclear samples resin slurry (20 μL) was added (120 μL volume, protein concentration 1 mg/mL, 0.2% SDS final). Samples were shaken at room temperature for 2 h, the supernatant discarded and the Neutravidin sepharose resin washed 3 × 1% SDS in PBS, 2 × 4 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) and 4 × 50 mM AMBIC (5 vol. for each wash consisting of 2 min vortexing followed by brief centrifugation to pellet the resin and discard washings). After washing, proteins on the Neutravidin sepharose resin were reduced with 100 mM DTT in 50 mM AMBIC (4 μL for cytosolic samples, 1.2 μL for nuclear samples) at 55 ˚C for 30 min with gentle agitation. The resin was washed 2 × 50 mM AMBIC. Cysteines were then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AMBIC (4 μL for cytosolic samples, 1.2 μL for nuclear samples) in the dark at room temperature. The resin was then washed 2 × 50 mM AMBIC. Samples were then digested with Trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega), 0.5 μg for cytosolic samples, 0.25 μg for nuclear samples) at 37 ˚C overnight with gentle agitation. Samples were then centrifuged and the supernatant transferred to a new tube. The resin was washed with 0.1% formic acid in water and centrifuged and this supernatant added to the same tube. The peptide solutions were then stage-tipped according to a published protocol.6 Briefly, stage tips were prepared by fitting C18 Empore disks (SDC-XC, 3M) into 200 μL pipette tips. The stage tip was initially washed by centrifuging (2000 × g, 2 min) with MeOH (150 μL) followed by water (150 μL). Peptide solutions were then added to the top of the stage tip and centrifuged (2000 × g, 2 min) to load the peptides onto the C18 sorbent followed by desalting by washing with water (150 μL). Peptides were eluted with 79% acetonitrile in water and dried with speed-vac-assisted solvent removal. Peptides were then re-dissolved in 0.5% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water and transferred to LC-MS sample vials for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Easy nLC-1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptide samples were separated with a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC column 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25 W. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 250 and 80 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105. LC-MS/MS data analysis The .raw data file obtained from each LC-MS/MS acquisition was directly processed with the software MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5,7 with the peptides being identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the human UniProt+isoforms database (January 2014) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) set as variable modifications for the search. The multiplicity was set to 2 corresponding to the number of labels to quantify against one another (Lys0, Lys8, Arg0 and Arg10). The minimum length of a peptide was set to 7 residues, the maximum amount of missed trypsin cleavages was set to 2, the maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 5 and the maximum charge of a peptide as +7. Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 0.01. Quantification of peptides was allowed off ‘razor+unique’ peptides carrying no modifications as well as methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation or carbamidomethylation. All other parameters were used as pre-set by the software. Data outputted from MaxQuant was analysed using a combination of Perseus version 1.4.0.20, Microsoft Office Excel 2010 and GraphPad Prism 5.0. The corresponding data files from the two fractions (cytosolic and nuclear) of the same sample were combined to form a single file. Protein identifications by MaxQuant based on ‘contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ and ‘reverse’ were filtered out. Further filtering only allowed identification of a protein target if it contained at least two ‘razor+unique peptides’ in both biological duplicates for each differing experimental condition. A two sample t-test (S0 = 1, FDR = 0.01) was carried out across the replicates on the original H/L ratios between the 2 only sample and the 2 plus sulforaphane competition samples to identify statistically significant differences. Medium-confidence targets were defined as those giving a statistically significant difference at any concentration of sulforaphane competition. High-confidence targets were defined as medium-confidence targets present at 5, 25 and 100 μM, or 25 and 100 μM sulforaphane competition The averaged H/L ratios for each concentration of competition against sulforaphane (5 μM, 25 μM and 100 μM) were normalised to the H/L ratio of the 2 only sample to generate a QS for each concentration of competition against sulforaphane. To visualise competition across the sulforaphane concentration gradient against 2, heat maps were generated in Perseus. The colour coding for the log2(quantification score) was defined as: Blue – 0, Green – 1.0, Yellow – 2.0, Red – 3.0, Grey – no value calculated. The quantification score for the three sulforaphane competition concentrations (5 μM, 25 μM and 100 μM) from the MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell line for a select number of targets were then plotted against one another as depicted in Fig. 3. Where a protein was only present in one cell line, an arbitrary value of 0 was assigned as the quantification score for that protein ID for the purpose of the plot.

### Publication Abstract
Sulforaphane is a small molecule isothiocyanate which exhibits anticancer potential, yet its biological targets remain poorly understood. Here we employ a competition-based chemical proteomics strategy to profile sulforaphane's targets and identify over 500 targets along with their relative affinities. These targets provide a new set of mediators for sulforaphane's bioactivity, and aid understanding of its complex mode of action.

### Keywords
Sulforaphane; cancer; chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Thomas Lanyon-Hogg

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK


