### Accession
PXD024733

### Title
culture media formulations on extracellular vesicle production by amniotic epithelial cells

### Description
Abstract The therapeutic properties of extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from stem cells and stem-like cells make them promising cell-free alternative to regenerative medicine. However, clinical translation of this technology relies heavily on the ability to manufacture EVs in a scalable, reproducible, cGMP-compliant manner. The choice of cell culture media is a critical component for EV manufacturing. In this study, we used human amniotic epithelial cells (hAECs) as a cell model system to explore the effect of chemically defined serum-free media on EV production. Here we showed that different culture media and different cell culture supplements have variable effects on EV production including culture parameters, EV yield, and EV biogenesis. Cell viability and proliferation rate are not reliable quality indicators of EV manufacturing. The levels of common EV tetraspanins and epitope makers can be impacted by different culture media formulations even when culture parameters are maintained, and EV yield are comparable. This study has uncovered some critical aspects regarding EV production culture media that need to be considered in clinical-grade scalable EV manufacturing.

### Sample Protocol
Samples solubilised in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, and quantified by microBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For mass spectrometry-based proteomics, samples (5 g in 50 L) were normalized and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 25°C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. Magnetic beads were prepared by mixing Sera‐Mag Speed Beads A and B at 1:1 (v:v) ratio and washing twice with 200 µL MS-water. Magnetic beads were reconstituted to a final concentration of 100 µg/µL. Magnetic beads were added to the samples at 10:1 beads-to-protein ratio and ethanol added for a final concentration of 50% (v/v). Protein-bound magnetics beads were washed three times with 200 µL of 80% ethanol and reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB pH 8 and digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio for 16 h at 37 °C at 1000 rpm. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid, and centrifuged at 20,000g for 1 min. The peptide digests were collected from the supernatant and kept frozen at -80°C and dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid, and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, 23290) as per manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) [41] software and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011, J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794–1805.) as previously described.[43]. Tandem mass spectra were searched as a single batch against Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (74,823 entries, downloaded Jan-2020) with a contaminants database employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 for both the protein and peptide level with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and this FDR was determined by searching a reverse sequence database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Contaminants, and reverse identification were excluded from further data analysis. ‘Match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant (Nagaraj et al., 2012, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11, M111.013722.) was performed and samples analysed as a single batch. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. For label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) we required a minimum ratio count of 2 (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Formulations, Amniotic, Stem cells, Culture media, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.


