### Accession
PXD031026

### Title
Metabolic profiling of interspecies interactions during sessile bacterial cultivation reveals growth and sporulation induction in Paenibacillus amylolyticus in response to Xanthomonas retroflexus - Samples from Xanthomonas retroflexus

### Description
An in-depth characterization of an observed interspecies interaction between two co-isolated bacteria, Xanthomonas retroflexus and Paenibacillus amylolyticus. Using microsensor measurements for mapping the chemical environment, we show how X. retroflexus promoted an alkalization of its local environment through degradation of amino acids and release of ammonia. When the two species were grown in proximity, the modified local environment induced a morphological change and increased growth of P. amylolyticus followed by sporulation. 2D spatial metabolomics enabled visualization and mapping of the degradation of oligopeptide structures by X. retroflexus and morphological changes of P. amylolyticus through e.g. the release of membrane-associated metabolites. Proteome analysis and microscopy were used to validate the shift from vegetative growth towards sporulation. In summary, we demonstrate how environmental profiling by combined application of microsensor, microscopy, metabolomics and proteomics approaches can reveal growth and sporulation promoting effects resulting from interspecies interactions.

### Sample Protocol
All proteomics experiments were conducted on 50% TSA plates without Congo red and Coomassie brilliant blue. Colony biomass was extracted from the 50% TSA plates using a scalpel. X. retroflexus cell biomass was dissolved in protein extraction buffer (200 mM Tris HCl pH 7.6, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol and 20 mM DTT) and the cells were lysed with a Q500 sonicator (Qsonica, Newtown, USA) for 4 min at 30% amplitude. The sonicated samples were centrifuged at 10000 g and soluble proteins in the supernatants were precipitated by adding ice-cold acetone to a final concentration of 80%. Samples were precipitated over night at -18°C. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in a urea solution (8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8). For P. amylolyticus the samples were dissolved in 8M guanidine hydrochloride and sonicated with similar parameters as used for the X. retroflexus. Protein concentration was estimated via Bradford assay and samples were diluted to 5 μg/μL, reduced with 5 mM DTT for 1 hr, and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr in the dark. Samples were four fold diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, and then incubated overnight by trypsin (1:100 trypsin-to-protein ratio wt:wt) at room temperature with horizontal shaking at 500 rpm. Inactivation of trypsin was achieved by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 2% and debris was removed by centrifugation (10000g, 10 min).  The tryptic peptides were purified on STAGE-tip micro columns (Kulak et al., 2014) before being subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS. The samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data were recorded in a data dependent manner, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition, on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) was coupled to the mass spectrometer through an EASY spray source and peptide separation was performed on 50 cm EASY-spray columns (Thermo Scientific) with 2 µm size C18 particles and inner diameter of 75 µm. Mobile phase consisted of solvents A (0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The initial concentration of solvent B was 6%, and hereafter gradients were applied to reach the following concentrations: 14% B in 37min, 25%B in 42min, 38%B in 21min, 60%B in 20min, 95%B in 3min and 95%B for 7min. The total length of the gradient was 130min. The full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 20ms was applied. For the full scans, the range was adjusted to 350-1500 m/z. The top 10 most abundant ions from the full scan were sequentially selected for fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z (Kelstrup et al., 2012), and excluded from re-selection for a 30 s time period. For the MS/MS scans the resolution was adjusted to 17,500 and maximum injection time of 60ms. The ions were fragmented in a higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the inbuilt Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm (parent ions) and 20ppm (fragment ions); a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted.  Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification. A target decoy search that allowed for a maximum of 1% FDR on both peptide and protein level and a minimum length of 7 amino acids per peptide was performed. Quantification was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) in MaxQuant with a minimum ratio count of 2 and applying the match between runs function.

### Publication Abstract
The toolbox available for microbiologists to study interspecies interactions is rapidly growing, and with continuously more advanced instruments, we are able to expand our knowledge on establishment and function of microbial communities. However, unravelling molecular interspecies interactions in complex biological systems remains a challenge, and interactions are therefore often studied in simplified communities. Here we perform an in-depth characterization of an observed interspecies interaction between two co-isolated bacteria, <i>Xanthomonas retroflexus</i> and <i>Paenibacillus amylolyticus</i>. Using microsensor measurements for mapping the chemical environment, we show how <i>X. retroflexus</i> promoted an alkalization of its local environment through degradation of amino acids and release of ammonia. When the two species were grown in proximity, the modified local environment induced a morphological change and growth of <i>P. amylolyticus</i> followed by sporulation. 2D spatial metabolomics enabled visualization and mapping of the degradation of oligopeptide structures by <i>X. retroflexus</i> and morphological changes of <i>P. amylolyticus</i> through e.g. the release of membrane-associated metabolites. Proteome analysis and microscopy were used to validate the shift from vegetative growth towards sporulation. In summary, we demonstrate how environmental profiling by combined application of microsensor, microscopy, metabolomics and proteomics approaches can reveal growth and sporulation promoting effects resulting from interspecies interactions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Ph, Bacteria, Xanthomonas, Interspecies interactions

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen, Section of Microbiology
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Jakob Herschend

### Lab Head
Dr Mette Burmølle
University of Copenhagen, Section of Microbiology


