### Accession
PXD019636

### Title
Orchid tissue TMT Quantitative analysis

### Description
We collected samples of Pistil, Plain Valve, Plain lip and Plain calyx from the same period and quenched them in liquid nitrogen. Two biological replications were performed in each sample. TMT labeled quantitative proteomics was used to analyze different proteins in different tissues. GO and KEGG were used to analyze the differentially expressed proteins in different tissues, and the key proteins in the important pathway were found

### Sample Protocol
All samples were resuspended and lysed on ice in 200 μL buffer (pH 8.0) containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma, USA), 100 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma,USA), and 150 mM Tris-HCl (Sigma, USA). The samples were disrupted using a homogenizer and boiled for 5 min, then ultrasonicated and boiled again for another 5 min. After that, the undissolved debris were removed by centrifugation for 15 min at 16000 rpm, and the proteins in the supernatant were collected. Protein concentrations were estimated with a Bicinchoninic Acid Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The amount of 300 μg proteins of each sample was digested accordingto the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (Wisniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009). Briefly, 200 μL of uric acid (UA) buffer (pH 8.0) containing 8 M urea (Sigma, USA) and 150 mM Tris-HCl, was added into each sample, and then ultra-filtrated with a molecular weight cutoff of 10 kDa. After that, 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, USA) in UA buffer was mixed to the protein samples and incubated for 20 min in darkness, followed by washing with 100 μL of UA buffer three times and then 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma, USA) twice. Subsequently, the protein suspension was digested with 4 μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) in 40 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C for 16 h, then digested protein samples were centrifuged at 16000 rpm for 10 min and collected.

### Data Protocol
A total of 30 fractions of the peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid separately and prepared for LC-MS/MS Analysis. LCMS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer(Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) that was coupled to Easy-nLC 1200system, nano HPLC. Peptides from each fraction were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column (2 cm × 100 μm, 5 μm, C18,Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), then onto an EASY-Spray Column(75 μm × 120 mm, 3 μm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (V/V, the same below) formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 98% acetonitrile water at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient elution of mobile phase B was set as follows: from 4% to 7% for 0–2 min, from 7% to 20%for 2–67 min, from 20% to 35% for 67–79 min, from 30% to 90% for79–81 min, maintaining at 90% for 81–90 min.MS data were acquired using a data-dependent mode. Precursor ions were selected across a mass range of 300–1800 m/z. A maximum of 20 most abundant precursor ions per cycle from each MS spectra were elected for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value was based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC). The AGC target value of 1e6, a resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, and maximum injectiontime of 50 ms were set in MS scan. A target AGC value of 1e5, and aresolution of 35000 at m/z 200, and maximum injection time of 50 m swere set in MS/MS scan. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s, and normalized collision energy was 35.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orchid tmt

### Affiliations
Zhejiang academy of agricultural sciences
Institute of Horticulture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
yue chen

### Lab Head
Dr Chongbo Sun
Institute of Horticulture, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


