### Accession
PXD039086

### Title
Identification of levoglucosan degradation pathways in bacteria

### Description
Levoglucosan is produced in the pyrolysis of cellulose and starch, including from bushfires or the burning of biofuels, and is deposited from the atmosphere across the surface of the earth. We describe two levoglucosan degrading Paenarthrobacter spp. (Paenarthrobacter nitrojuajacolis LG01 and Paenarthrobacter histidinolovorans LG02) that were isolated by metabolic enrichment on levoglucosan as sole carbon source. Genome sequencing and proteomics analysis revealed expression of a series of gene clusters encoding known levoglucosan degrading enzymes, levoglucosan dehydrogenase (LGDH, LgdA), 3-keto-levoglucosan b-eliminase (LgdB1) and glucose 3-dehydrogenase (LgdC), along with an ABC transporter cassette and associated solute binding protein. However, no homologues of 3-ketoglucose dehydratase (LgdB2) were evident. The expressed gene clusters contained a range of putative sugar phosphate isomerase/xylose isomerases with weak similarity to LgdB2. Sequence similarity network analysis of genome neighbors revealed that homologues of LgdA, LgdB1 and LgdC are generally conserved in a range of bacteria in the phyla Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria. One sugar phosphate isomerase/xylose isomerase cluster (LgdB3) was identified with limited distribution mutually exclusive with LgdB2. LgdB1, LgdB2 and LgdB3 adopt similar predicted 3D folds suggesting overlapping function in processing intermediates in LG metabolism. Our findings highlight the diversity within the LGDH pathway through which bacteria utilize levoglucosan as a nutrient source.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted snap frozen bacterial cells were solubilized in 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES by boiling them for 10 min at 95 °C. The protein concentrations were assessed by an bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100g of each biological replicate prepared for digestion using Micro S-traps (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 10mM DTT for 10 mins at 95°C and then alkylated with 40mM IAA in the dark for 1 hour. Samples were acidified to 1.2% phosphoric acid and diluted with seven volumes of S-trap wash buffer (90% methanol, 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide pH 7.1) before being loaded onto S-traps and washed 3 times with 400l of S-trap wash buffer. Samples were then digested with 3 g of Trypsin (a 1:33 protease/protein ratio) in 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide for 4 hours at 37 °C before being collected by centrifugation with washes of 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide, followed by 0.2% formic acid followed by 0.2% formic acid / 50% acetonitrile. Samples were dried down and further cleaned up using C18 Stage 1,2 tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter.   Prepared purified peptides from each sample were re-suspended in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid) and separated using a two-column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20-mm by 75-m trap and a PepMap C18 500-mm by 75-m analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 l/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface both at 300 nl/minute via the analytical columns using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For samples infused into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 95 min, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 min before being held at 2% B for another 8 min. For samples infused into the Orbitrap Eclipse 95-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 65 min, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 min before being held at 2% B for another 8 min. The Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (375-1500 m/z and a resolution of 120k) and 3 seconds of Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE of 30%, a maximal injection time of 22 ms, and a resolution of 15k). The Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode at two different FAIMS CVs -40 and -60. For each FAIMS CV a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z and a resolution of 60k) was acquired every 1.5 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (Stepped NCE 28,32,37%, maximal injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
Identification and LFQ analysis were accomplished using MaxQuant (v2.0.2.0)3 using the in house generated proteomes of LG01 and LG02 allowing for oxidation on Methionine. Prior to MaxQuant analysis dataset acquired on the Fusion Lumos were separated into individual FAIMS fractions using the FAIMS MzXML Generator 4. The LFQ and “Match Between Run” options were enabled to allow comparison between samples. The resulting data files were processed using Perseus (v1.4.0.6)5 to compare the growth conditions using student t-tests as well as Pearson correlation analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Levoglucosan is produced in the pyrolysis of cellulose and starch, including from bushfires or the burning of biofuels, and is deposited from the atmosphere across the surface of the earth. We describe two levoglucosan degrading Paenarthrobacter spp. (Paenarthrobacter nitrojuajacolis LG01 and Paenarthrobacter histidinolovorans LG02) that were isolated from soil by metabolic enrichment using levoglucosan as the sole carbon source. Genome sequencing and proteomics analysis revealed the expression of a series of genes encoding known levoglucosan degrading enzymes, levoglucosan dehydrogenase (LGDH, LgdA), 3-keto-levoglucosan &#x3b2; -eliminase (LgdB1) and glucose 3-dehydrogenase (LgdC), along with an ABC transporter cassette and an associated solute binding protein. However, no homologues of 3-ketoglucose dehydratase (LgdB2) were evident, while the expressed genes contained a range of putative sugar phosphate isomerases/xylose isomerases with weak similarity to LgdB2. Sequence similarity network analysis of genome neighbours of LgdA revealed that homologues of LgdB1 and LgdC are generally conserved in a range of bacteria in the phyla Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria. One group of sugar phosphate isomerase/xylose isomerase homologues (named LgdB3) was identified with limited distribution that is mutually exclusive with LgdB2, and we propose that they may fulfil a similar function. LgdB1, LgdB2 and LgdB3 adopt similar predicted 3D folds, suggesting overlapping function in processing intermediates in LG metabolism. Our findings highlight diversity within the LGDH pathway, through which bacteria utilize levoglucosan as a nutrient source.

### Keywords
Levoglucosan

### Affiliations
1 School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. 2 Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Spencer J. Williams
1 School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. 2 Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


