### Accession
PXD036323

### Title
Phosphoproteomics data of the Anti-Proliferative Activity of Safranal on Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cell

### Description
We conducted a combining isobaric tag-based TMT labeling followed by titanium dioxide (TiO2)-based enrichment of phosphopeptides as phosphoproteomics study on MDA-MB-231 treated with safranal.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 2×106 MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with Safranal and collected in three different time points of 30min, 12h and 24h with three replicates in each time point. Moreover, the cells were incubated 12h with the cell culture medium containing 0.15% DMSO in two replicates as control conditions. The cells were lysed in 250 µL lysis buffer (1% SDC, 5 mM TCEP) by probe sonicating in 2 cycles of 10 seconds at 60% amplitude. Proteins were digested using Trypsin and Lys-C and peptides were labeled with the TMT 11 plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 enrichment method and fractionated thruogh High pH reverse-phase chromatography. The peptides were collected into 18 fractions using concatenation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was performed against the Swissprot Homo sapiens database using in-house Mascot server (version 2.6). Search parameters were set to false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides, fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The phosphopeptides search included the parameters: Maximum missed cleavages, 2; Static modifications, TMT6plex (K), TMT6plex (N-term) and Carbamidomethyl (C); Dynamic modifications, Phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and MASCOT ion score ?15. All datasets from PD were exported to Excel (Microsoft) for further processes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Tmt labeling, Safranal., Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Shahid Beheshti University
Protein research group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Mahshid Zarrineh

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Røssel Larsen
Protein research group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark


