### Accession
PXD032097

### Title
Proteomics analyses reveal potential therapeutic strategies for HCM

### Description
Proteomics was performed to facilitate the understanding of the metabolic alterations in HCM patients from proteinlevel

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples from HCM were ground to a powder in liquid nitrogen and then lysed in 8 M urea containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and then sonicated using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) three times and centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and protein content was quantified using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Haimen, China). The proteins were then reduced and alkylated by mixing sequentially with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and then with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. The protein sample was diluted by addition of 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) to give a final urea concentration of < 2 M. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight followed by a second digestion for 4 h at a 1:100 ratio. Peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column from Phenomenex® (Torrance, CA, USA) and then vacuum-dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed using a TMT 10 plex kit (ThermoFisher-90406LCS). The peptides were then fractionated using high pH RP-HPLC on an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm id, 250 mm length), combined into 18 fractions, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides from each fraction were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and loaded onto a home-made RP-HPLC analytical column (75 μm id, 150 mm length). The peptides were separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system with the following gradient: 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% over 8 min, and 35% to 80% over 3 min, followed by a hold at 80% for 3 min. The flow rate was constant at 400 nL/min. The peptides were analyzed using an Q ExactiveTM Plus MS/MS system (Thermo Scientific-Pierce Protein Biology Products, San Diego, CA, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The peptides were selected for MS/MS using a normalized collision energy setting of 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 with a fixed first mass set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The TMT reporter ions were measured in high-resolution MS2 mode and the interference was controlled by FDR and score cutoff. The cutoffs for modified peptides, score for recalibration and the FDR of peptide level were 40, 70, and 0.01, respectively. The raw MS/MS data were analyzed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Human database (20,317 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missing cleavages. In the first and main searches, the mass tolerance of precursor ions was set at 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. The false detection rate was adjusted to <1% and the minimum score for peptides was set at 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heart tissue, Hcm, Therapeutic strategies

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
wang wenmin

### Lab Head
Dr Wenmin Wang, Zeping Hu
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


