### Accession
PXD027327

### Title
Cleavage of hemagglutinin from influenza A, at varying pH and over a twenty-four hour time period in the presence of cathepsin B, H and S

### Description
Pathogen-derived peptides presented by MHCII that are best able to activate cognate CD4+ T cells and initiate an adaptive immune response are termed immunodominant. The exact mechanisms and molecular determinants of antigen processing that contribute to immunodominance remain unclear. Recently, attention has been called to the events of proteolytic cleavage as a potential determinant. Here, we compare data generated through cleavage of hemagglutinin from influenza A, at varying pH and over a twenty-four hour time period in the presence of cathepsin B, H and S, to an immunodominant hierarchy previously established with an ex-vivo mouse model. We show that cleavage alone does not directly predict immunodominance, however resistance to digestion emerged as a determinant of immunodominance. Moreover, pH conditions contribute to shaping the peptidome available for MHCII binding and the size of the pools of unique peptides associated with immunodominance. These differences suggest the presence of multiple antigen processing pathways through which resistance to proteolytic cleavage and peptide redundancy may result in a more diverse peptidome for presentation.

### Sample Protocol
Cathepsin Digest Kinetic Analysis: Hemagglutinin (42 μg) in phosphate (pH 6.4) or citrate-phosphate (pH 5.0) buffers with 4 mM EDTA and 600 mM L-cysteine was digested by CTS B (0.83μM), CTS H (0.83μM), and CTS S (0.42μM) for 2min, 8min, 20min, 3hrs, 6hrs, 16hrs and 24 hours. Reactions were quenched with the irreversible protease inhibitor L-trans-epoxysuccinyl-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E-64) (Sigma Aldrich, # E3132-1MG) to a final concentration of 28 μM. Samples were frozen in dry ice and stored at -80°C until trypsin digestion. Trypsin Digestion: Cathepsin digested Influenza Hemagglutinin (HA) samples (45µg HA input) were precipitated with TCA/Acetone (10% TCA / 50% Acetone final)on ice for 45 minutes, spun down 10 minutes at max speed and protein pellets were washed twice, with successive centrifugation, first with cold acetone then second with cold methanol. Generated pellet was solubilized for protein denaturation in 20μl of 8M Urea / 50mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5) / 1mM TrisHCl. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by addition of 2.5μl of 25mM DTT, 30.5μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5) and 5μl of methanol. Incubated at 52°C for 15 minutes then cooled on ice to room temperature. Deglycosylation step followed by addition of 2.0μl [20U] of PNGase F (Promega) and incubation for 2 hours at 37°C. Alkylation of reduced cysteine thiols was accomplished next with 3µl addition of 55mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) in 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5) and incubation at room temperature in darkness for 15 minutes. Reaction was quenched with 8µl of 25mM DTT in 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5). Subsequently 10μl of Trypsin/LysC solution [100ng/μl 1:1 Trypsin (Promega) : LysC (FujiFilm) mix in 25mM NH4HCO3] and 19μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5) was added to 100µl final volume. Digestion was conducted for 2 hours at 42°C then additional 5µl of trypsin/LysC solution added and digestion proceeded o/n at 37°C. Reaction was terminated by acidification with 2.5% Trifluoroacetic acid [TFA] to 0.3% final. Digests were cleaned up using OMIX C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) per manufacturer protocol and eluted in 20µl of 50/50/0.1% ACN/H2O/TFA. Dried to completion in the speed-vac and finally reconstituted in 90µl of 0.1% formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent) connected to hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source (held at constant 35°C). Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3µM, 100Å, 150 x 0.075mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto which 1µl of extracted peptides was automatically loaded. NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual gradient from 0% (v/v) B to 30% (v/v) B over 80 minutes and concluded with 5 minute fast gradient from 30% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 5 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by CID-type MS2 fragmentation of 30 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 350 to 1800 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development). Resulting mgf files were used to search against Uniprot UP5640 Homo sapiens amino acid sequence database appended with Influenza A virus Hemagglutinin protein sequence (96,822 total entries) plus common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database, cRAP (116 total entries) using in-house Mascot search engine 2.7.0 [Matrix Science] with semi-tryptic digest specificity, fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable Methionine oxidation plus Asparagine and Glutamine deamidation. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass at 0.6 Da. Protein annotations, significance of identification and spectral based quantification was done with help of Scaffold software (version 4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 85.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cathepsin, Mhcii, Hemagglutinin, Lc-ms/ms, Influenza a, Immunodominance

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Thomas Kuhn
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK


