### Accession
PXD011556

### Title
Bacteriocin LC-MSMS

### Description
This is the first report of a bacteriocin being produced by lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC 4356. For protein identification, the ~8-kDa peptide band was removed from the acrylamide gel and digested in-gel by trypsin, and the resulting peptide fragments were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The MS data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v2.2) with the SEQUEST search engine. Three peptides, VAHCASQIGR (amino acids 23-32), GSAACVSYLTR (amino acids 69-79), GSAACVSYLTRHRHH (amino acids 69-83) were identified as tryptic fragments on the basis of LC-MS/MS.This is the first report of a bacteriocin being produced by lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC 4356. For protein identification, the ~8-kDa peptide band was removed from the acrylamide gel and digested in-gel by trypsin, and the resulting peptide fragments were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The MS data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v2.2) with the SEQUEST search engine. Three peptides, VAHCASQIGR (amino acids 23-32), GSAACVSYLTR (amino acids 69-79), GSAACVSYLTRHRHH (amino acids 69-83) were identified as tryptic fragments on the basis of LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) analyses were performed on a Thermo EASY nLC II LC system coupled to a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source. Proteins in silver-stained gel bands were in-gel digested using trypsin for 16 hours at 30°C. A volume of 2 μL of each sample containing around 100 ng of tryptic peptides was injected onto a 10 cm × 100 μm column in-house packed with Michrom Magic C18 stationary phase (5 μm particle diameter and 300 Å pore size). Peptides were eluted using a 35-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with mobile phase A (96.9% water, 3% ACN and 0.1% FA) and B (97% ACN, 2.9% water and 0.1% FA). A full MS spectrum (m/z 400-1400) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000, then the ten most abundant multiple charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing in linear trap with the option of dynamic exclusion. Peptide fragmentation was performed using a collision induced dissociation at normalized collision energy of 35% with activation time of 10 ms

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v2.2) with the SEQUEST search engine. Database searches were against UniProt Lactobacillus acidophilus proteome database (Uniprot UP000030883) and Antimicrobial Peptide Database (APD, http://aps.unmc.edu/AP/main.php), respectively. The enzyme for database search was chosen as trypsin (full) and maximum missed cleavage sites was set at 2. Mass tolerances of the precursor ion and fragment ion were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Dynamic modifications on Methionine (oxidation, +15.9949 Da), protein N-terminus (Acetyl, +42.0106), and static modifications on Cysteine (carbamidomethyl, +57.0215 Da) were allowed. Only peptides and proteins with high confidence (false discovery rate <1%) were reported.

### Publication Abstract
A longstanding awareness in generating resistance to common antimicrobial therapies by Gram-negative bacteria has made them a major threat to global health. The application of antimicrobial peptides as a therapeutic agent would be a great opportunity to combat bacterial diseases. Here, we introduce a new antimicrobial peptide (&#x223c;8.3&#x2009;kDa) from probiotic strain <i>Lactobacillus acidophilus</i> ATCC 4356, designated acidocin 4356 (ACD). This multifunctional peptide exerts its anti-infective ability against <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> through an inhibitory action on virulence factors, bacterial killing, and biofilm degradation. Reliable performance over tough physiological conditions and low hemolytic activity confirmed a new hope for the therapeutic setting. Antibacterial kinetic studies using flow cytometry technique showed that the ACD activity is related to the change in permeability of the membrane. The results obtained from molecular dynamic (MD) simulation were perfectly suited to the experimental data of ACD behavior. The structure-function relationship of this natural compound, along with the results of transmission electron microscopy analysis and MD simulation, confirmed the ability of the ACD aimed at enhancing bacterial membrane perturbation. The peptide was effective in the treatment of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infection in mouse model. The results support the therapeutic potential of ACD for the treatment of <i>Pseudomonas</i> infections.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Multidrug-resistant bacteria are a major threat to global health, and the <i>Pseudomonas</i> bacterium with the ability to form biofilms is considered one of the main causative agents of nosocomial infections. Traditional antibiotics have failed because of increased resistance. Thus, finding new biocompatible antibacterial drugs is essential. Antimicrobial peptides are produced by various organisms as a natural defense mechanism against pathogens, inspiring the possible design of the next generation of antibiotics. In this study, a new antimicrobial peptide was isolated from <i>Lactobacillus acidophilus</i> ATCC 4356, counteracting both biofilm and planktonic cells of <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> A detailed investigation was then conducted concerning the functional mechanism of this peptide by using fluorescence techniques, electron microscopy, and <i>in silico</i> methods. The antibacterial and antibiofilm properties of this peptide may be important in the treatment of <i>Pseudomonas</i> infections.

### Keywords
Bacteriocin, Lactobacillus acidophilus atcc 4356

### Affiliations
NIGEB
Division of Industrial & Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), P. O. Box 14155-6343, Tehran, Iran

### Submitter
Sima Modiri

### Lab Head
Dr Kambiz Akbari Noghabi
Division of Industrial & Environmental Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), P. O. Box 14155-6343, Tehran, Iran


