### Accession
PXD016867

### Title
Interactome identification of Histones H3 and H4 in the presence and absence of methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) in the pathogenic yeast Candida glabrata

### Description
The main goal of this project is to identify proteins in Candida glabrata that interact with histones H3 (CgHht) and H4 (CgHhf) under normal and MMS-treatment conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cghht1Δ2Δ/CgHHT-SFB and Cghhf1Δ2Δ/CgHHF-SFB strains, used for the interactome analysis, were grown in CAA medium till logarithmic-phase, and further incubated for 3 h in the CAA medium lacking or containing 0.06% MMS. Cells were harvested and cell lysates were prepared using glass bead lysis method. Cell lysates were subjected to tandem affinity purification with streptavadin-agarose and S-protein-agarose beads. Cell lysates (5 mg protein) were incubated with streptavidin beads for 2 h, followed by elution with the biotin (2 mg/ml)-containing buffer. The resulting supernatant was incubated with S-protein agarose beads for 2 h at 4°C, followed by 3 washes with lysis buffer. Next, beads were boiled in 2X SDS-gel loading buffer, and protein samples were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel till bromophenol blue dye in the sample buffer entered about 3 mm into the gel. After staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, protein bands were excised and sent to the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA (https://taplin.med.harvard.edu) for protein identification. Samples were prepared and sent from two independent biological replicates. At the Taplin facility, gel pieces were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion followed by microcapillary LC-MS/MS (Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) using the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer. Sample with search name 69465 refers to Cghhf1Δ2Δ/SFB-vector_CAA grown, 69466 refers to Cghhf1Δ2Δ/CgHHF-SFB_CAA grown_Replicate-1, 69467 refers to Cghhf1Δ2Δ/CgHHF-SFB_MMS (0.06%) grown_Replicate-1, 69468 refers to Cghhf1Δ2Δ/CgHHF-SFB_CAA grown_Replicate-2, 69469 refers to Cghhf1Δ2Δ/CgHHF-SFB_MMS (0.06%) grown_Replicate-2, 69470 refers to Cghht1Δ2Δ/SFB-vector_CAA grown, 69471 refers to Cghht1Δ2Δ/CgHHT-SFB_CAA grown_Replicate-1, 69472 refers to Cghht1Δ2Δ/CgHHT-SFB_MMS (0.06%) grown_Replicate-1, 69473 refers to Cghht1Δ2Δ/CgHHT-SFB_CAA grown_Replicate-2 and 69474 refers to Cghht1Δ2Δ/CgHHT-SFB_MMS (0.06%) grown_Replicate-2.

### Data Protocol
All generated fragmentation patterns were acquired and searched against the UniProt C. glabrata reference proteome database using the SEQUEST software to determine the peptide sequences. 1% false discovery rate was set as a cut-off to filter the identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Candida glabrata, a nosocomial fungal bloodstream pathogen, causes significant morbidity and mortality in hospitals worldwide. The ability to replicate in macrophages and survive a high level of oxidative stress contributes to its virulence in the mammalian host. However, the role of DNA repair and recombination mechanisms in its pathobiology is still being discovered. Here, we have characterized the response of C. glabrata to the methyl methanesulfonate (MMS)-induced DNA damage. We found that the MMS exposure triggered a significant downregulation of histone H4 transcript and protein levels, and that, the damaged DNA was repaired by the homologous recombination (HR) pathway. Consistently, the reduced H4 gene dosage was associated with increased HR frequency and elevated resistance to MMS. The genetic analysis found CgRad52, a DNA strand exchange-promoter protein of the HR system, to be essential for this MMS resistance. Further, the tandem-affinity purification and mass spectrometry analysis revealed a substantially smaller interactome of H4 in MMS-treated cells. Among 23 identified proteins, we found the WD40-repeat protein CgCmr1 to interact genetically and physically with H4, and regulate H4 levels, HR pathway and MMS stress survival. Controlling H4 levels tightly is therefore a regulatory mechanism to survive MMS stress in C. glabrata.

### Keywords
Histone h3 and h4, Tandem affinity purification, Lc-ms/ms, Sfb (s-protein-flag epitope-streptavidin-binding peptide) triple epitope, Dna damage stress

### Affiliations
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Rupinder Kaur

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rupinder Kaur
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India


