### Accession
PXD018695

### Title
Hyperactive Mouse Serotonin Transporter Interacting Proteins LC-MSMS

### Description
The serotonin (5-HT) transporter (SERT) is a key determinant of the concentration of 5-HT available for synaptic signaling and is the target of the antidepressant-selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). In addition to the role of SERT in mediating the actions of antidepressant medications, multiple, rare gain of function coding variants in SERT have been identified in subjects with autism spectrum disorder (ASD).  The Blakely lab has extensively characterized the structural and functional impact of one of these variants, SERT Ala56, in vitro and in vivo,   revealing a constitutively-imposed, biased conformation that enhances transporter function and that perturbs transporter regulation.  We hypothesize that SERT Ala56 disrupts the interactions of molecular networks that normally ensure proper transporter structure, localization and regulation, and whose elucidation may reveal new determinants of serotonergic dysfunction in ASD.  Here, we pursue an unbiased proteomic analysis of changes in SERT interacting protein (SIPs) imposed by the SERT Ala56 variant, expressed in transgenic mice.  Further investigation of the SIPs and associated networks nominated through our studies may provide new opportunities to detect and modulate brain networks that contribute to the underlying complexity of ASD.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected midbrain tissue from 4 mice were homogenized in 10% (w/v) of 0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM EDTA utilizing a Teflon-glass tissue homogenizer.  The resulting midbrain homogenate was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 800 X g and the supernatant was then subjected to 10,000 x g spin for 10 min.   Pellets were lysed for 1 hr rotating in PBS + 0.7% DDM containing protease inhibitors at 4°C. Protein lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 16,060 × g to obtain soluble material. Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA method. 1 mg of supernatant was then added to 50 µL protein A Dynabeads that were previously cross-linked with an anti-SERT serum #48 using dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP). Briefly, beads were washed 3X in PBS at room temp followed by incubation with #48 anti-SERT serum at 4°C for 1 h. Antibody-bound beads were then incubated with 6.5 mg/mL DMP in 0.2 M Triethylamine (TEA) buffer for 30 min at room temperature. The incubation step was repeated 3X with freshly made DMP buffer each time. Cross-linked beads were then quenched in 50 mM ethanolamine (EA) buffer for 5 min at room temp, washed 2X in 1 M glycine (pH 3) buffer, and then 3X in PBS (10 min, room temp) and then stored at 4C until use. Immunocomplexes were eluted by incubating beads with 2X Laemmli sample buffer at 70°C for 10 min. SERT immunocomplexes eluted from the antibody-conjugated Dynabeads were first resolved for 6 cm using a 10% Novex® precast gel.  Protein bands were excised from the gel and cut into 1 mm3 pieces. Proteins were treated for 30 minutes with 45 mM DTT, and available Cys residues were carbamidomethylated with 100mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes.  Gel pieces were further destained with 50% MeCN in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, and proteins were digested with trypsin (10ng/uL) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C.  Peptides were extracted by gel dehydration with 60% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, the extracts were dried by speed vac centrifugation, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were loaded onto a self-packed biphasic C18/SCX MudPIT column using a Helium-pressurized cell (pressure bomb). The MudPIT column consisted of 360 x 150um i.d. fused silica, which was fritted with a filter-end fitting  and packed with 5cm of Luna SCX material (5um, 100Å) followed by 4cm of Jupiter C18 material (5um, 300Å, Phenomenex).  Once the sample was loaded, the MudPIT column was connected using an M-520 microfilter union to an analytical column (360um x 100um i.d.), equipped with a laser-pulled emitter tip and packed with 20cm of C18 reverse phase material (Jupiter, 3um beads, 300Å).  Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and autosampler, MudPIT analysis was performed with an 8-step salt pulse gradient (0, 100, 150, 200, 300, 500, 750, and 1000mM ammonium acetate). Following each salt pulse, peptides were gradient-eluted from the reverse analytical column at a flow rate of 350nL/min, and the mobile phase solvents consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile (solvent B). For the peptides from the first 7 SCX fractions, the reverse phase gradient consisted of 2–50 %B in 83 min, 50 %B from 83-84 min, 50-2 %B from 84-85 min, and column equilibration at 2 %B from 85-95 min. For the last SCX-eluted (1M ammonium acetate) peptide fraction, the peptides were eluted from the reverse phase analytical column using a gradient of 2-98 %B in 83 min, 98 %B from 83-84 min, 98-2 %B from 84-85 min, and 2 %B from 85-95 min. Peptides were introduced via nanoelectrospray into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, and data were collected using a data-dependent method. The instrument method included an MS1 AGC target value of 3e6, followed by up to 15 MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions detected in the preceding MS scan.  The MS2 AGC target was set to 1e5, dynamic exclusion was set to 30s, HCD collision energy was set to 28 nce, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.01) and Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14) by The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter Florida. Both Mascot and Sequest were set up to search the UniProt Mouse2016_08_BSA release (16918 entries; ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/previous_releases/release-2016_08/) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and Sequest as a fixed modification. Deamidated ion of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot and Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  A total of 1050 proteins were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Serotonin transporter interacting proteins, Midbrain

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core


