### Accession
PXD008586

### Title
Small Protein Enrichment-Based Proteogenomics Identifies Plentiful Missing Proteins and Three Novel sORFs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Small proteins (SPs) are defined as peptides of 100 amino acids or less encoded by short open reading frames (sORFs). Recent studies have shown that SPs are involved in many important biological processes, including cell signaling, metabolism, growth and so on. However, most of the annotated SPs in almost all species are currently lacking the evidence for protein existence and are regard as missing proteins (MPs). In addition, more and more mis-annotated sORFs have been discovered by proteogenomic methods in human, mice and even the well-characterised Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This reveals a blind spot in traditional gene annotation technology for those SPs-encoding genes. Because SPs are short and generally low abundant, SPs identification using proteomics faces challenges. A deeper coverage of SPs identification may help validate more MPs and discover more potential mis-annotated sORFs. Here, we applied a SPs enrichment-based proteogenomic strategy to Saccharomyces cerevisiae. By integrating four different SPs enrichment methods, we have successfully validated 31 MPs and discovered 3 novel sORFs (YKL104W-A, YHR052C-B and YHR054C-B) which were verified by novel peptide synthesis. In-depth analysis of our SPs enrichment datasets also reveals a series of special physicochemical and biological characteristics of SPs and particular rules of SPs identification. Based on these, we then systematically conclude the difficulties, causes and solutions in SPs identification.

### Sample Protocol
The isogenic yeast strain JMP024 was grown at 30°C in YPD medium (1% yeast extract, 2% Bacto-peptone, and 2% dextrose) and harvested at an OD600 of 1.5. Ice-cold 0.01% NaN3 was used to wash cells to remove residual media. SPs were enriched using four complementary enrichment methods. (1) Urea_Tricine method: 30 OD cells were re-suspensed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) and lysed by vortexing with glass beads (work 30 s, iced 30 s, 10 cycles). The debris was eliminated by centrifugation (17,000 × g) at 4℃ for 20 min. The protein concentration was determined by a gel-assisted method as described previously[14]. Proteins were then subjected to disulfide reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (45℃, 30 min) and alkylation with 20 mM IAA (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). The alkylated proteins (80 μg) were resolved by a 12% Tricine-SDS-PAGE (6.5 cm), and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250. Then, the gel lane below 30 kDa region was excised into 13 fractions. (2) Urea_MWCO method: the proteins extracted as described above were processed by 30-kDa molecular weight cut off (MWCO) filter, and the flow through was subjected to disulfide reduction and alkylation as above. (3) HCl_Tricine method: 60 OD cells were solubilized in lysis buffer (50 mM HCl, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME), 0.05% Triton X-100) and lysed by vortexing with glass beads. After centrifugation (17,000 × g, 4℃, 20 min), the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The debris was further extracted with the same buffer for three more times for the remaining proteins. Then the four extracts were pooled, lyophilized and then suspended with 1 × SDS gel-loading buffer. The sample was subjected to disulfide reduction and alkylation as above. Proteins were resolved by a 12% Tricine-SDS-PAGE (3 cm), and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250. Then, the gel lane below 30 kDa region was excised into 5 fractions. (4) HCl_MWCO method: the multiple extracts using the HCl_Tricine method were then passed through a 30-kDa MWCO filter and the flow through was subjected to disulfide reduction and alkylation as above.Enriched proteins from the Urea_Tricine and HCl_Tricine methods were digested with trypsin (12.5 ng/μL) at 37℃ for 16 h. The extracted peptides were dried for MS detection. For the Urea_MWCO and HCl_MWCO samples, a 3kDa-MWCO filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method was performed essentially as described previously. Briefly, for the Urea_MWCO enrichment method, enriched sample was added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min. Then the samples were washed three times with 300 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin was loaded onto the filter at a protease to protein substrate ratio of 1:50 and the mixture was incubated for 16h at 37℃. Peptides were then desalted with C18 column as described previously and vacuum dried before LC-MS/MS analysis. The HCl_MWCO sample was added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min. The samples were washed three times with 300 μL of substitution buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Then the samples were washed three more times with 300 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin as above.

### Data Protocol
To identify annotated sORFs, the raw data files were searched by the MaxQuant against the Swiss-Prot S. cerevisiae database (version released in 2017.11). Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin was set as protease with two missed cleavage permitted; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and that of the MS2 fragments was set at 0.5 Da; peptide matches were filtered by a minimum length of seven amino acids; false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% at the peptide and protein levels, which was estimated using a target-decoy search strategy. To identify unannotated sORFs, data files were searched by pFind 3.1 software against a specified composite of target/decoy yeast database containing a six-frame translation database of the genome, an N-terminal peptides database, a junction peptides database, and a common contaminants database for proteogenomics purpose. The novel peptides were filtered firstly until a FDR lower than 1% using a target-decoy search strategy. S-FDR, T-FDR I and T-FDR II were used for enhancing the credibility of the novel peptides filter.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Yeast, Proteogenomics, Small proteins, Short open reading frames, Missing proteins

### Affiliations
Beijing Proteome Research Center, 38 Science Park Road, Changping District, Beijing 102206, China.
National Center for Protein Sciences·Beijing

### Submitter
cuitong he

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Beijing Proteome Research Center, 38 Science Park Road, Changping District, Beijing 102206, China.


