### Accession
PXD019436

### Title
Oxidation of cytochrome 605 is the rate limiting step when Ferrimicrobium ferriphilum respires aerobically on soluble iron

### Description
Proteins that oxidize extracellular substrates in Gram-positive bacteria are poorly understood.  Ferrimicrobium acidiphilum is an actinobacterium that respires aerobically on extracellular ferrous ions at pH 1.5.  In situ absorbance measurements were conducted on turbid suspensions of intact Fm. acidiphilum using an integrating cavity absorption meter designed for that purpose.  Initial velocity kinetic studies monitored the appearance of product ferric ions in the presence of catalytic quantities of cells.  Cell-catalyzed iron oxidation obeyed the Michaelis-Menten equation with values for KM and Vmax of 71 µM and 0.29 fmol/min/cell, respectively.  Cell-monitored turnover kinetic studies conducted with higher concentrations of cells revealed that only a single cytochrome with reduced absorbance peaks at 448 and 605 nm was visible as the cells respired aerobically on iron.  The reduced cytochrome 605 exhibited mathematical and correlational properties that were consistent with the hypothesis that oxidation of the cytochrome constituted the rate-limiting step in the aerobic respiratory process with a turnover number of 35 ± 2 s-1.  Genomic and proteomic analyses showed that Fm. acidiphilum expressed two a-type heme copper terminal oxidases.  Cytochrome 605 was associated with the terminal oxidase genes that occur earlier in the annotated circular genome of this bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
A Fm. acidiphilum cell pellet was placed in a 1% SDS solution and immediately homogenized using sonic oscillation. The sample was heated to 80 oC for 10 minutes and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific).  Based on the protein concentration, 100 µg of protein sample were adjusted to a final volume of 100 µl using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate; the protein was then reduced using (2- carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) in 10 mm Tris at 55 °C for 1 hour.  The reduced sample was subsequently alkylated using 5 µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min.  Next, the protein sample was precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction, air-dried and digested with 2 µg of trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Scientific Pierce) at 37 °C overnight. The next day, a SepPak cartridge purification (Waters, Ireland) using acidic reverse phase conditions, and an off-line basic reverse phase fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity of the sample as previously described (41).    Each of the 12 resulting fractions were then run on a Dionex U3000 nano flow HPLC system coupled to a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer.  Each fraction was subjected to a 90-minute chromatographic method that employed a gradient from 2-25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 60 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 minutes and a re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA in a “trap-and-load” configuration. The trap column was an Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100A and the column was an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 15 cm (Thermo Fisher Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  The entire run was conducted at 0.3 µl/min flow rate and sample was ionized through a Thermo Nanospray Flex Ion Source.  MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 240,000.  Data dependent acquisition (DDA) MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 30% using a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Data analyses were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 using SEQUEST HT scoring. The protein FASTA database was Fm. acidiphilum (TaxID=1121877) version 2019-12-19.  Static modification included carbamidomethyl on cysteines (=57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (=15.9949).  Parent ion tolerance was 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2.  Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Respiratory chain, Bioenergetics, Systems biology, Proteomics, Electron transfer, Cytochrome oxidase, Actinobacteria, Integrating cavity absorption meter

### Affiliations
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility
LSU Health Sciences Center School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology LSUHSC Proteomics Facility New Orleans, LA 70112

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie J Guidry
LSU Health Sciences Center School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology LSUHSC Proteomics Facility New Orleans, LA 70112


