### Accession
PXD027368

### Title
Morc3 silences endogenous retroviruses by enabling Daxx-mediated histone H3.3 incorporation

### Description
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) comprise a significant portion of mammalian genomes. Although specific ERV loci feature regulatory roles for host gene expression, most ERV integrations are transcriptionally repressed by Setdb1 mediated H3K9me3 and DNA methylation. However, the protein network which regulates the deposition of these chromatin modifications is still incompletely understood. Here, we performed a genome-wide sgRNA screen for genes involved in ERV silencing and identified the GHKL ATPase protein Morc3 as a top-scoring hit. Morc3 knock-out cells display de-repression, reduced H3K9me3, and increased chromatin accessibility of distinct ERV families. We found that the Morc3 ATPase cycle and Morc3 SUMOylation are important for ERV chromatin regulation. Proteomic analysis revealed that Morc3 mutant proteins fail to interact with the histone H3.3 chaperone Daxx. This interaction depends on Morc3 SUMOylation and Daxx SUMO binding. Notably, in Morc3 ko cells, we observed strongly reduced histone H3.3 on Morc3 binding sites. Thus, our data demonstrate Morc3 as a critical regulator of Daxx-mediated histone H3.3 incorporation to ERV regions.  This dataset comprises several experiments addressing different questions:  1. ChIP-MS experiment to determine the protein interaction context of Morc3 using a Morc3-3xFLAG knock-in ES cell line compared to wild type ES cells (Experiment 20200408).  2. ChIP-MS experiments to investigate changes in the protein interaction context of the Morc3 mutant rescue cell lines. Comparison of Morc3 knock-out cell lines with re-expression of Morc3-CW-3xFLAG mutant (Ref. #3111), Morc3-ATP-binding-3xFLAG and Morc3-SUMOylation-3xFLAG mutants (Ref. #3635), and Morc3-deltaN-3xFLAG mutant (Ref. #5174) compared to wt Morc3-3XFLAG rescue.  3. ChIP-MS experiment to determine if the interaction between Morc3 and Daxx is mediated through this C-terminal SIM, comparing Daxx knock-out cell lines with re-expression of wild type 3xFLAG-Daxx protein or 3xFLAG-Daxx  ∆SIM, which lacks the C-terminal SIM domain. (Ref. #3301)

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of bait proteins (Daxx or Morc3) was performed according to the “Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous protein (RIME) for analysis of chromatin complexes” protocol (Mohammed et al., 2016). For each immunoprecipitation experiment between 60 and 100 million mouse embryonic stem cells expressing 3xFLAG tagged bait proteins were harvested and fixed by formaldehyde crosslinking. After nuclei extraction chromatin was sheared with the Bioruptor pico (Diagenode) for 10-12 cycles (30 s on / 30 s off) at 4 °C and ChIP was performed at 4° C for 4 h with 60 μl of Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen, #10004D) coupled to 6 μl of the FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, #F3165).  For Liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry (LC–MS) desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in either a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50 min gradient from 4 to 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid or in a 25 cm analytical column (75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, Aurora-IonOpticks) with a 50 min gradient from 2 to 35 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 – 1600) were acquired with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 x 106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 x 105 and fragmented at 27 % normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.14.0) was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, UP000000589_10090_Mmusculus_2020; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. The final list of proteins found was filtered and statistically processed in R studio version 3.5.0 using the Linear Models for Microarray Data (LIMMA) R script Version 1.0.1 that is available on GitHub written by Wasim Aftab (https://github.com/wasimaftab/LIMMA-pipeline-proteomics). For comparative analysis between Morc3 wild type and mutant proteins, iBAQ values for proteins identified with more than 2 peptides were normalized to Morc3 or Daxx, respectively, by dividing by the iBAQ value of the bait. Mean normalized iBAQ values from replicate experiments were plotted.

### Publication Abstract
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) comprise a significant portion of mammalian genomes. Although specific ERV loci feature regulatory roles for host gene expression, most ERV integrations are transcriptionally repressed by Setdb1-mediated H3K9me3 and DNA methylation. However, the protein network which regulates the deposition of these chromatin modifications is still incompletely understood. Here, we perform a genome-wide single guide RNA (sgRNA) screen for genes involved in ERV silencing and identify the GHKL ATPase protein Morc3 as a top-scoring hit. Morc3 knock-out (ko) cells display de-repression, reduced H3K9me3, and increased chromatin accessibility of distinct ERV families. We find that the Morc3 ATPase cycle and Morc3 SUMOylation are important for ERV chromatin regulation. Proteomic analyses reveal that Morc3 mutant proteins fail to interact with the histone H3.3 chaperone Daxx. This interaction depends on Morc3 SUMOylation and Daxx SUMO binding. Notably, in Morc3 ko cells, we observe strongly reduced histone H3.3 on Morc3 binding sites. Thus, our data demonstrate Morc3 as a critical regulator of Daxx-mediated histone H3.3 incorporation to ERV regions.

### Keywords
Morc3, Setdb1, Erv, Endogenous retroviruses, Histone h3.3, Daxx

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Molecular Biology  Biomedical Center Munich  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)   Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Gunnar Schotta
Molecular Biology  Biomedical Center Munich  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)   Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


