### Accession
PXD023940

### Title
Borrelia burgdorferi infected Ixodes scapularis nymph saliva proteome

### Description
Lyme disease (LD) is one of the most important human vector-borne diseases in North America. Since transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi (Bb), the causative agent of LD, is influenced by yet unknown tick saliva proteins (TSP), the discovery and characterization of such TSPs are highly sought after for their potential as tick-antigen based vaccine targets. We validated a novel non-invasive approach of collecting sufficient amounts of saliva from unfed, partially fed (12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72h), and replete fed Ixodes scapularis nymphs for identification of tick saliva proteins using the LC-MS/MS approach. Our data has described TSPs that might be injected into the host within few hours of the tick starting to feed and are likely associated with manipulating host immunity to facilitate transmitted Bb to colonize the host. Thus, these data will serve as a source for Bb-infection associated TSPs that might be targeted in tick-antigen based vaccines to prevent LD. Equally important, the non-invasive method to collect nymph tick saliva is likely to provide transformative impact on research to understand transmission of other TBD agents.

### Sample Protocol
Ixodes scapularis nymph tick saliva proteins were identified using LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximately 2 ug of total tick saliva proteins (in triplicate) per feeding time point was digested in-solution overnight at 37°C using trypsin in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a final ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate). Subsequently, the digested proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), and alkylated with 25 mM iodoaceamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Digestion reactions, in a final concentration of 0.15 µg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5% final concentration) and centrifuged for debris removal before peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification analysis were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2, Bruker Scientific LLC, Billerica, MA, http://www.bruker.com) using ProLuCID/Sequest 1,2, DTASelect2 3 4 and Census 5,6. Tandem mass spectra were extracted into MS1 and MS2 files 10 from raw files using RawExtract 1.9.9 (http://fields.scripps.edu/downloads.php) and were searched against a tick and spirochete protein databases from GenBank, rabbit protein database from Uniporot, and IPI human protein database (version 3_57_01, released on 01-01-2009; plus sequences of known contaminants such as keratin and porcine trypsin concatenated to a decoy database in which the sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed 11 using ProLuCID/Sequest. The CD-hit program was used to reduce sequence redundancy in the database by removing proteins with 98% amino acid identity. LTQ data were searched with 3000.0 milli-amu precursor tolerance and the fragment ions were restricted to a 600.0 ppm tolerance. All searches were parallelized and performed on IP2Bruker Scientific LLC clusters. Search space included all fully- and half-tryptic peptide candidates with no missed cleavage restrictions. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) of cysteine was considered a static modification and we require 2 peptides per protein and at least one tryptic terminus for each peptide identification. The ProLuCID search results were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect program (version 2.0) with false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05; under such filtering conditions, the estimated false discovery rate was below ~1% at the protein level in all analysis. . Search parameters were set to accept proteins that had at least two peptide matches in 2 of the 3 runs to be considered a high stringency. A cutoff score was established to accept a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post processed to only accept PSMs with <10ppm precursor mass error. Finally, the protein matches from each sampled time points were concatenated into one file using the Identification Compare (IDcompare) program on IP2-Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Ver.5.0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rabbit host, Borrelia burgdorferi, Tick saliva

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University College of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Medicine Department of Veterinary Pathobiology Mulenga Laboratory College Station, Texas, USA 77843
Texas A&M University

### Submitter
Albert Mulenga

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Mulenga
Texas A&M University College of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Medicine Department of Veterinary Pathobiology Mulenga Laboratory College Station, Texas, USA 77843


