### Accession
PXD012987

### Title
Reproducibility, specificity and accuracy of DIA quantification - Spectral Libraries

### Description
For the complete description see the manuscript. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) is the method of choice for mass spectrometry based proteomics discovery experiments, data-independent acquisition (DIA) is steadily becoming more important. One of the most important requirement to perform a DIA analysis is the availability of spectral libraries for the peptide identification and quantification. Several researches were already conducted regarding the creation of spectral libraries from DDA analyses and obtaining identifications with these in DIA measurements. But so far only few experiments were conducted, to estimate the effect of these libraries on the quantitative level. In this work we created a spike-in gold standard dataset with known contents and ratios of proteins in a complex sample matrix. With this dataset, we first created spectral libraries using different sample preparation approaches with and without sample prefractionation on peptide and protein level. Two different search engines were used for protein identification. In total, five different spike-in states were compared with DIA analyses, comparing eight different spectral libraries generated by varying approaches and one library free method, as well as one default DDA analysis. Not only the number of identifications on peptide and protein level in the spectral libraries and the corresponding analyses was inspected, but also the number of expected and identified significant quantifications and their ratios were thoroughly examined.

### Sample Protocol
For the complete description see the manuscript. Frozen C2C12 cells were warmed up within a water bath (37°C) and taken into culture in a 58 cm² petri dish (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) within 10 ml DMEM (Gibco®, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) standard medium containing 15 % (v/v) FCS (Gibco®), 2 % (v/v) sodium pyruvate (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 1 % (v/v) non-essential amino acids (Biochrom) and 1 % (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Pan Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany). The cells were cultivated in an incubator (37°C, 5 % CO2), the medium was changed every two days and the cells were split at a confluency of approx. 70 %. For this, the cells were washed with 5 ml PBS (Gibco®), then detached with 1.5 ml 0.05 % Trypsin/1 M EDTA (Gibco®) for 3 min inside the incubator and further the activity of trypsin was stopped by the addition of standard medium.  Before lysis, cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000x g for 10 min and then lysed in 30 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.5, 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea using glass beads and sonication (4 x 1 min on ice). After lysate transfer into a fresh tube glass beads were washed with distilled water, the resulting solution was combined with the lysate (resulting in 5.3 M urea and 1.5 M thiourea concentrations) and cleared by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 min.  As spike-in proteins we chose 13 non-mouse proteins with varying physico-chemical properties (see supplementary Table S1 for detailed information and UniProt accessions): human α-synuclein, β-lactoglobulin from bovine milk, fibrinogen α, β and γ from human plasma (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger, human hemoglobin α and β, lipases 1, 2 and 3 from Candida rugosa, lysozyme from chicken egg white and myoglobin from equine skeletal muscle (Sigma-Aldrich, part of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, unless otherwise stated). The fibrinogen α, β and γ were contained in the same solution, as were the hemoglobin α and β and the lipases 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Therefore, the relative amounts of these proteins are equal in all spike-in levels. The spike-ins were combined in a manner to yield in a comparable overall sample amount and physiologically plausible protein concentrations. The gold standard spike-in sample set (GS) consisting of five samples was prepared as follows: a constant amount of C2C12 lysate as background matrix was spiked with varying amounts of the 13 spike-in proteins in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) as specified in Table 1.  For spectral library generation (in-solution digest, protein fractionation and peptide fractionation) C2C12 lysate was mixed with equal amounts of the spike-in proteins (called master mix, MM, in the following) as specified in supplementary Table S2.  All samples (library samples, DDA and DIA analysis samples) were analyzed using the following LC-MS/MS setup: For LC separation the nanoHPLC system Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) was used with a PepMap 100 C18 (100 µm ID x 2 cm, particle size 5 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as precolumn and a PepMap C18 (75 µm x 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as analytical column. Peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient using 0.1% formic acid (FA) as buffer A and 84% ACN in 0.1% FA as buffer B. The gradient was run from 5% to 40% buffer B. Subsequently, peptides were ionized by ESI and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary temperature was set to 250°C and the spray voltage to 1600 V. The lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (445.120 m/z) was used for internal recalibration. For DDA MS runs (library generation and DDA analyses), the mass range of full scan was set to 350 – 1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3x106, 80 ms maximum injection time). HCD fragmentation of the Top10 abundant precursor ions was performed at 27% NCE. The fragment analysis was performed with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 1x106, 120 ms maximum injection time, 2.2 m/z isolation window).  For DIA MS runs, the MS1 full scan was performed at a mass range of 350 – 1400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3 x106, 20 ms maximum injection time). Fragment analysis was subdivided into 22 DIA isolation windows of equal width (49 m/z wide) using a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3 x106, auto maximum injection time). Stepped collision energy was used (25.5%, 27% and 30% NCE). Sample analyses, containing the spike-in proteins, in DDA and DIA mode were performed with 200 ng sample peptide amount (corresponding to approximately 1 to 100 fmol spike-ins), while for library generation up to 800 ng of peptides per sample were injected.

### Data Protocol
DDA data were searched with PD using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science Ltd, UK, (33)) as peptide search engine and Percolator (34) for the refinement of target-decoy estimation. For all searches, DIA and DDA, the following common settings were used: - as fixed modification, only Carbamidomethylation at C was set, while as variable modifications Oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-terminal Q), Deamidated (NQ), Ammonium (DE) and Ammonia-loss (N, N-terminal C) were allowed due to sample preparation - a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed - the precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the fragment tolerance to 20 mmu - the cleavage enzyme Trypsin (cleavage at each K and R, unless followed by P) was used For DDA identifications, a database consisting of the UniProt reference mouse proteome (release 2017_12, 52548 protein entries), the cRAP contaminants (unchanged since January 2015, 115 entries), the iRT protein for DIA retention time calibration and a database of the spike-in proteins was used. Additionally to the 13 spiked-in proteins several proteins that were identified together with them in prior experiments (data not shown) were added to the database, containing altogether 160 protein accessions in the spike-in database (compare 2.2.4). Thus, the complete protein database used in this study contained 52,824 entries. The searches to create the spectral library were refined using Percolator, allowing only high confidence peptides in PD. Spectral libraries were generated using the spectral library generation function of Spectronaut (SN) using mostly the default settings. In brief, PD confidence level ‘high’ was used for identification with SN protein inference enabled. Fragment ions between 300-1800 m/z, with minimum 3 amino acid length and minimum relative intensity of 5 were considered. Precursors with less than 3 fragment ions were removed. For the generation of Pulsar spectral libraries, DDA raw data were directly loaded into Pulsar and spectral library generation was done using the same settings as described for SN 11. An overview on all spectral libraries used in this work regarding library creation can be found in Figure 2 and supplementary Table S3, and regarding library content (their constituting precursors, peptides and protein groups) in supplementary Table S5. In total eight different libraries are described here; whereby the most complex spectral library “IS and F all 78” was created from DDA data of the other 5 non-Pulsar libraries and 6 additional measurements of the “MM IS 6” sample.

### Publication Abstract
Currently data-dependent acquisition (DDA) is the method of choice for mass spectrometry-based proteomics discovery experiments, but data-independent acquisition (DIA) is steadily becoming more important. One of the most important requirements to perform a DIA analysis is the availability of suitable spectral libraries for peptide identification and quantification. Several studies were performed addressing the evaluation of spectral library performance for protein identification in DIA measurements. But so far only few experiments estimate the effect of these libraries on the quantitative level.In this work we created a gold standard spike-in sample set with known contents and ratios of proteins in a complex protein matrix that allowed a detailed comparison of DIA quantification data obtained with different spectral library approaches. We used in-house generated sample-specific spectral libraries created using varying sample preparation approaches and repeated DDA measurement. In addition, two different search engines were tested for protein identification from DDA data and subsequent library generation. In total, eight different spectral libraries were generated, and the quantification results compared with a library free method, as well as a default DDA analysis. Not only the number of identifications on peptide and protein level in the spectral libraries and the corresponding DIA analysis results was inspected, but also the number of expected and identified differentially abundant protein groups and their ratios.We found, that while libraries of prefractionated samples were generally larger, there was no significant increase in DIA identifications compared with repetitive non-fractionated measurements. Furthermore, we show that the accuracy of the quantification is strongly dependent on the applied spectral library and whether the quantification is based on peptide or protein level. Overall, the reproducibility and accuracy of DIA quantification is superior to DDA in all applied approaches.Data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange repository with identifiers PXD012986, PXD012987, PXD012988 and PXD014956.

### Keywords
Peptide identification, Spectral library, Dia, Label-free quantification, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Medical Faculty,
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Julian Uszkoreit

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center


