### Accession
PXD003350

### Title
Malaria Palmitoyl Transferases

### Description
Proteomic Interactome of Plasmodium Falciparum DHHC

### Sample Protocol
P falciparum tagged DHHC5 and DHHC9 were immunoprecipitated. Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE, bands excised, digested with trypsin and analysed by MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using Mascot against a P falciparum PlasmoDB26 database.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitoylation is the post-translational reversible addition of the acyl moiety, palmitate, to cysteine residues of proteins and is involved in regulating protein trafficking, localization, stability and function. The Aspartate-Histidine-Histidine-Cysteine (DHHC) protein family, named for their highly conserved DHHC signature motif, is thought to be responsible for catalysing protein palmitoylation. Palmitoylation is widespread in all eukaryotes, including the malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, where over 400 palmitoylated proteins are present in the asexual intraerythrocytic schizont stage parasites, including proteins involved in key aspects of parasite maturation and development. The P.&#x2009;falciparum genome includes 12 proteins containing the conserved DHHC motif. In this study, we adapted a palmitoyl-transferase activity assay for use with P.&#x2009;falciparum proteins and demonstrated for the first time that P.&#x2009;falciparum DHHC proteins are responsible for the palmitoylation of P.&#x2009;falciparum substrates. This assay also reveals that multiple DHHCs are capable of palmitoylating the same substrate, indicating functional redundancy at least in vitro. To test whether functional redundancy also exists in vivo, we investigated the endogenous localization and essentiality of a subset of schizont-expressed PfDHHC proteins. Individual PfDHHC proteins localized to distinct organelles, including parasite-specific organelles such as the rhoptries and inner membrane complex. Knock-out studies identified individual DHHCs that may be essential for blood-stage growth and others that were functionally redundant in the blood stages but may have functions in other stages of parasite development. Supporting this hypothesis, disruption of PfDHHC9 had no effect on blood-stage growth but reduced the formation of gametocytes, suggesting that this protein could be exploited as a transmission-blocking target. The localization and stage-specific expression of the DHHC proteins may be important for regulating their substrate specificity and thus may provide a path for inhibitor development.

### Keywords
Pfalciparum, Gel, Dhhc

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


