### Accession
PXD040867

### Title
Rat Cortical Primary Neuronal Culture with NRN1 Protein Treatment

### Description
Cortical rat neuronal culture, lysis and proteolytic digestion  Primary rat cortical neurons were generated from E18 Sprague-Dawley rat embryos with minor modifications (Swanger, Mattheyses et al. 2015, Henderson, Greathouse et al. 2019). Neurons were cultured at a density of 4x105 cells per well in 12-well culture plates (Fisher Scientific, catalog no. 353043). Neurons were cultured in Neurobasal medium (Fisher Scientific, catalog no. 21103-049) supplemented with B27 (Fisher Scientific, catalog no.17504-044). Culture maintenance included a half media change every 2-3 days. At DIV 14, neurons were either treated with 150 ng/mL recombinant NRN1 protein (Abcam, ab69755) or vehicle treated with diH2O for 6 hours. NRN1 concentration was chosen based on published data that identified a plateau in exogenous NRN1 induced effects on transient potassium currents at 150 ng/mL (Yao et al., 2012). After 6 hours neurons were washed 2x with 1 mL 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). To harvest cells, 1 mL 1X PBS + protease inhibitor (Fisher Scientific, catalog no. 78426) was added and cells were centrifuged for 2300rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C. Cell pellets were lysed in 200uL 8M urea buffer and HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1x final concentration). Lysates were sonicated with a probe sonicator 3 times for 10 s with 10 s intervals at 30% amplitude and cleared of cellular debris by centrifugation in a tabletop centrifuge at 18,000 rcf for 3 minutes at 4° C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and one-dimensional SDS-PAGE gels were run followed by Coomassie blue staining as quality control for protein integrity and equal loading before proceeding to protein digestion. Protein homogenates (50 µg) were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2 M urea and then treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Pierce) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum.

### Sample Protocol
Rat neuron TMT labeling  Peptides from each individual cell line in the study and a global pooled reference internal standard (GIS) were labeled using the TMTpro 16-plex kit (ThermoFisher Cat#A44520 Lot#VH311511). Labeling was performed essentially as previously described (Johnson et al., 2020; Ping et al., 2018b). Briefly, each sample (containing 100µg of peptides) was re-suspended in 100mM TEAB buffer (100µL). The TMT labeling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, and anhydrous ACN (256µL) was added to each reagent channel. Each channel was gently vortexed for 5 min, and then 41 µL from each TMT channel was transferred to the peptide solutions and allowed to incubate for 1h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 5% (vol/vol) hydroxylamine (8µl) (Pierce). All 16 channels were then combined and dried by SpeedVac (LabConco) to approximately 150µL and diluted with 1 mL of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, then acidified to a final concentration of 1% (vol/vol) FA and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Peptides were desalted with a 200 mg C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters). Each Sep-Pak column was activated with 3mL of methanol, washed with 3mL of 50% (vol/vol) ACN, and equilibrated with 2×3mL of 0.1% TFA. The samples were then loaded, washed with 2×3mL 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA and 2 mL of 1% (vol/vol) FA. Elution was performed with 2 volumes of 1.5 mL 50% (vol/vol) ACN. The eluates were then dried to completeness. High pH fractionation was performed next as described for human samples.  Rat neuron LC-MS/MS  All samples were analyzed with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano in capillary flow mode. The analytical column was a 300um x 150mm ID Waters CSH with 1.7 um beads. Mass spectrometry was performed with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) Pro equipped Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo) in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition with 1.5 second top speed cycles for each FAIMS compensation voltage (CV). Each cycle consisted of one full MS scan followed by as many MS/MS events that could fit within the given 1.5 second cycle time limit. MS scans were collected at a resolution of 120,000 (410-1600 m/z range, 4x105 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion injection time, FAIMS CV of -45 and -65). All higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (0.7 m/z isolation width, 35% collision energy, 1.25×10^5 AGC target, 54 ms maximum ion time, TurboTMT on). Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced peaks for 20 seconds within a 10-ppm isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Rat neuron data search and protein quantification  All raw files (n=96) were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer Suite (version 2.4) Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB rat proteome database (downloaded April 2015 with 29370 total sequences). The Sequest HT search engine was used with the following parameters: fully tryptic specificity; maximum of two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of 6; fixed modifications for TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da); variable modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966); precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. The Percolator node was used to filter peptide spectral matches (PSMs) to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. A Multi-consensus was performed to group proteins identified across the individual batches. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence in adherence with the principles of parsimony. A total of 125869 peptides mapping to 9799 protein groups. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Only unique and razor (i.e., parsimonious) peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms and pathways enabling certain individuals to remain cognitively normal despite high levels of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology remain incompletely understood. These cognitively normal people with AD pathology are described as preclinical or asymptomatic AD (AsymAD) and appear to exhibit cognitive resilience to the clinical manifestations of AD dementia. Here we present a comprehensive network-based approach from cases clinically and pathologically defined as asymptomatic AD to map resilience-associated pathways and extend mechanistic validation. Multiplex tandem mass tag MS (TMT-MS) proteomic data (n&#xa0;= 7787 proteins) was generated on brain tissue from Brodmann area 6 and Brodmann area 37 (n&#xa0;= 109 cases, n&#xa0;= 218 total samples) and evaluated by consensus weighted gene correlation network analysis. Notably, neuritin (NRN1), a neurotrophic factor previously linked to cognitive resilience, was identified as a hub protein in a module associated with synaptic biology. To validate the function of NRN1 with regard to the neurobiology of AD, we conducted microscopy and physiology experiments in a cellular model of AD. NRN1 provided dendritic spine resilience against amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) and blocked A&#x3b2;-induced neuronal hyperexcitability in cultured neurons. To better understand the molecular mechanisms of resilience to A&#x3b2; provided by NRN1, we assessed how exogenous NRN1 alters the proteome by TMT-MS (n&#xa0;= 8238 proteins) of cultured neurons and integrated the results with the AD brain network. This revealed overlapping synapse-related biology that linked NRN1-induced changes in cultured neurons with human pathways associated with cognitive resilience. Collectively, this highlights the utility of integrating the proteome from the human brain and model systems to advance our understanding of resilience-promoting mechanisms and prioritize therapeutic targets that mediate resilience to AD.

### Keywords
Nrn1, Neuroproteomics, Rat primary cortical neurons

### Affiliations
Emory University
Professor, Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Nicholas T. Seyfried, DPhil
Professor, Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


