### Accession
PXD003718

### Title
Co-immunoprecipitation of HA-tagged proteins in Giardia lamblia

### Description
Giardia lamblia's diverged endocytic system was investigated using co-immunoprecipitation of known and conserved endocytic factors which led to the discovery of novel associated components. This was assembled into an interactome of the endocytic pathway in this intestinal parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were crosslinked, lysed and epitope-tagged bait proteins were immunoprecipitated, along with any complexed associated proteins using a highly specific anti-HA antibody. Complexes were then eluted, analysed on reducing and denaturing SDS-PAGE gels. Protein bands were extracted from gel pieces, trypsinized and then measured on a Q-exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC.

### Data Protocol
Following peptide data acquisition, database searches were performed using the MASCOT search program against the G. lamblia database (http://tinyurl.com/37z5zqp) with a concatenated decoy database supplemented with commonly observed contaminants and the Swissprot database to increase database size. The identified hits were then loaded onto the Scaffold Viewer version 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, US) and filtered based on high stringency parameters (minimal mascot score of 95% for peptide probability, a protein probability of 95%, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein (95_2_95) or on slightly relaxed stringency parameters (95_2_50).

### Publication Abstract
Giardia lamblia is a parasitic protozoan that infects a wide range of vertebrate hosts including humans. Trophozoites are non-invasive but associate tightly with the enterocyte surface of the small intestine. This narrow ecological specialization entailed extensive morphological and functional adaptations during host-parasite co-evolution, including a distinctly polarized array of endocytic organelles termed peripheral vacuoles (PVs), which are confined to the dorsal cortical region exposed to the gut lumen and are in close proximity to the plasma membrane (PM). Here, we investigated the molecular consequences of these adaptations on the Giardia endocytic machinery and membrane coat complexes. Despite the absence of canonical clathrin coated vesicles in electron microscopy, Giardia possesses conserved PV-associated clathrin heavy chain (GlCHC), dynamin-related protein (GlDRP), and assembly polypeptide complex 2 (AP2) subunits, suggesting a novel function for GlCHC and its adaptors. We found that, in contrast to GFP-tagged AP2 subunits and DRP, CHC::GFP reporters have no detectable turnover in living cells, indicating fundamental differences in recruitment to the membrane and disassembly compared to previously characterized clathrin coats. Histochemical localization in electron tomography showed that these long-lived GlCHC assemblies localized at distinctive approximations between the plasma and PV membrane. A detailed protein interactome of GlCHC revealed all of the conserved factors in addition to novel or highly diverged proteins, including a putative clathrin light chain and lipid-binding proteins. Taken together, our data provide strong evidence for giardial CHC as a component of highly stable assemblies at PV-PM junctions that likely have a central role in organizing continuities between the PM and PV membranes for controlled sampling of the fluid environment. This suggests a novel function for CHC in Giardia and the extent of molecular remodeling of endocytosis in this species.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation; clathrin; endocytosis; giardia lamblia

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Carmen Faso

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zürich, Switzerland


