### Accession
PXD022072

### Title
Proteomics uncover EPHA2 in cetuximab resistant colorectal cancer cell lines as a potential novel therapeutic target

### Description
In metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), primary and acquired resistance against anti-EGFR targeted monoclonal antibodies, such as cetuximab (CET), were shown to be frequently caused by activating alterations in RAS genes (KRAS or NRAS). To this day no efficient second-line treatment options have emerged to treat mCRC upon emergence of acquired KRAS alterations. In order to uncover potential targets for second-line targeted therapies, we used mass spectrometric proteomics to shed light on kinome reprogramming in an established model of acquired, KRAS associated CET resistance. This CET resistance was reflected by significant changes in the kinome, most of them individual to each cell line. Interestingly a common theme in all investigated resistant cell lines was the upregulation of the Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2), a well-known driver of cell migration. Expectedly resistant cell lines displayed increased migration (p<0.01) that was significantly reduced by targeting the EPHA2 signalling axis using RNA interference (p<0.001), ephrin-A1 stimulation (p<0.001), dasatinib (p<0.01) or anti-EPHA2 antibody treatment (p<0.001), identifying it as an actionable target in CET resistant mCRC. These results highlight EPHA2 and its role in KRAS mutated acquired CET resistance in mCRC and identify it as a potential target for the development of future precision medicine therapies.

### Sample Protocol
To uncover kinase reprogramming in resistant cells parental and resistant cells were seeded at 10^6 cells in 75cm^2 flasks and grown in the presence/ absence of 5μg/mL cetuximab for 48h before being subjected to cell lysis.  Cell lysates were subjected to proteolysis using trypsin, labeled using tandem-mass tags (TMT) and separated into 32 fractions using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. 1µg of each fraction were injected into an Ultimate 3000 SD HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF. Peptides were delivered to a trap column and separated on the analytical column using a 90 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) with embedded Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the UniProt databases. An FDR cut-off of 0,01 was used for identification of peptides and proteins. To facilitate further data analysis, the results were imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus (v.1.5.4.1). Quantification was performed TMT based.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cetuximab resistance, Epha2

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Germany

### Submitter
Anna Jarzab

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Germany


