### Accession
PXD021748

### Title
A Unique Signaling Feedback Circuit Defines Interferon Responses in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms

### Description
Type I interferons (IFNs) are key initiators and effectors of the immune response against malignant cells and can also directly inhibit tumor growth.  IFN is highly effective in the treatment of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), but the mechanisms of action are unclear and it remains unknown why some patients respond to IFN therapy and others do not.  We have identified and characterized a novel pathway involving PKC upstream of the kinase ULK1.  Engagement of the Type I IFN receptor triggers PKC-dependent phosphorylation of ULK1 on serines 341 and 495, required for subsequent engagement of p38 MAPK that regulates transcription of IFN-stimulated genes and subsequent growth inhibitory responses. We show that this pathway is essential for IFN-suppressive effects on primary malignant erythroid precursors from patients with MPNs in vitro, while increased levels of ULK1 and p38 MAPK correlate with clinical response to IFN therapy in MPN patients. IFN treatment also induces cleavage/activation of the ULK1-interacting ROCK1/2 proteins in vivo, triggering a negative feedback loop that suppresses IFN responses. Both ROCK homologs are overexpressed in MPN patients and their genetic or pharmacological inhibition enhances IFN-anti-neoplastic responses in malignant erythroid progenitors from MPN patients. Together, our results identify activation of the PKC-ULK1-p38 MAPK cascade as a key and essential component for the IFN-response, regulated by a feedback loop involving ROCK1/2. These findings suggest the clinical potential of pharmacological inhibition of ROCK1/2 in combination with IFN-therapy for the treatment of MPN patients.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins that interact with endogenous ULK1, HEL cells were either left untreated or treated with human IFN-alpha (10 x 103 IU/ml) for 10 minutes, then lysed in NP-40 buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 180 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EGTA, and 0.1% NP-40] supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Three milligrams of protein (total cell lysates) from untreated and IFN-alpha-treated samples was used for immunoprecipitation of endogenous protein-ULK1 complexes using ULK1 (D8H5) rabbit monoclonal antibody. As control, the same procedure was followed for IFN-alpha-treated lysates, but using rabbit (DA1E) monoclonal antibody immunoglobulin G (IgG) XP isotype control instead of the ULK1 antibody. After incubation overnight with rotation at 4°C, samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C with rotation with protein G Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (50ul/sample; #17-0618-01; GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and then washed three times with NP-40 buffer and twice with wash buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 180 mM KCl, and 0.2 mM EGTA]. Protein-ULK1 complexes were eluted from the beads by incubation with Lane Marker Reducing Sample Buffer (Pierce) at 95°C for 10 min, and proteomic analyses were performed in the Northwestern Proteomics Core Facility (Northwestern University, Chicago). IP-eluted proteins were initially separated using SDS-PAGE and cut into 10 equivalent height bands before standard in-gel digestion. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and desalted using solid-phase extraction on a Pierce C18 Spin column, before elution in 40 μl of 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in water and injected onto a trap column (150 μm; inner diameter [ID] by 3 cm) coupled with a nanobore analytical column (75 μm; ID by 15 cm; both ReproSil-Pur C18-aQ, 3 μm0. Samples were separated using a linear gradient of solvent A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (5% water, 95% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) over 60 minutes. nLC-MS/MS data were obtained on a Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the human SwissProt database, and results were reported at 1% false discovery rate in Scaffold (Proteome Software). Proteins identified by nLC-MS/MS analysis in the control group (rabbit IgG) were excluded from our data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoplasm, Ulk1, Interferon, Rock2, Rock1

### Affiliations
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Paul Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Leonidas C. Platanias
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA


