### Accession
PXD009745

### Title
The activity-dependent bulk endocytosis proteome reveals a key presynaptic role for Rab11

### Description
Activity-dependent bulk endocytosis (ADBE) is the dominant mode of synaptic vesicle (SV) endocytosis during high frequency stimulation, suggesting it should play key roles in neurotransmission during periods of intense neuronal activity. However efforts in elucidating the physiological role of ADBE have been hampered by the lack of identified molecules which are unique to this endocytosis mode. To address this, we performed proteomic analysis on purified bulk endosomes, which are a key intermediate in ADBE. Bulk endosomes were enriched via two independent approaches, a classical subcellular fractionation method and isolation via magnetic nanoparticles. There was a 79 % overlap in proteins identified via the two protocols and these molecules formed the ADBE proteome. Bioinformatic analysis revealed a strong enrichment in cell adhesion, cytoskeletal and signalling molecules, in addition to expected SV and trafficking proteins. Network analysis identified rab GTPases as a central hub within the ADBE proteome. Subsequent investigation of a subset of these rabs revealed that constitutively active rab11 both facilitated ADBE and accelerated clathrin-mediated endocytosis. This first result suggests that the ADBE proteome will provide a rich resource for the future study of presynaptic function.

### Sample Protocol
WT and KCl-stimulated endosomes from subcellular fractionation or magnetic nanoparticles enrichment were lysed in 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH = 8 and a cocktail of protease inhibitors. Protein amount was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce) and an equivalent of 30 ug of protein per replicate was reduced (10 mM TCEP, 30 min, @RT) and alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min, @RT in dark) prior to trypsin digestion (Pierce). Peptides were desalted via C18 MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Peptides samples were re-suspended in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and dimethyl labelled (Boersema et al, 2009) as follows: WT endosomes were labelled with the light isotope-coded chemicals (12CH2O and NaBH3CN) while the intermediate isotope-coded dimethyl chemicals (12CD2O and NaBH3CN) was used for the labelling of KCl-stimulated endosomes. The chemical reaction was quenched by the addition of 1% ammonium hydroxide and further neutralized by the addition of 50% TFA. Labelled peptides were desalted via C18 MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum centrifugation and analysed individually by LC-MS/MS to ensure > 95% labelling efficiency. The WT and KCl-stimulated endosomes from subcellular fractionation or magnetic nanoparticles enrichment were combined in 1:1 ratio as follows, KCl-stimulated endosomes (intermediate) vs. WT endosomes (light). Dimethyl samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC Systems chromatography (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) with a C18 PepMap, serving as a trapping column (2 cm x 100 µm ID, PepMap C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) followed by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size)(Thermo-Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient consisting of 2.4-28% (ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) over 240 min at 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometric identification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) operated in data dependent, positive ion mode. FullScan spectra were acquired in a range from 400 m/z to 1500 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000, with an automated gain control (AGC) of 300,000 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD fragmentation was performed at 33% collision energy for all included precursor ions and MS/MS fragments were detected in the linear ion trap mass analyser in a rapid mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.1.7 (Cox & Mann, 2008) with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus), deamidation (NQ), hydroxyproline (P), quantitation labels Dimethyl and Dimethyl:2H4 on N-terminal and/or lysine, and trypsin as enzyme with 2 missed cleavages. Search was conducted using the Uniprot-Trembl rat database (31,305 entries, downloaded September 29th, 2015), including common contaminants. Mass accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Quantification of identified proteins referred to razor and unique peptides and required a minimum ratio count of 2. Dimethyl-based relative ratios were extracted for each protein/conditions and were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Quantitative proteomics, Nycozend and magnetic nanoparticles, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Institute for Cell and molecular Biosciences (ICAMB) Faculty of medical Sciences, Newcastle University Framlington place Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Institute for Cell and molecular Biosciences (ICAMB) Faculty of medical Sciences, Newcastle University Framlington place Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK


