### Accession
PXD011655

### Title
Single-cell census of the colonic epithelium reveals goblet cell drivers of barrier breakdown in inflammatory bowel disease

### Description
Colonic epithelial cells facilitate host-microbe interactions to control mucosal immunity, and they also coordinate recycling and forming the mucus barrier. Epithelial barrier breakdown underpins inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, we do not know the specific contributions of each epithelial cell subtype to this process. Here, we profiled single colonic epithelial cells in health and IBD. Our results identified previously unknown subtypes and crypt gradients of progenitors, colonocytes and goblet cells. We also revealed a novel specialized metal ion storage and chloride secretory cell. In IBD, we discovered a unique cluster of disease associated goblet cells that remodels the barrier. We found downregulated WFDC2, a novel goblet cell expressing anti-protease that inhibited bacterial growth. Our in vivo studies demonstrated WFDC2 preserved tight junction integrity and prevented commensal invasion and mucosal inflammation. We delineate markers and transcriptional states, identify a new colonic epithelial cell and uncover fundamental principles of epithelial plasticity and barrier breakdown in IBD. Thus, our study reveals new therapeutic targets and disease-related mechanisms in IBD

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected by FACS into RIPA buffer spiked to 4 % NP-40 and frozen. Samples were thawed, 1 µL of Benzonase (E1014, Sigma) was added and samples were kept on ice for 30 minutes. Protein lysates were digested using a modified SP3 protocol1. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. 2 µL of carboxyl-modified paramagnetic beads (prepared as in 2) were mixed with the samples. Acetonitrile was added to the samples to a final concentration of 70 % (v/v). Protein binding to the beads was carried out for 18 minutes with orbital shaking at 1,000 rpm. Beads were then immobilised on a magnet for 2 minutes and the supernatant discarded. Beads were washed twice with 70 % (v/v) ethanol and once with 100 % acetonitrile, all on the magnet. Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 ng trypsin and digested overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the beads were resuspended by brief bath sonication. Acetonitrile was added to 95 % (v/v) and samples were shaken at 1,000 rpm for 18 minutes to bind peptides, then beads were immobilised on the magnet for 2 minutes and the supernatant discarded. Beads were resuspended in 2 % dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and then immobilised on the magnet for 5 minutes and the supernatant transferred to LC-MS vials and were stored at -20 °C until analysis.  Peptides were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 75 µm x 500 mm C18 EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) with 2 µm particles was used at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 60-minute linear gradient from 2 % buffer B to 35 % buffer B (A: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in water; B: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). MS1 precursor scans were performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000 at 200 m/z and a rate of 1 Hz. Precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis using an isolation window with of 1.6 m/z and were fragmented using HCD at a normalised collision energy of 28. MS2 fragment spectra were acquired in the iontrap using the Rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation of proteins was performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Version 4.1, Waters) and proteins were identified using MASCOT (Matrix Science) by searching against the Uniprot reference human proteome (retrieved 20180718, 95128 sequences). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification and the variable modifications allowed were deamidation of N/Q and oxidation of M. Peptide FDR was adjusted to 1% and low scoring peptides (<20) excluded.

### Publication Abstract
The colonic epithelium facilitates host-microorganism interactions to control mucosal immunity, coordinate nutrient recycling and form a mucus barrier. Breakdown of the epithelial barrier underpins inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, the specific contributions of each epithelial-cell subtype to this process are unknown. Here we profile single colonic epithelial cells from patients with IBD and unaffected controls. We identify previously unknown cellular subtypes, including gradients of progenitor cells, colonocytes and goblet cells within intestinal crypts. At the top of the crypts, we find a previously unknown absorptive cell, expressing the proton channel OTOP2 and the satiety peptide uroguanylin, that senses pH and is dysregulated in inflammation and cancer. In IBD, we observe a positional remodelling of goblet cells that coincides with downregulation of WFDC2-an antiprotease molecule&#xa0;that we find to be expressed by goblet cells&#xa0;and that inhibits bacterial growth. In vivo, WFDC2 preserves the integrity of tight junctions between epithelial cells and prevents invasion by commensal bacteria and mucosal inflammation. We delineate markers and transcriptional states, identify a colonic epithelial cell and uncover fundamental determinants of barrier breakdown in IBD.

### Keywords
Human, Inflammatory bowel disease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK


