### Accession
PXD024392

### Title
Tuning DO:DM ratios modulates HLA class II immunopeptidomes

### Description
Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II antigen presentation underlies a wide range of immune responses in health and disease.  Although peptide ligand binding affinity has been the major focus for explaining and predicting class II antigens, we know that the levels and activities of accessory molecules, HLA-DM (DM) and HLA-DO (DO) can have strong effects on peptide repertoires. However, the extent to which these antagonistic proteins’ levels relative to one another shape the identities and properties of peptides selected for presentation remains unclear.  Hence, after creating cell line panel with varying DO:DM ratios, of we set out to measure the effects these ratios can have on peptide presentation. Using a combined immunopeptidomic and proteomic discovery strategy, we profiled ligandome differences across this panel. By surveying over 10,000 unique HLA-DR4-presented peptides, we found marked increases in repertoire diversity and altered physical properties of presented peptides that corresponded with increasing DO:DM ratios.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-class II peptidomes were extracted from our T2 DR4 cell line panel (with and without DM, varying DO:DM ratios and in addition a knockout of DO for the high DO:DM line). In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). The precleared lysate was then incubated with the HLA-DR specific antibody L243 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted. The isolated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).   For standard proteome analysis the cells were lysed in 8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris pH 8 supplemented with protease inhibitors. The lysate was then centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 15 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh test tube for a second round of centrifugation. Samples were reduced in the lysis buffer and then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark and then quenched with DTT. Proteins were further isolated by methanol-chloroform precipitation, and the protein pellet was washed with acetone before being re-suspended in 8M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8. Total protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) before being diluted to 1 M urea using 50 mM Tris pH 8 prior to digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 1:25 enzyme: substrate (16 hours at 37 °C). The reaction was quenched with formic acid and the peptides desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge. The TMT labeling reagents were obtained from Thermo Fischer Scientific and each TMT reagent was reconstituted in 40 μl of acetonitrile and incubated with corresponding peptide sample for 1 hr. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v) hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were acidified with 25% formic acid to pH 2, desalted and resuspended in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. Peptides were then fractionated by high-pH reverse phase fractionation and then desalted, dried down and stored at -80°C until final LC-MS/MS measurement. The peptides were analyzed on a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For immunopeptidome data all tandem mass spectra were queried against a “target-decoy” protein sequence database consisting of human proteins (downloaded from the Uniprot resource, June-2016), common contaminants, and reversed decoys of the above using both SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and PEAKS DB search engines (PEAKS Studio 8) (Zhang et al., 2012). Spectra were also interpreted by de novo sequencing (PEAKS Studio 8) to improve high-confidence peptide identification. For all searches with SEQUEST the msConvert program (v3.0.45) was used to generate peak lists from the original data, and spectra were then assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST (v28.12) algorithm. For all searches with PEAKS the RAW data files were imported into PEAKS and subjected to default data refinement (deisotoping, charge deconvolution, peak centroiding). For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For SEQUEST and PEAKS DB, enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N,Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).   For the proteome profiling experiment the raw data analysis was performed using ProteomeDiscover v2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using SEQUEST-HT and the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.6 Da. Strict trypsin specificity was required allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT-labeled (+229.163) N-terminus and lysine was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation on serine, tyrosine and threonine, were set as a variable modification. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was required at both the peptide level and protein level for the proteome data with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) antigen presentation underlies a wide range of immune responses in health and disease. However, how MHC-II antigen presentation is regulated by the peptide-loading catalyst HLA-DM (DM), its associated modulator, HLA-DO (DO), is incompletely understood. This is due largely to technical limitations: model antigen-presenting cell (APC) systems that express these MHC-II peptidome regulators at physiologically variable levels have not been described. Likewise, computational prediction tools that account for DO and DM activities are not presently available. To address these gaps, we created a panel of single MHC-II allele, HLA-DR4-expressing APC lines that cover a wide range of DO:DM ratio states. Using a combined immunopeptidomic and proteomic discovery strategy, we measured the effects DO:DM ratios have on peptide presentation by surveying over 10,000 unique DR4-presented peptides. The resulting data provide insight into peptide characteristics that influence their presentation with increasing DO:DM ratios. These include DM sensitivity, peptide abundance, binding affinity and motif, peptide length, and choice of binding register along the source protein. These findings have implications for designing improved HLA-II prediction algorithms and research strategies for dissecting the variety of functions that different APCs serve in the body.

### Keywords
Antigen presentation, Mhc, Dm, Hla-ii, Do, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Stanford, CA  94025, USA

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E. Elias
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Stanford, CA  94025, USA


