### Accession
PXD031875

### Title
Biomarkers for canine Leptospira vaccine potency

### Description
Mandatory potency testing of Leptospira vaccine batches relies partially on in vivo procedures, requiring large numbers of laboratory animals. Cell-based assays could replace in vivo tests if biomarkers indicative of Leptospira vaccine potency are identified. We investigated innate immune responsiveness induced by inactivated L. interrogans serogroups Canicola and Icterohaemorrhagiae, and two bivalent, non-adjuvanted canine Leptospira vaccines containing the same serogroups. First, the transcriptome and proteome analysis of canine 030-D cells stimulated with Leptospira strains, and the corresponding vaccine revealed more than 900 DEGs and 23 DEPs in common to these three stimuli. Second, comparison of responses induced by this Leptospira vaccine and a vaccine from another manufacturer revealed a large overlap in DEGs and DEPs as well, suggesting potential to identify biomarkers of Leptospira vaccine activity. Because not many common DEPs were identified, we selected seven molecules from the identified DEGs, associated with pathways related to innate immunity, of which CXCL-10, IL-1β, SAA, and complement C3 showed increased secretion upon stimulation with both Leptospira vaccines. These molecules could be interesting targets for development of biomarker-based assays in the future. Additionally, this study contributes to the understanding of the mechanisms by which Leptospira vaccines induce innate immune responses in the dog.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested from 3 replicates for each condition, centrifuged 5 min at 300g and resuspended in 100 µl 50 mM phosphate buffer (Sigma Aldrich). Proteins were denatured by adding RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation, USA) to a final concentration of 0.1 % (w/v) and incubation at 80°C in a water bath for 30 minutes after which the samples were stored at -80°C until protein digestion. The protein content was determined by assessing UV absorbance at 280 nm on a Nanodrop™ spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Protein digestions were performed on samples containing 200 µg/ml protein in 100 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.4 (Sigma Aldrich) with the addition of 2 µl of 0.1 mg/ml Lys-C (Roche) and incubation for 4 h at 37°C, followed with an addition of 2 µl of 0.4 mg/ml trypsin (Promega) and overnight incubation at 37°C. Dimethyl labelling was used for the quantitative analysis of protein expressions by mass spectrometry as previously described14 with minor modifications. Native formaldehyde (CH2O with M=30.03 g/mol; Sigma Aldrich) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3; Sigma Aldrich) were used at final concentrations of 45 mM for “light” labeling of digested samples. The deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O with M=32.04 g/mol; Sigma Aldrich) and NaCNBH3 were used at final concentrations of 45 mM for “heavy” labelling of the internal standard (“Common reference”). The labelling of samples and Common reference was performed at 37°C for 2 h. Each “light”-labeled sample was mixed with an aliquot of the “heavy”-labeled Common reference, based on equal protein amounts for the “light” and “heavy”-labeled samples. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed exactly as previously described.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were processed with PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) against the Canis lupus familiaris database (Taxonomy ID = 9615, www.uniprot.org) containing 45,351 entries for protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (semispecific) with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. The parent mass error tolerance and fragment mass error tolerance for ions were set to 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Static modifications were carbamidomethylation on Cys (+ 57.02 Da), dimethylation on Lys and the peptide N-termini (+ 28.0313 Da and + 32.0564 Da for "light" and "heavy", respectively), while variable modifications were deamidation on Asn and Gln (+ 0.98402 Da) and oxidation on Met (+ 15.99492Da). False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Chromatographic peak area intensities of the precursor ions of the identified peptides were used for relative protein quantification.  Protein MS data processing and statistical analysis were done using R statistical software on identified 2,623 proteins (here defined as different UniProt accession numbers). The relative quantification of the samples was based on the comparison of all samples against a Common Reference acting as an internal standard between samples, in accordance with previous publications. The resulting sample / Common Reference ratios were Log2-transformed. Next, the values were normalized for variations between measurements by performing a median correction, in which all relative protein expression values were divided by median protein expression value of each run. Proteins were included as quantitative differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) if (i) they were detected in at least two out of three replicates for both stimulated and unstimulated samples, (ii) showed an average upregulation or downregulation of at least 2-fold upon stimulation, and (iii) change was statistically significant (p < 0.01) according to a Student’s T-test. Additionally, proteins were considered as qualitative DEPs if they were detected in all samples of the stimulated group and in no samples of the unstimulated group, or the reverse situation. Quantitative and qualitative DEPs were compared between exposures using Venn diagrams. The subcellular localization of DEPs was determined based on GO terms for cellular component using QuickGO (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/) and UniProtKB databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Monocyte, Innate immunity, Vaccine, Dog, Leptospira

### Affiliations
Intravacc, Bilthoven, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Andreja Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Arjen Sloots
Intravacc, Bilthoven, the Netherlands


