### Accession
PXD014807

### Title
Domain model explains propagation dynamics and stability of K27 and K36 methylation landscape

### Description
Chromatin states must be stably maintained during cell proliferation to uphold cellular identity and genome integrity. Inheritance of histone modifications across cell division is thought to be central in this process. However, the histone modification landscape is challenged by the incorporation of new unmodified histones during each cell cycle and the principles that govern heritability remain poorly defined. Here, we take a quantitative approach and develop a reusable computational model that describes propagation of K27 and K36 methylation states. We measure combinatorial K27 and K36 methylation patterns by quantitative mass spectrometry on subsequent generations of histones in the presence and absence of enzymatic inhibition. Our modelling rejects active global demethylation and invoke the existence of 8 domains defined by distinct methylation endpoints. We find that K27me3 on pre- existing histones stimulates the rate of de novo K27me3 establishment, supporting a read-write mechanism in timely chromatin restoration. Finally, we provide a detailed, quantitative picture of the mutual antagonism between K27 and K37 methylation, and propose that this antagonism enhance the stability of epigenetic states across cell division.

### Sample Protocol
E14 mESCs were cultured at 37 degree and 5% Co2 on gelatin-coated plates in 2i/LIF medium.S2 cells were grown in suspension in spinners in M3+BPYE media. E14 mESCs were treated with 10µM of EPZ6438 EZH2 inhibitor (MedChem Express) for indicated time. For washout, cells were washed three times in PBS, trypsinized, washed in growth medium, and plated into R6K4 fresh medium.   Acid extracted histones were resuspended in Lämmli buffer and separated by a 14-20% gradient SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie (Brilliant blue G-250). Protein bands in the molecular weight range of histones (15-23 kDa) were excised as single band/fraction. Gel slices were destained in 50% acetonitrile/50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysine residues were chemically modified by propionylation for 30min at RT with 2.5% propionic anhydride (Sigma) in ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5 to prevent tryptic cleavage. This step added a propionyl group only to unmodified and monomethylated lysines, whereas lysines with other side chain modification will not obtain an additional propionyl-group. Subsequently, proteins were digested with 200ng of trypsin (Promega) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight and the supernatant was desalted by C18-Stagetips (reversed-phase resin) and carbon Top-Tips (Glygen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following carbon stage tip, the dried peptides were resuspended in 17µl of 0.1% TFA.   5µl of each sample were separated on a C18 home-made column (C18RP Reposil-Pur AQ, 120 x 0.075mm x 2.4m, 100Å, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a gradient from 5% B to 30% B (solvent A 0.1% FA in water, solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) over 32min at a flow rate of 300nl/min (Ultimate 3000 RSLC Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA) and directly sprayed into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the PRM mode to identify and quantify specific fragment ions of N-terminal peptides of human histone 3.1 and histone 4 proteins. In this mode, the mass spectrometer automatically switched between one survey scan and 9 MS/MS acquisitions of the m/z values described in the inclusion list containing the precursor ions, modifications and fragmentation conditions. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 250–800) were acquired with resolution 30,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). PRM spectra were acquired with resolution 15,000 to a target value of 2x105, maximum IT 60ms, isolation 2 window 0.7m/z and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 degree.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Skyline (version 3.6) (MacLean et al., 2010) by using doubly and triply charged peptide masses for extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Peaks were selected manually and the integrated peak values (Total Area MS1) were exported as .csv file for further calculations. The percentage of each modification within the same peptide is derived from the ratio of this structural modified peptide to the sum of all isotopically similar peptides. Therefore, the Total Area MS1 value was used to calculate the relative abundance of an observed modified peptide as percentage of the overall peptide. The unmodified peptide of histone 3.1 (aa 41–49) was used as indicator for total histone 3.1. Coeluting isobaric modifications were quantified using three unique MS2 fragment ions. Averaged integrals of these ions were used to calculate their respective contribution to the isobaric MS1 peak (e.g., H3K36me3 and H3K27me2K36me1).

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin states must be maintained during cell proliferation to uphold cellular identity and genome integrity. Inheritance of histone modifications is central in this process. However, the histone modification landscape is challenged by incorporation of new unmodified histones during each cell cycle, and the principles governing heritability remain unclear. We take a quantitative computational modeling approach to describe propagation of histone H3K27 and H3K36 methylation states. We measure combinatorial H3K27 and H3K36 methylation patterns by quantitative mass spectrometry on subsequent generations of histones. Using model comparison, we reject active global demethylation and invoke the existence of domains defined by distinct methylation endpoints. We find that H3K27me3 on pre-existing histones stimulates the rate of de novo H3K27me3 establishment, supporting a read-write mechanism in timely chromatin restoration. Finally, we provide a detailed quantitative picture of the mutual antagonism between H3K27 and H3K36 methylation and propose that it stabilizes epigenetic states across cell division.

### Keywords
Data modeling, Chromatin domains, Histone modifications, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Biomedical Center, Chromatin Proteomics Group, Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Großhaderner Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

### Submitter
Moritz Voelker-Albert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Biomedical Center, Chromatin Proteomics Group, Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Großhaderner Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.


