### Accession
PXD017277

### Title
Succession of Bifidobacterium longum strains in response to a changing early life nutritional environment reveals dietary substrate adaptations

### Description
Diet-microbe interactions play a crucial role in infant development and modulation of the early-life microbiota. The genus Bifidobacterium dominates the breast-fed infant gut, with strains of B. longum subsp. longum (B. longum) and B. longum subsp. infantis (B. infantis) particularly prevalent within the early-life microbiota. Although, transition from milk to a more diversified diet later in infancy initiates a shift to a more complex microbiome, with concurrent reductions in Bifidobacterium abundance, specific strains of B. longum may persist in individual hosts for prolonged periods of time. Here, we sought to investigate the adaptation of B. longum to the changing infant diet during the early-life developmental window. Genomic characterisation of 75 strains isolated from nine either exclusively breast- or formula-fed infants in the first 18 months of their lives revealed subspecies- and strain-specific intra-individual genomic diversity with respect to glycosyl hydrolase families and enzymes, which corresponded to different dietary stages. Complementary phenotypic growth studies indicated strain-specific differences in human milk oligosaccharide and plant carbohydrate utilisation profiles between and within individual infants, while proteomic profiling identified proteins involved in metabolism of selected carbohydrates. Our results indicate a strong link between infant diet and B. longum subspecies/strain genomic and carbohydrate utilisation diversity, which aligns with a changing nutritional environment i.e. moving from breast milk to a solid food diet. These data provide additional insights into possible mechanisms responsible for the competitive advantage of this bifidobacterial species and their long-term persistence in a single host and may contribute to rational development of new dietary therapies for this important development window.

### Sample Protocol
B. longum subsp. longum 25 (B_25) was grown in triplicate in mMRS supplemented with cysteine HCl at 0.05% and 2% (w/v) glucose, cellobiose or LNnT as a sole carbon source. B. longum subsp. longum 71 (B_71) was grown in triplicate in mMRS supplemented with cysteine HCl at 0.05% and either 2% (w/v) glucose or 2’FL as a sole carbon source. Cell pellets from 50 mL samples (at the mid-exponential growth phase) were collected by centrifugation (4500 × g, 10 min, 4 °C) and washed three times with PBS pH 7.4. Cells were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.4 and disrupted by bead-beating in three 60 s cycles using a FastPrep24 (MP Biomedicals, CA). Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Germany). Protein samples, containing 50 μg total protein, were separated by SDS-PAGE with a 10% Mini-PROTEAN gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA) and then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250. The gel was cut into five slices, after which proteins were reduced, alkylated, and in-gel digested according to a method published previously. Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Germany). Each sample was independently analyzedanalysed on a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (v.2.2 SP1).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and searched against a sample-specific database generated from the B. longum subsp. longum 25 and 71 genomes. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm. The enzyme specificity was set to consider tryptic peptides and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and formation of pyro-glutamic acid at N-terminal glutamines were used as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy strategy. A protein was considered confidently identified if it was detected in at least two of the three biological replicates in at least one glycan substrate. The MaxQuant output was further explored in Perseus v.1.6.1.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bifidobacterium, Lactoneotetraose, Cellobiose, 2'fucosyllactose

### Affiliations
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Aas, Norway

### Submitter
Sabina Leanti La Rosa

### Lab Head
Dr Phil B. Pope
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Aas, Norway


