### Accession
PXD033518

### Title
In vivo stress reporters as early biomarkers of the cellular changes associated with progeria

### Description
Study of progeria reporter mouse model using histology, proteomics and western-blotting.

### Sample Protocol
Details are given in the accompanying manuscript. Proteins from tissue homogenates were digested, TMT labelled and analysed via LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Details are given in the accompanying manuscript.In brief, MS raw data was searched using MaxQuant. Search data was analysed using in-house developed R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related diseases account for a high proportion of the total global burden of disease. Despite recent advances in understanding their molecular basis, there is a lack of suitable early biomarkers to test selected compounds and accelerate their translation to clinical trials. We have investigated the utility of in vivo stress reporter systems as surrogate early biomarkers of the degenerative disease progression. We hypothesized that cellular stress observed in models of human degenerative disease preceded overt cellular damage and at the same time will identify potential cytoprotective pathways. To test this hypothesis, we generated novel accelerated ageing (progeria) reporter mice by crossing the LmnaG609G mice into our oxidative stress/inflammation (Hmox1) and DNA damage (p21) stress reporter models. Histological analysis of reporter expression demonstrated a time-dependent and tissue-specific activation of the reporters in tissues directly associated with Progeria, including smooth muscle cells, the vasculature and gastrointestinal tract. Importantly, reporter expression was detected prior to any perceptible deleterious phenotype. Reporter expression can therefore be used as an early marker of progeria pathogenesis and to test therapeutic interventions. This work also demonstrates the potential to use stress reporter approaches to study and find new treatments for other degenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Progeria, Stress pathways, Early biomarker, Accelerated ageing, Preclinical model

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK

### Submitter
Florian Weiland

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Inesta-Vaquera
Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


