### Accession
PXD003345

### Title
Discordant Fasting Signaling Response in Hearts of Mice with Diet-Induced Obeisity and Insulin Resistance

### Description
Sixteen mouse heart samples were analyzed in four groups:  Normal, 24hr fast, Diet-Induced Obesity, and DIO with 24hr fast.  The cytoplasmic fractions of IN-Sequence heart preparations (solubilized proteins excluding most myofilaments) were analyzed by Liquid Chromatography coupled Mass Spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were liquid nitrogen powdered, and subjected to IN-Sequence in order to make cytoplasmic protein preparations.  Those protein samples were measued by BCA assay (protein concentration) and digested by FASP kit (Expedion) procedure with reduction and alkylation.  Desalting clean up was performed using Waters HLB plates.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite with in-line Dionex Nano LC using a PepMap RSLC column.   The resolution was set at 60,000 FWHM with top 15 ion selection for MS2.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to MZxml by MSConvert.  Search was performed by the Comet tool at TPP (Petunia GUI) with:  20ppm max mass tolerance (with isotope offsets),  2 enzymatic termini, 2 max missed cleavages, one variable mod of 79.96631 Da at S, T, or Y, and a constituative mod of 57.021464 on C.  The FASTA   was uniprot-MouseReviewed_cRAPadded_7Oct13iRT_unix.fasta.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is regulated by nutrient and energy status and plays an adaptive role during nutrient deprivation and ischemic stress. Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a hypernutritive state characterized by obesity, dyslipidemia, elevated fasting blood glucose levels, and insulin resistance. It has also been associated with impaired autophagic flux and larger-sized infarcts. We hypothesized that diet-induced obesity (DIO) affects nutrient sensing, explaining the observed cardiac impaired autophagy. We subjected male friend virus B NIH (FVBN) mice to a high-fat diet, which resulted in increased weight gain, fat deposition, hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and larger infarcts after myocardial ischemia-reperfusion. Autophagic flux was impaired after 4 wk on a high-fat diet. To interrogate nutrient-sensing pathways, DIO mice were subjected to overnight fasting, and hearts were processed for biochemical and proteomic analysis. Obese mice failed to upregulate LC3-II or to clear p62/SQSTM1 after fasting, although mRNA for LC3B and p62/SQSTM1 were appropriately upregulated in both groups, demonstrating an intact transcriptional response to fasting. Energy- and nutrient-sensing signal transduction pathways [AMPK and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)] also responded appropriately to fasting, although mTOR was more profoundly suppressed in obese mice. Proteomic quantitative analysis of the hearts under fed and fasted conditions revealed broad changes in protein networks involved in oxidative phosphorylation, autophagy, oxidative stress, protein homeostasis, and contractile machinery. In many instances, the fasting response was quite discordant between lean and DIO mice. Network analysis implicated the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor and mTOR regulatory nodes. Hearts of obese mice exhibited impaired autophagy, altered proteome, and discordant response to nutrient deprivation.

### Keywords
Heart, Fasting, Mouse, In-sequence, Ms, Proteomics, Metabolism, Mass spectrometry, Fvbn

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai
Heart Institute and Advanced Clinical Biosystems Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Joel Kooren

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Heart Institute and Advanced Clinical Biosystems Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


