### Accession
PXD040227

### Title
Membranes prime the RapGEF EPAC1 to transduce cAMP signaling

### Description
EPAC1, a cAMP-activated GEF for Rap GTPases, is a major transducer of cAMP signaling in normal cells and a therapeutic target in cardiac diseases. The recent discovery that cAMP is compartmentalized in membrane-proximal nanodomains challenged the current model of EPAC1 activation in the cytosol. Here, we discover that anionic membranes are a major component of EPAC1 activation. We find that anionic membranes activate EPAC1 in the absence of cAMP, that they increase its affinity for cAMP by 2 orders of magnitude, and that they synergize with cAMP to yield maximal GEF activity. Thus, EPAC1 has four states that differ in their affinity for cAMP and GEF efficiency. In cells, where cytosolic cAMP is low, this implies that EPAC1 must be primed by membranes to bind cAMP. Examination of the inhibitory mechanism of the cardiomyocyte-active chemical CE3F4 in this new framework further reveals that it targets only only membrane- and cAMP-activated EPAC1. Together, our findings reformulate previous concepts of cAMP signaling to include a hitherto overlooked role of membranes through EPAC proteins, with important implications for drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
EPAC1FL was deuterated alone and in complex with cAMP and PM liposomes. EPAC1 alone (15µM) and a mixture of EPAC1 (15µM) with 4.5mM of cAMP and of PM liposomes at 3.125mM (total lipids), extruded at 0.2µm (see liposomes preparation and binding assay), were freshly prepared at room temperature. To conserve protein stability over the time, we decided to performe the preparation of each mixture every 3 replicates. 3µL of EPAC1 alone prepared sample were incubated into 57µL of deuterium buffer (50mM HEPES pD 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 2mM β-mercaptoethanol, 2mM MgCl2 and D2O) at defined time period at 20°C. Similar incubations were performed for the mixture of EPAC1+cAMP+liposomes with a deuteration buffer containing in addition 4.5mM cAMP. Five time points were done (0.5, 1, 2, 5 and 10 min) with a 95% deuterated final solution and all conditions were analyzed in triplicate. 55µL of each deuterated preparations were quenched with 55µL of quench buffer (150mM Glycine pH 1.5 and 4M Guanidine-HCl) at 1 °C during 30 sec with a final pH of 2.4. Deuteration, quenching and injection of the samples were automatically performed, three by three, using a Leap HDX Automation manager (Waters). Digestion and chromatography were done on an Acquity UPLC system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK). Digestion was performed on a pepsin-immobilized cartridge (Enzymate pepsin column, 300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm I.D. × 30 mm, Waters, Manchester, UK) at a 100µL/min flow rate composed of 0.1% acid formic solution at 20 °C. Peptides were then trapped on a UPLC pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Van-Guard pre-column, 2.1 mm I.D. x 5 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) and separated on UPLC column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.0 mm I.D. x 100 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) at 0.1 °C. Peptides separation was performed with an elution gradient at a flow rate of 40µL/min composed of solvent A (0.1% formic acid, water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile) from 2-40% B over 7 min followed by 0.5 min ramp to 85% B. Peptides were then analyzed with a Synapt G2Si HDMS (Waters, Wilmslow, UK) with Glu-fibrino peptide infused for calibration and lock mass correction in positive ion and resolution mode. MS/MS acquisition were done using data independent acquisition (MSE) on a range of 50-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein Lyse Global Server 2.5.3 (PLGS, Waters) searches were done to identify unlabeled peptides using homemade databank with interested protein end pepsin sequence with methionine oxidation as variable modification. DynamX 3.0 (Waters) was next employed to filter identified peptides with a minimum intensity of 1000, a minimum fragment of 0.3 per amino acid and their presence in at least 2 of 3 replicates. Isotopic profile for all identified peptides were manually checked and validated without back-exchange correction, deuteration mean values were reported as relative. Differences of deuterium uptake were statistically validated with a p-value of 0.01 on MEMHDX software {Hourdel, 2016 #174} where statistical significance thresholds were set to 0.01. HDX results were exported on EPAC1FL model using PyMOL (www.pymol.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epac1, Hdxms

### Affiliations
CNRS, IPHC, LSMBO
LSMBO IPHC CNRS Strasbourg France

### Submitter
Marie LEY

### Lab Head
Dr CIANFERANI Sarah
LSMBO IPHC CNRS Strasbourg France


