### Accession
PXD026538

### Title
Quantitative Proteome of enzymatically isolated rumen epithelium in sheep with low or high methane emission.

### Description
Ruminant livestock are one of the major contributors to carbon emission contributing the global warming issue. Methane (CH4) produced from enteric microbial fermentation of feed in the reticulo-rumen are known to differ between sheep with different digestive function and fermentation products such as metabolites. However, the molecular mechanism underpinning differences in methane emission remains to be fully elucidated. We extracted a membrane and cytosolic protein fraction of rumen epithelium proteins from both high (H) and low (L) CH4 emitting sheep. Protein abundance differences between the phenotypes were quantified using SWATH-mass spectrometry. We identified 92 proteins annotated as cell surface transporters, of which only solute carrier family (SLC) 40A1 had a greater fold change of protein expression in the high methane emission phenotype. The main difference in protein abundance we found were related to the metabolism of glucose, lactate and processes of cell defence against microbes in the epithelium of sheep in each group. To best of our knowledge, this represents one of the most comprehensive proteomes of ovine rumen epithelium to date.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue pieces of ventral rumen wall were collected post-morte¬m from 10 sheep with high and 10 low methane emission. The epithelium proteins were isolated enzymatically from the underlying lamina propria and fractionated into cytosol and membrane proteins, purified by dialysis and protein concentrations were determined. SDS in the membrane samples was removed using a detergent removal spin columns and finally eluted using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8). Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark. The reaction was quenched with excess DTT for 15 min. Samples were digested at 37 °C, overnight with trypsin at a 1:50 ratio. The digests were quenched with formic acid, and samples were desalted using self-packed SDB-RP StageTips.  For generating a spectral library, a portion of tryptic peptides from all the samples were pooled and fractionated by offline BpRP HPLC assisted fractionation system. Fractions were consolidated into 17 fractions, vacuum centrifuged and reconstituted for LC-MS/MS processing. Each sample was analysed on a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) in two stages: Information-Dependent Acquisition-MS (IDA-MS) analysis of BpRP fractionated peptides for spectral library generation, followed by Data-Independent Acquisition-MS (DIA-MS) analysis of individual samples using SWATH-MS procedure for quantiﬁcation. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in positive ion mode using a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with an Eksigent Ultra nanoLC system (Eksigent) and nanoflex cHiPLC module (SCIEX).  Peptides were first injected and desalted with 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid using a C18 trap (Halo-C18, 160 Å, 2.7 µm, 200 µm x 2 cm). Subsequently, for IDA, peptides eluted from a trap column and separated on a cHiPLC C18 column (15 cm x 200 μm, 3 μm, ChromXP C18-CL, 120 Å, 25oC, SCIEX) using a linear solvent gradient from 2 % acetonitrile (0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % mobile phase B (B: 99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) at 600 nL/min over 120 min. For SWATH-MS, data was acquired using a 60 min LC gradient (5-35 % mobile phase B) at 600 nl/min. Liquid chromatography eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray MS analysis (spray voltage 2.5 kV) using a nanospray III source (SCIEX) and an uncoated PicoTip Emitter (New Objective, USA). First a TOFMS survey scan (m/z 350-1500, 250 ms) was conducted followed by MS/MS analysis (2+ to 4+; 100 ms each, m/z 100-1800) of the top 20 most intense precursor ions with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. For SWATH experiments, individual samples were analysed in DIA-MS mode using variable m/z windows (100 in total) determined based on precursor m/z densities from IDA data. First, a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/ z 350-1500) followed by 100 SWATH-MS2 scans (m/ z 350-1500).  Each SWATH-MS2 scan used rolling collision energy and CE spread of 5. SWATH experiments for individual samples were acquired in a randomized order with one blank injection acquired between each sample.

### Data Protocol
Spectra library was generated by performing a combined data search of all the IDA-MS data using the Paragon algorithm (SCIEX) in ProteinPilot (Version 5.0, SCIEX) in thorough ID mode with FDR calculation enabled and allowing biological modification. All the MS/MS spectra from IDA experiments were searched against a reference database for the Ovine proteome (Oar v4. Ensembl, May 2017). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and an unused cut-off score of 1.3 (95 % confidence) was used for database searches. For SWATH quantitation, consolidated ProteinPilot IDA search results were imported into PeakView 2.1 with SWATH 2.0 MicroApp (SCIEX) and used as a spectral library.  Retention times for all SWATH files were aligned using linear regression model using endogenous peptides across the elution profile. The top 6 most intense fragment ions for each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data using a maximum number of peptides of 100, 75 ppm mass tolerance, peptide confidence threshold of ≥ 0.99, and a 5 min retention time extraction window.  After data processing, peptides with confidence > 99% and FDR < 1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Sheep, Rumen epithelium, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
NSW Department of Primary Industries, Extensive Livestock Industry Centre, Trevenna Rd, University of New England, Armidale, NSW, 2351, Australia.
Macquarie university

### Submitter
Karthik Shantharam kamath

### Lab Head
Dr Jude Bond
NSW Department of Primary Industries, Extensive Livestock Industry Centre, Trevenna Rd, University of New England, Armidale, NSW, 2351, Australia.


