### Accession
PXD039393

### Title
Effect of deletion of htpG on global proteomic profile of M. tuberculosis H37Rv

### Description
The main objective of this study is to understand the effect of deletion of htpG on protein expression profile of M. tuberculosis H37Rv. Whole cell lysates were prepared from 4 biological replicates of the wild-type control and the ∆htpG knockout strains by bead beating in 1X PBS containing protease inhibitors and subjected to 8-plex iTRAQ.

### Sample Protocol
Sixty microgram proteins from 4 biological sets of the control and the htpG mutant strains were acetone precipitated, denatured, reduced, alkylated, and trypsinized followed by labelling with 8-plex isobaric tags. Labeles were used as follows: 113 (wild-type rep-1), 114 (∆htpG rep-1), 115 (wild-type rep-2), 116 (∆htpG rep-2), 117 (wild-type rep-3), 118 (∆htpG rep-3), 119 (wild-type rep-4) and 121 (∆htpG rep-4), respectively (AB-SCIEX). Labelling was quenched after 2 hour of incubation by adding 70µl of water and samples were subsequently analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed through Protein pilot version 5.0.2.

### Publication Abstract
Protein folding is a crucial process in maintaining protein homeostasis, also known as proteostasis, in the cell. The requirement for the assistance of molecular chaperones in the appropriate folding of several proteins has already called into question the previously held view of spontaneous protein folding. These chaperones are highly ubiquitous cellular proteins, which not only help in mediating the proper folding of other nascent polypeptides but are also involved in refolding of the misfolded or the aggregated proteins. Hsp90 family proteins such as high-temperature protein G (HtpG) are abundant and ubiquitously expressed in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. Although HtpG is known as an ATP-dependent chaperone protein in most organisms, function of this protein remains obscured in mycobacterial pathogens. Here, we aim to investigate significance of HtpG as a chaperone in the physiology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We report that M. tuberculosis HtpG (mHtpG) is a metal-dependent ATPase which exhibits chaperonin activity towards denatured proteins in coordination with the DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE chaperone system via direct association with DnaJ2. Increased expression of DnaJ1, DnaJ2, ClpX, and ClpC1 in a &#x394;<i>htpG</i> mutant strain further suggests cooperativity of mHtpG with various chaperones and proteostasis machinery in M. tuberculosis. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> M. tuberculosis is exposed to variety of extracellular stressful conditions and has evolved mechanisms to endure and adapt to the adverse conditions for survival. mHtpG, despite being dispensable for M. tuberculosis growth under <i>in vitro</i> conditions, exhibits a strong and direct association with DnaJ2 cochaperone and assists the mycobacterial DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE (KJE) chaperone system. These findings suggest the potential role of mHtpG in stress management of the pathogen. Mycobacterial chaperones are responsible for folding of nascent protein as well as reactivation of protein aggregates. M. tuberculosis shows differential adaptive response subject to the availability of mHtpG. While its presence facilitates improved protein refolding via stimulation of the KJE chaperone activity, in the absence of mHtpG, M. tuberculosis enhances expression of DnaJ1/J2 cochaperones as well as Clp protease machinery for maintenance of proteostasis. Overall, this study provides a framework for future investigation to better decipher the mycobacterial proteostasis network in the light of stress adaptability and/or survival.

### Keywords
Htpg, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Professor
Laboratory of Mycobacterial Genetics, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad, India

### Submitter
Nisheeth Agarwal

### Lab Head
Dr Nisheeth Agarwal
Laboratory of Mycobacterial Genetics, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad, India


