### Accession
PXD039437

### Title
Pivotal role for S-nitrosylation of DNA methyltransferase in epigenetic regulation

### Description
DNMTs catalyze the methylation of cytosine with SAM. DNA methylation affects key cellular processes by regulating gene expression, thus serving a variety of physiological and pathophysiological roles. However, the chemical mechanisms of DNA methylation by which its enzymatic activity is regulated have not been fully elucidated. We found that a critical cysteine residue in DNMT is the target of protein S-nitrosylation, leading to the attenuation of DNMT enzymatic activity and consequent aberrant regulation of gene expression during neoplastic cell proliferation. Our results demonstrate that de novo DNA methylation mediated by DNMT3 is regulated by NO, which is involved in tumor formation.

### Sample Protocol
Human recombinant full-length DNMT3B (8 μg) was incubated in 100 μM SNOC and analyzed 30 min later. Biotin-switch assay was performed. From the reaction mixture incubated in HPDP-biotin, DNMT3B was purified with a His-tagged Protein Purification Kit. The eluted protein was treated with 0.25 μg/ml trypsin at 37 °C overnight, the digested peptides were cleaned with self-made C18 and SCX StageTips, and then processed by liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nanospray ion source in positive mode. The peptides were separated with a nano-HPLC C18 capillary column (0.075 × 150 mm, 3 μm). A 120-min gradient was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, including 0–30%B in 100 min and then 30– 65%B in 20 min (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B, 100% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid). MS and MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. The top ten precursor ions were selected for MS/MS by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 28% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were used to search the human Swiss Prot database using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with MASCOT search engine software (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). Parameters were set as follows: enzyme: trypsin (C-term side of K/R), the maximum number of missed cleavages=1, variable modifications: oxidation (Met), biotin-HPDP (Cys), methylthio (Cys), cysteinyl (Cys), mass tolerance for precursor=6 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions=20 mmu, minimum peptide length 4. The proteins were considered to be identified when they have at least one peptide with 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) catalyze methylation at the C5 position of cytosine with S-adenosyl-L-methionine. Methylation regulates gene expression, serving a variety of physiological and pathophysiological roles. The chemical mechanisms regulating DNMT enzymatic activity, however, are not fully elucidated. Here, we show that protein S-nitrosylation of a cysteine residue in DNMT3B attenuates DNMT3B enzymatic activity and consequent aberrant upregulation of gene expression. These genes include Cyclin D2 (Ccnd2), which is required for neoplastic cell proliferation in some tumor types. In cell-based and in vivo cancer models, only DNMT3B enzymatic activity, and not DNMT1 or DNMT3A, affects Ccnd2 expression. Using structure-based virtual screening, we discovered chemical compounds that specifically inhibit S-nitrosylation without directly affecting DNMT3B enzymatic activity. The lead compound, designated DBIC, inhibits S-nitrosylation of DNMT3B at low concentrations (IC<sub>50</sub>&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;100&#x2009;nM). Treatment with DBIC prevents nitric oxide (NO)-induced conversion of human colonic adenoma to adenocarcinoma in vitro. Additionally, in vivo treatment with DBIC strongly attenuates tumor development in a mouse model of carcinogenesis triggered by inflammation-induced generation of NO. Our results demonstrate that de novo DNA methylation mediated by DNMT3B is regulated by NO, and DBIC protects against tumor formation by preventing aberrant S-nitrosylation of DNMT3B.

### Keywords
No, Dna methylation, S-nitrosylation, Epigenetics, Cancer

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences
School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Japan

### Submitter
Akihiro Ito

### Lab Head
Dr Akihiro Ito
School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Japan


