### Accession
PXD025969

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic profilings of two foxtail millet cultivars under salinity

### Description
In this project, comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis was performed to explore sophisticated responsive networks of foxtail millet varieties of An04 and Yugu2 under salinity. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation-based (iTRAQ) and tandem mass tags-based (TMTs) quantitative proteomics approaches were used. In total, 10366 sites corresponding to 2862 proteins were detected and quantified. There were 759 and 990 sites corresponding to 484 and 633 proteins identified under salinity in An04 and Yugu2, respectively, and 1264 and 1131 phosphorylation sites corresponding to 789 and 731 proteins were identified between these two varieties before and after salt stress, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials, growth conditions and sampling  Foxtail millet seedlings were cultivated hydroponically as described before with minor modifications. Briefly, sterilized seeds of Yugu2 and An04 were germinated on moist filter paper in petri dishes for 12h. And then, the seedlings were transferred to hydroponic containers containing the 1/2 Hoagland solution. The seeds were germinated in a light chamber under 30/25 °C day/night cycle, 450μmol m-2 s-1 light intensity, and relative humidity of 70% with a 14-h photoperiod. After two weeks, the seedlings were treated with 150 mM NaCl for 0 min and 15 min with three independent biological replications for each sample. The roots were collected and washed gently with sterile water, and then frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis.       Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion The roots of foxtail millet were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen and four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added. And then the mixture was sonicated three times on ice using an ultrasonic processor (Scientz). After centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min, the remaining debris was removed. The protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA and washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 15 min, and then diluted with100 mM TEAB. The trypsin was added and protein was digested twice.  TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment (for Phosphoproteomics) The peptide mixtures were vibrated with IMAC microspheres suspended with vibration in the loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). And then the IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected and washed. The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted from IMAC microspheres using an elution buffer with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A datadependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot Setaria italica database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation on Ser、Thr、Tyr and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40

### Publication Abstract
Excess soluble salts in saline soils are harmful to most plants. Understanding the biochemical responses to salts in plants and studying the salt tolerance-associated genetic resources in nature will contribute to the improvement of salt tolerance in crops. As an emerging model crop, foxtail millet (<i>Setaria italica</i> L.) has been regarded as a novel species for stress resistance investigation. Here, the dynamic proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of two foxtail millet varieties of An04 and Yugu2 with contrasting salt tolerance characteristics were investigated under salt stress. In total, 10,366 sites representing to 2,862 proteins were detected and quantified. There were 759 and 990 sites corresponding to 484 and 633 proteins identified under salinity in An04 and Yugu2, respectively, and 1,264 and 1,131 phosphorylation sites corresponding to 789 and 731 proteins were identified between these two varieties before and after salt stress, respectively. The differentially-regulated phosphoproteins (DRPPs) were mainly involved in signal transduction, regulation of gene expression, translation, ion transport, and metabolism processes. Yugu2 possessed signal perception and transduction capabilities more rapidly and had a more intense response compared with An04 upon salinity. The sucrose metabolism pathway, in particularly, might play a vital role in salt response in foxtail millet, which not only provides UDP-glucose for the cellulose synthesis and energy production, but also promotes flavonoid related synthesis to enhance the salt tolerance ability. Over-expressing the phospho-mimic sucrose synthase (SuS) (<i>SuS</i> <sup><i>S</i>10<i>D</i></sup> ) in soybean roots enhanced salt tolerance compared with over-expressing <i>SuS</i> lines. The knowledge of this research will shed light on elucidating the mechanisms of salt response, and pave the way for crop varieties innovation and cultivation under salinity and stresses.

### Keywords
Foxtail millet (setaria italica); salt stress; proteomic and phosphoproteomic; phosphorylation; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
li zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Liu Wei
Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences


