### Accession
PXD027394

### Title
Identification of protein-protein interactions in live cells using photoactivatable  myristate probe X10

### Description
19 TST-tagged myristoylated proteins (baits) were transfected into cells and labeled with photoactivatable clickable myristate probe X10. mCitrine-TST was used as a negative control. X10-labeled proteins were photocrosslinked in live cells to their interacting partners with the aim of identifying new PTM-mediated protein-protein interactions. Proteins enriched with a certain TST-tagged bait were considered interactors when compared to the presence in all other baits, with statistical significance FDR<0.05.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells in 6 cm tissue culture dishes were transfected with a plasmid expressing a protein of interest (each protein in triplicate) using Lipofectamine LTX with PLUS reagent according to manufacturers protocol.  6 h post-transfection, media was changed and cells were treated with 100 μM X10. After 24 h (30 h post-transfection) cells were washed with PBS three times and placed on ice. The ice tray was placed inside Spectrolinker XL-1000 and irradiated with UV light for 5 min. The cells were gently scraped and collected in a pellet upon centrifugation at 1000 g for 3 min.  60 μl of 1% SDS in PBS was added to the pellets to initiate lysis. Lysates were frozen overnight and then defrosted. Lysates were then incubated at 95˚C for 10 min. After cooling to rt, 240 μl of 1.25% Triton X-100 in PBS was added. DNA was broken down by repeatedly passing the lysates through 25G needles. The lysates were centrifuged at 4˚C at 17000g for 15 min. Supernatant was collected and protein concentration measured.  32 μl of StrepTactin beads (MagStrep "type3" XT) per sample were washed three times with 0.2% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 in PBS. 400 μg of lysate proteins were added and incubated with the beads at 4˚C overnight. The beads were then washed in three times with 500 μl 0.2% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 in PBS, followed by three times with 50 mM AMBIC. The beads were resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM AMBIC containing 10 mM TCEP and were stirred for 1 h at 370C in a thermomixer (Eppendorf). The beads were pelleted in a microcentrifuge and the supernatant was swapped for 50 μl of 50 mM AMBIC containing 10 mM iodoacetamide, whereupon they left in a dark without stirring for 30 min. The beads were washed twice with 500 μl 50 mM AMBIC. 50 μl of 50 mM AMBIC was again added to the beads followed by trypsin solution containing 0.11 μg of trypsin (20 μg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin from Promega vials were resuspended in 100 μl 50 mM AMBIC) and left shaking in a thermomixer at 37 0C for 4 h. The supernatant was collected, and the beads resuspended in 70 μl 50 mM AMBIC and stirred for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and combined with a previous fraction. The beads were resuspended in 70 μl 1.5% TFA in MilliQ water and stirred for 15 minutes. The supernatant was again collected and combined with previous fractions.  The resulting peptides solution was desalted on a STAGE (stop and go extraction) tip. A stack of three Empore™ SDB XC discs from Sigma was cut and fit into a p200 pipette tip. The tips were activated with 150 μl of methanol by centrifugation for 2 min at 2000g and washed with 150 μl of MilliQ water for 2 min at 2000 g. The peptide samples were loaded onto the tips and centrifuged for 2 min at 2000g. The tips were washed with 150 μl of MilliQ water for 2 min at 2000g. The peptides were eluted from the tips using 60 μl of 79% acetonitrile in water by centrifugation for 2 min at 2000g. The solutions were then dried in a Thermo Savant SPD1010 speedvac and stored at -80 0C for subsequent proteomics analysis. Dried peptide fractions were dissolved in 15 µl of LC-MS grade H¬2O containing 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.5% (v/v) TFA. 3 µl of the solution were injected into the LC-MS/MS system. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Easy nLC-1000 was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Scans were acquired from 350 to 1800 m/z. Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25 W (LFQ) or 31 W (TMT). Maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 250 and 80 ms, respectively; the ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics results (*.RAW files) were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 using the latest release of Homo sapiens proteome from uniprot.org. In MaxQuant, digestion was set as Trypsin/P, oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-term) were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and other settings were as by default.  Perseus 1.5.5.3 was used to analyze file proteinGroups.txt obtained as result of MaxQuant searches. Potential contaminants, reverse and only identified by site proteins were discarded before the analysis. All data was transformed using log2(x) function before any further manipulation. Data was normalized by subtracting a median of each data column.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are essential and pervasive regulatory elements in biology. Despite the development of a range of techniques to probe PPIs in living systems, there is a dearth of approaches to capture interactions driven by specific post-translational modifications (PTMs). Myristoylation is a lipid PTM added to more than 200 human proteins, where it may regulate membrane localization, stability or activity. Here we report the design and synthesis of a panel of novel photocrosslinkable and clickable myristic acid analog probes, and their characterization as efficient substrates for human <i>N</i>-myristoyltransferases NMT1 and NMT2, both biochemically and through X-ray crystallography. We demonstrate metabolic incorporation of probes to label NMT substrates in cell culture and <i>in situ</i> intracellular photoactivation to form a covalent crosslink between modified proteins and their interactors, capturing a snapshot of interactions in the presence of the lipid PTM. Proteomic analyses revealed both known and multiple novel interactors of a series of myristoylated proteins, including ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) and spliceosome-associated RNA helicase DDX46. The concept exemplified by these probes offers an efficient approach for exploring the PTM-specific interactome without the requirement for genetic modification, which may prove broadly applicable to other PTMs.

### Keywords
Myristoylation; photocrosslinking; protein-protein interaction

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London;  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute; Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd; Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London;  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute; Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd; Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK


