### Accession
PXD010865

### Title
Peptide mapping of purified huntingtin protein samples from different eukaryotic expression systems

### Description
Huntingtin expression, purification and biophysical characterisation: purified huntingtin protein samples of different polyQ lengths derived from insect cell and mammalian cell production were digested and subject to peptide mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
All data was acquired on an Agilent 1260 capillary HPLC system coupled to an Agilent Q-TOF6545 mass spectrometer via the Dual Agilent Jetstream ion source.  Intact protein: The purified, recombinant protein was analyzed on a Poroshell 300SB-C3 column (1x75 mm with 5 micron particles) at a flow-rate of 500 microliters/min using a gradient of 5% solvent B (96:4 ACN:H2O with 1% formic acid) to 95% solvent B in 4 minutes. The column temperature was held at 70 ˚C. Bottom-up proteomics for sequence coverage and PTM analysis: Proteins were processed according to established protocols27. Briefly, proteins were reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, and incubated with trypsin (6 µL, 0.2 mg/mL) overnight at 37 °C. The digests acidified to p2 in H, desalted on-column (by diverting the first two minutes to waste), before analysis.  Peptides were separated on a C18 Advance BioPeptide column (2.1x150 mm 2.7 micron particles) at a flow rate of 400 microliters/min and an operating pressure of 4,700 psi. Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 100% solvent A (98:2 H2O:ACN with 1% formic acid) to 50% B (96:4 ACN:H2O with 1% formic acid) in 80 minutes. Mass spectra were acquired from m/z 300–1700 at a rate of 8 spectra per second. The tandem mass spectra were acquired in automated MS/MS mode from m/z 100-1500 with an acquisition rate of 3 spectra per second. The top ten precursors were selected and sorted by abundance only. Collision-induced dissociation was done using all ions at 4*(m/z)/100-1 and -5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using OTHERS Studio 8.5 (build 20171002) and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (Uniprot). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length of five, a maximum of three missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of three labelled amino acids per peptide were employed.

### Publication Abstract
The gene mutated in individuals with Huntington's disease (HD) encodes the 348-kDa huntingtin (HTT) protein. Pathogenic HD CAG-expansion mutations create a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract at the N terminus of HTT that expands above a critical threshold of &#x223c;35 glutamine residues. The effect of these HD mutations on HTT is not well understood, in part because it is difficult to carry out biochemical, biophysical, and structural studies of this large protein. To facilitate such studies, here we have generated expression constructs for the scalable production of HTT in multiple eukaryotic expression systems. Our set of HTT expression clones comprised both N- and C-terminally FLAG-tagged HTT constructs with polyQ lengths representative of the general population, HD patients, and juvenile HD patients, as well as the more extreme polyQ expansions used in some HD tissue and animal models. Our expression system yielded milligram quantities of pure recombinant HTT protein, including many of the previously mapped post-translational modifications. We characterized both apo and HTT-HTT-associated protein 40 (HAP40) complex samples produced with this HD resource, demonstrating that this toolkit can be used to generate physiologically meaningful HTT complexes. We further demonstrate that these resources can produce sufficient material for protein-intensive experiments, such as small-angle X-ray scattering, providing biochemical insight into full-length HTT protein structure. The work outlined and the tools generated here lay a foundation for further biochemical and structural work on the HTT protein and for studying its functional interactions with other biomolecules.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Polyglutamine, Huntingtin, Pbacmam, Htt, Huntington’s disease, Eukaryotic expression system, Hd, Polyq

### Affiliations
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto,  Toronto ON M5G 1L7, Canada.   Tel.: 416-946-0881 E-mail: cheryl.arrowsmith@uhnresearch.ca
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Suzanne Ackloo

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl H Arrowsmith
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto,  Toronto ON M5G 1L7, Canada.   Tel.: 416-946-0881 E-mail: cheryl.arrowsmith@uhnresearch.ca


