### Accession
PXD005276

### Title
Kinome profiling upon HCMV infection using the MIB-MS approach

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a significant cause of disease in immune-compromised adults and immune naïve newborns. No vaccine exists to prevent HCMV infection, and current antiviral therapies have toxic side effects that limit the duration and intensity of their use. There is thus an urgent need for new strategies to treat HCMV and repurposing existing drugs as antivirals is an attractive approach. Virus-induced changes in infected cells are often driven by changes in cellular kinase activity, leading us to hypothesize that defining the complement of kinases (the kinome), whose activity or expression is altered during infection would identify existing kinase inhibitors that could be repurposed as new antivirals. To this end, we applied a recently developed technique, MIB-MS kinome profiling, to quantitatively measure perturbations in >240 cellular kinases simultaneously in cells infected with a laboratory-adapted (AD169) or clinical (TB40E) HCMV strain using a label-free approach. Significant time-dependent changes for multiple kinases including cell cycle, receptor tyrosine and mitotic kinases were observed. Based on these data, we tested antiviral activity of 14 kinase inhibitors, and the most potent inhibitor blocked HCMV early gene expression and viral DNA accumulation. These results show the utility of kinome profiling to screen kinase inhibitors that can be repurposed as antivirals.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from biological duplicates of AD169 or TB40E HCMV infected primary human MRC-5 fibroblasts (0, 24, 48, or 72 hours) were lysed then kinases in each sample were enriched using MIBs columns composed of 4 immobilized kinase inhibitors. Proteins were eluted from MIBs columns, digested with trypsin and the subsequent peptide samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1000-QExactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.17 and searched against the reviewed Uniprot human database. A minimum of two unique peptides was required for label-free quantitation using the LFQ intensities. Statistical analyses were performed in the R statistical programming language version 3.3.1.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a significant cause of disease in immune-compromised adults and immune na&#xef;ve newborns. No vaccine exists to prevent HCMV infection, and current antiviral therapies have toxic side effects that limit the duration and intensity of their use. There is thus an urgent need for new strategies to treat HCMV infection. Repurposing existing drugs as antivirals is an attractive approach to limit the time and cost of new antiviral drug development. Virus-induced changes in infected cells are often driven by changes in cellular kinase activity, which led us to hypothesize that defining the complement of kinases (the kinome), whose abundance or expression is altered during infection would identify existing kinase inhibitors that could be repurposed as new antivirals. To this end, we applied a kinase capture technique, multiplexed kinase inhibitor bead-mass spectrometry (MIB-MS) kinome, to quantitatively measure perturbations in &gt;240 cellular kinases simultaneously in cells infected with a laboratory-adapted (AD169) or clinical (TB40E) HCMV strain. MIB-MS profiling identified time-dependent increases and decreases in MIB binding of multiple kinases including cell cycle kinases, receptor tyrosine kinases, and mitotic kinases. Based on the kinome data, we tested the antiviral effects of kinase inhibitors and other compounds, several of which are in clinical use or development. Using a novel flow cytometry-based assay and a fluorescent reporter virus we identified three compounds that inhibited HCMV replication with IC<sub>50</sub> values of &lt;1 &#x3bc;m, and at doses that were not toxic to uninfected cells. The most potent inhibitor of HCMV replication was OTSSP167 (IC<sub>50</sub> &lt;1.2 nm), a MELK inhibitor, blocked HCMV early gene expression and viral DNA accumulation, resulting in a &gt;3 log decrease in virus replication. These results show the utility of MIB-MS kinome profiling for identifying existing kinase inhibitors that can potentially be repurposed as novel antiviral drugs.

### Keywords
Kinome, Hcmv, Antivirals, Human herpesvirus, Label-free quantitation, Kinase inhibitors, Virology

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Microbiology & Immunology UNC School of Medicine UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Nathaniel J. Moorman
Department of Microbiology & Immunology UNC School of Medicine UNC-Chapel Hill


