### Accession
PXD040390

### Title
Prefoldin 2 contributes to mitochondrial morphology and function

### Description
We analyzed consequences of the loss of prefoldin subunits on the cell proliferation and survival of Saccharomyces cerevisiae upon exposure to various cellular stress conditions. Mass spectrometry analysis comparing whole yeast proteomes of cells lacking PFD2 versus wild type cells was performed. We found that Pfd2 contributes to mitochondrial protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype cells and Δpfd2 cells transformed with empty vector (pESC-URA) cells were grown in CSM-URA medium with 3% glycerol and 0.05% sucrose to logarithmic growth phase. Cultures were grown at 25°C or shifted for 4h to 37°C.  28 OD600 of yeast cells were harvested, centrifuged to remove culture medium, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cell pellet was washed with sterile water and centrifuged at 4400rpm for 5min at 4°C. Cell pellet was resuspended in 500µl of 10% TCA and transferred to 2 ml tube with 200µl of unwashed glass beads. PMSF was added to the final concentration of 2 mM. Cells were homogenized for 7 min at 4°C vortex instrument (“Disruptor Genie”, Scientific Industries). Supernatant was collected into 1.5ml tube. Glass beads were washed with 250 µl of 10% TCA and vortexed gently. Supernatants were combined in 1.5 ml tube and incubated on ice for 20 min. Supernatant was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Pellet was washed with 500 µl of 100% ice-cold acetone and incubated for 10 min on ice. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. Pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea and incubated at 30°C for 15 min to dissolve. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 2 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to new 1.5 ml tube and protein concentration was determined using ROTIQuant reagent (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG) in 96-well plate assay using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a quantitation standard. For in-solution digestion, 50 µg of protein was mixed with ProteaseMAXTM Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega Corporation) in final concentration 0.05% and reduced using 5 mM DTT at 56°C for 20 min and alkylated by 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at a final concentration of 15 mM for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were digested by trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:28) at 37°C for 16 h (400 rpm). Proteolysis was stopped by adding TFA to final concentration 0.5%. The digest was snap-frozen and stored at -80°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Discs Bio-C18 (Affinisep) using a previously reported stage-tip protocol and dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator at 40 °C. Prior to LC-MS/MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm length × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55°C by applying 90 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of  300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 96 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3 × 1e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the intensity threshold for MS/MS was set to 1e4.

### Data Protocol
Sixteen raw files were loaded in MaxQuant version 2.2.0.0. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q) were specified as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Trypsin/P was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used. Reviewed UniProtKB sequences of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (downloaded at 17th February 2023, includes 6727 protein sequences) were digested in silico and used by the Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide spectrum match level (PSM) and at the protein level were set on 0.01. The result of MaxQuant search generated in proteinGroups.txt output table were processed further using Perseus ver. 2.0.6.0. The dataset with LFQ intensities as main columns was filtered to exclude commonly occurring contaminants, proteins identified by site or matched to the reverse database. Protein groups that were identified by less than 2 razor + unique peptides were removed. Upon inspection of the Gaussian distribution of all samples the biological replicate 3 of sample Δpfd2_37°C and Biological replicate 4 of sample WT_37°C was removed from further analysis because of larger number of missing values. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and rows were filtered based on valid values. Proteins with at least 50% of valid values within all four conditions were maintained. All remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution (Width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8, Mode: Separately for each column). The Gaussian distribution of log2-transformed LFQ intensities after imputation was confirmed for each sample by histogram analysis. Using build-in statistical analysis in Perseus v2.0.9.0 P-values between two groups (Δpfd2_25°C vs. WT_25°C; Δpfd2_37°C vs. WT_37°C; Δpfd2_37°C vs. Δpfd2_25°C; WT_37°C vs. WT_25°C) were determined by two-sided Welch`s T-test (permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations = 0.05, S0 = 0). Differences in protein abundance between wild-type and deletion strains were visualized along with the adjusted p-value (permutation-based FDR) for statistical significance using Python version 3.9 and seaborn package (https://github.com/seaborn).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prefoldin, Mitochondria, Proteostasis, Chaperone, Pfd2/gim4, Tom70

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Basis of Aging and Rejuvenation Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences Poland
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Kamila Liput

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrike Topf
Laboratory of Molecular Basis of Aging and Rejuvenation Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences Poland


