### Accession
PXD004047

### Title
wPip (Buckeye) Ovarian Proteome

### Description
A protein pilot dataset detecting Wolbachia proteins from protein extracted from dissected infected Culex pipiens mosquito ovaries. The experiment was based of an iTRAQ experiment comparing infected and uninfected ovarian tissues and has been usefull in characterizing the wPip (Buckeye) ovarian proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from Culex pipiens tissues as described previously (Beckmann et al., 2013). Ovaries from 30 infected and 30 tetracycline cured-mosquitoes were dissected in 100% ethanol and collected in a 1.5 ml tube filled with 100% ethanol, which prevented tissues from sticking to the metal dissecting tools. Pooled tissues were sonicated at 40 mA for 10 seconds in a Kontes GE 70.1 ultrasonic processor, and trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to a final concentration of 10% (v/v). After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm in a microcentrifuge, pellets were washed with acetone:water (9:1), dried, and stored at -20°C. Samples were directly submitted to the University of Minnesota’s Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics for iTRAQ (isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification) analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was searched within protein pilot 4.5 against protein libraries from the wPip quinquefasciatus Pel and Culex pipiens genomes which were downloaded  from NCBI.   In the accompanying Excel spreadsheet proteins were sorted according to their relative abundance as determined by the number of spectra from the single most abundant peptide. Because proteins can often produce varying amounts of detectable tryptic peptides depending upon protein size and lysine/arginine content, to control for these variable aspects we reasoned that most proteins would be able to produce at least one detectable tryptic peptide and counting the quantity of the single most abundant peptide would be a better reflection of relative protein abundance than total peptide spectra derived from that protein. This quantification is justified by previous reports (Beckmann et al., 2013) showing that the two most abundant proteins are the Wolbachia surface protein (WSP; gi|190571332) and another putative membrane protein (gi|190570988). Only proteins with at least 3 unique peptides (95% confidence) detected were reported, and using this criterion the false discovery rate was zero.

### Publication Abstract
The genus Wolbachia is an archetype of maternally inherited intracellular bacteria that infect the germline of numerous invertebrate species worldwide. They can selfishly alter arthropod sex ratios and reproductive strategies to increase the proportion of the infected matriline in the population. The most common reproductive manipulation is cytoplasmic incompatibility, which results in embryonic lethality in crosses between infected males and uninfected females. Females infected with the same Wolbachia strain rescue this lethality. Despite more than 40 years of research and relevance to symbiont-induced speciation, as well as control of arbovirus vectors and agricultural pests, the bacterial genes underlying cytoplasmic incompatibility remain unknown. Here we use comparative and transgenic approaches to demonstrate that two differentially transcribed, co-diverging genes in the eukaryotic association module of prophage WO from Wolbachia strain wMel recapitulate and enhance cytoplasmic incompatibility. Dual expression in transgenic, uninfected males of Drosophila melanogaster crossed to uninfected females causes embryonic lethality. Each gene additively augments embryonic lethality in crosses between infected males and uninfected females. Lethality associates with embryonic defects that parallel those of wild-type cytoplasmic incompatibility and is notably rescued by wMel-infected embryos in all cases. The discovery of cytoplasmic incompatibility factor genes cifA and cifB pioneers genetic studies of prophage WO-induced reproductive manipulations and informs the continuing use of Wolbachia to control dengue and Zika virus transmission to humans.

### Keywords
Wolbachia, Culex pipiens, Proteome, Wpip

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry

### Submitter
John Beckmann

### Lab Head
Dr John Beckmann
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry


