### Accession
PXD032688

### Title
Mechano-redox control of Mac-1 de-adhesion from ICAM-1 by protein disulfide isomerase promotes directional movement under flow

### Description
Quantification of the redox state of disulfide bonds in the beta 2 subunit of human recombinant Mac-1 integrin.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant Mac-1 integrin was incubated without or with 10 mnolar excess redox active or redox inactive protein disulfide isomerase. The redox state of the disulfide bonds in beta 2 subunit was processed as described by Chiu (2019) Methods Mol Biol (DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9187-7_4).

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed as described by Chiu (2019) Methods Mol Biol (DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9187-7_4). Briefly, MS/MS spectra were searched against Swissprot reference proteome for all species using Mascot search engine (Version 2.7, Matrix Science) or against huamn ITGB2 protein sequence in Byonic (Version 3.0, Protein Metrics). Precursor mass tolerance and fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and the precursor ion charge state to 2+, 3+ and 4+. Variable modifications were defined as oxidized Met, deamidated Asn/Gln, N-terminal pyro Glu/Gln, iodoacetanilide derivative Cys and iodoacetanilide-13C derivative Cys with full trypsin and chymotrypsin cleavage of up to three missed cleavages. Only peptides with a peptide score >30 and error <6ppm were selected for quantification of relative abundance. Relative ion abundance of peptide labelled with 12C-IPA and/or 13-IPA in extracted ion chromatograms generated using XCalibur Qual Browser software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The redox state of cysteine as a percentage of the abundance of 12C-IPA lablled peptide of the total sum of abundance of 12C-IPA and 13C-IPA labelled peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox state, Disulfide bonds, Mac-1

### Affiliations
Centenary Institute, University of Sydney
Centenary Institute University of Sydney

### Submitter
Joyce Chiu

### Lab Head
Dr Joyce Chiu
Centenary Institute University of Sydney


