### Accession
PXD018961

### Title
SHMT2 controls Burkitt lymphoma cell survival by maintaining an oncogenic TCF3 transcriptional program

### Description
In this study, the human Burkitt’s Lymphoma cell line BL60 has been analysed via proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis for effect of a knock down of the serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2 (shSHMT2) compared to a control construct (shGL2). Concerning the phosphoproteome, these results have been compared to an analysis of a knock down of CD79a (shCD79a) in these cells.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC [Ong et al. PMID:12118079] cells were cultured in RPMI without lysine and arginine (Silantes) supplemented with 10% h.i. dialyzed FCS (Bio&SELL), 100 U/ml Penicillin / 100 mg/ml Streptomycin (Life Technologies) and heavy (13C615N4 L-arginine and 13C615N2 L-lysine), medium-heavy (13C614N4-L-arginine and 4,4,5,5-d4-L-lysine) (all Eurisotop) or regular (light) amino acids (12C614N4 L-arginine and 12C614N2 L-lysine) (Sigma-Aldrich). Labeled BL60 cells carrying the doxycycline-inducible non-targeting shRNAs shGL2, shSHMT2.1266 or shCD79A were cultured for 3 or 5 days in SILAC medium containing 1 µg/ml doxycycline to induce shRNA expression. For IP-based enrichment of tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides (pYome) the PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit was applied according to Rush et al. [Rush et al. PMID:15592455] and following the instructions of the manufacturer (Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, after SILAC at least 1x10^8 cells were lysed in 10 ml urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate). Cell lysates from each SILAC condition were mixed in equal protein amounts followed by protein reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. After dilution with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 to an urea concentration of 2 M protein digestion with trypsin was carried out overnight at 37 °C (enzyme-to-substrate-ratio 1:100). The peptide mixtures were purified with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges and lyophilized. After sample solubilization in the kit buffer, peptides phosphorylated on tyrosine residues were immuno-precipitated with the anti-phospho-tyrosine-specific antibody P-Tyr-1000 (Cell Signaling Technology). Enriched phospho-peptides were eluted from the bead matrix under acidic conditions and purified. For global proteome profiling, cells were lysed in NP40-containing lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM NaF, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM sodium vanadate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (cOmplete cocktail, Roche) for 10 minutes on ice followed by centrifugation (21.380xg, 4°C, 10 min) to remove cell debris. Extracted proteins were subjected to gel-based proteome analysis as described previously [Corso et al. 2016 PMID:27155012]. Phospho-peptide samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first trapped on a precolumn (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 100 µm x 5 cm) and separated on an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 350 × 0.075 mm) with a 120-min linear gradient of 2–40% solvent B [80% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% FA] and versus solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL·min–1. Eluting peptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition using a top 20 MS/MS method with a survey scan resolution setting of 120,000 FWHM and an MS/MS resolution setting of 30,000 FWHM at 200 m/z. The 20 most abundant precursor peptide ions within the m/z 350-1600 range were selected for HCD with an NCE setting of 28% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. AGC target values and maximum ion injection times for MS and MS/MS were set 1 ×106 in 40 ms and 1 × 105 in 128 ms, respectively. Selected precursor mass-to-charge ratio values were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1, MPI for Biochemistry) [Tyanova et al. PMID:27809316]. Fragment ion spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine [Cox et al. PMID:21254760] against the UniProtKB human reference protein database (date: November 2016) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants and setting trypsin as enzme for protein digestion. After initial recalibration, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances of 6 and 20 ppm were set, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, additionally including phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine for phosphorylation analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. On both the peptide and protein level the maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database search strategy. SILAC multiplicity was set to triple labeling (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+4/Arg+6, Lys+8/Arg+10) requiring at least two ratio counts for peptide quantitation and enabling the “re-quantify” option. Subsequent evaluation of MaxQuant output data was conducted with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7, MPI for Biochemistry) [Tyanova et al. PMID:27348712]. First, entries identified from the decoy database and potential contaminants were removed. For global proteome analysis also proteins identified only with modified peptides were discarded. For phosphorylation analysis identified phospho-sites were filtered for a localization probability of at least 75%. The respective SILAC ratios were log-transformed, filtered for 2/3 valid values across replicate measurements and subjected to further statistical evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive lymphoma type that is currently treated by intensive chemoimmunotherapy. Despite the favorable clinical outcome for most patients with BL, chemotherapy-related toxicity and disease relapse remain major clinical challenges, emphasizing the need for innovative therapies. Using genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screens, we identified B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling, specific transcriptional regulators, and one-carbon metabolism as vulnerabilities in BL. We focused on serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2 (SHMT2), a key enzyme in one-carbon metabolism. Inhibition of SHMT2 by either knockdown or pharmacological compounds induced anti-BL effects in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Mechanistically, SHMT2 inhibition led to a significant reduction of intracellular glycine and formate levels, which inhibited the mTOR pathway and thereby triggered autophagic degradation of the oncogenic transcription factor TCF3. Consequently, this led to a collapse of tonic BCR signaling, which is controlled by TCF3 and is essential for BL cell survival. In terms of clinical translation, we also identified drugs such as methotrexate that synergized with SHMT inhibitors. Overall, our study has uncovered the dependency landscape in BL, identified and validated SHMT2 as a drug target, and revealed a mechanistic link between SHMT2 and the transcriptional master regulator TCF3, opening up new perspectives for innovative therapies.

### Keywords
Burkitt’s lymphoma, One carbon metabolism, B cell receptor

### Affiliations
University Hospital of Frankfurt, Medical Clinic II, Dept. of Hematology/Oncology
Department of Medicine II  Haematology/Oncology  Goethe University  Theodor-Stern-Kai 7  60590 Frankfurt  Germany

### Submitter
Anne Wilke

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Oellerich
Department of Medicine II  Haematology/Oncology  Goethe University  Theodor-Stern-Kai 7  60590 Frankfurt  Germany


