### Accession
PXD018706

### Title
Nascent RNA antagonises the interaction of regulatory proteins with chromatin

### Description
A number of transcriptional and chromatin regulatory proteins have been reported to be recruited to chromatin by specific regulatory RNAs. Whether RNA has a more general role in the interaction of proteins with chromatin is unknown. We used proteomics methods to determine the global impact of nascent RNA on chromatin in embryonic stem cells. Surprisingly, we found that nascent RNA primarily antagonises the interaction of chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators with chromatin. Transcriptional inhibition and RNA degradation induced recruitment of a set of transcriptional regulators, chromatin modifiers, nucleosome remodelers, and regulators of higher-order structure. RNA directly bound to factors including BAF, NuRD, EHMT1 and INO80 and inhibited their interaction with nucleosomes. In the case of the transcriptional elongation factor P-TEFb, direct binding to pre-mRNA released it from the chromatin-associated 7SK ribonucleoprotein complex. We propose that through these mechanisms, nascent RNA provides a direct link between transcriptional output and chromatin state.

### Sample Protocol
Pol II inhibition experiment: SILAC mixed samples (equal amount of light and heavy populations) were loaded in separate lanes of a 10 % SDS-PAGE gel and run approx. 10 mm. Each lane was manually excised, cubed to approx. 1 mm sides and put in a single well of a flat-bottomed 96 well plate. A Janus liquid handling robot (Perkin Elmer) was de-stained, reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide) proteins prior to overnight trypsin digest (100 ng, Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade) at 37 ºC. The following day, peptides were extracted using 50 % acetonitrile, 1 % formic acid. Nucleosome affinity purifcation experiment: SILAC mixed samples (equal volumes of light and heavy populations) were mixed. Proteins were alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide) and digested by two rounds of trypsin digestion (0.3 µg trypsin for 2 hrs at 25ºC and then overnight at 25ºC). Samples were desalted using C18 Stage tips and eluted in 60 % acetonitrile. Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation then re-solubilised in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. A Thermo Fisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 UHPLC instrument loaded peptide samples onto a trap cartridge (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 300 µm inner diameter, 5 mm length, 5 µm particle size) for desalting. Peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray analytical column (PepMap C18, 50 µm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated using a 120 minute gradient of increasing organic solvent (80 % acetonitrile, 5 % dimethyl sulfoxide) from 8 to 40 %. An orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionisation mode to acquire data. Instrument settings were: MS1 data were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120k, 4E6 AGC target, 50 milliseconds maximum injection time, dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds, a mass range of 300-1500 m/z and profile mode data capture. MS2 data were acquired in the ion trap using a 2 m/z isolation window, 2E4 AGC target, 300 milliseconds maximum injection time (inject ions for all available parallelisable time “Universal Method”), 35 % collision-induced dissociation (CID) energy, 10 milliseconds activation time and centroid mode data capture.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were analysed in MaxQuant v1.6.0.13. A SILAC quantification method (multiplicity 2) using light amino acid labels (K0 and R0) and heavy labels (K8 and R10) was selected. A UniProt Mus musculus protein database downloaded 14/06/2012 using default settings  was used for protein identification searches. MaxQuant generated a reverse database for decoy searching and an internal protein contaminant database was also searched containing sequences including trypsin and keratins. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term were permitted as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. A 1 % false discovery rate at the protein and peptide level was selected.The proteinGroups text file was opened in Perseus v1.4.0.2 to permit further data analyses. Reverse and contaminant proteins were removed. Intensity values were log10 transformed and H/L ratio values were log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Rna, Regulatory proteins

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Proteomics Science and Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Proteomics Science and Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute


