### Accession
PXD023546

### Title
Renal Cell Carcinoma (Renca) Extracellular Vesicles under Hypoxia and Normoxia

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) represent a diverse group of small membrane-encapsulated particles and provide a universal molecular cell-cell communication system. Hypoxia is a typical condition in solid tumors, and cancer-derived EVs support growth and invasion of tissues by tumor cells. EVs were purified from cell culture medium by ultracentrifugation followed by size exclusion chromatography with Exo-spin™ columns (Cell Guidance Systems Ltd). We performed proteomic analysis of five hypoxia/normoxia pairs of EV samples; each of these replicates for either hypoxia or normoxia was analyzed in duplicates. Obtained data were compared with proteomics analysis of corresponding cell culture media supernatants (SN) after EV removal with 100 000 g ultracentrifugation. We found that exposure of tumor cells to hypoxia (1% oxygen) induced EV secretion, altered EV sizes, and led to notable changes in the EV protein cargo in comparison to normoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from individual EV samples by using methanol/chloroform precipitation. Dried protein pellets were diluted in 4X Laemly loading buffer containing 10% β-mercaptoethanol, loaded into 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel (PAAG) (12% Mini-PROTEAN® TGXTM Precast Protein Gel, Bio-Rad) and run for maximum 15 minutes at 100-110V. SDS gel pieces stained with Sypro Ruby (Sigma, S4942) were cut out and processed as follows: 3 x 5 min washing steps with 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate in 40% acetonitrile/60% water to destain the gel, reduction with 20mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylation with 45mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, washing and tryptic digestion with 5 μl of trypsin solution (20 ng/μl proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma) in trypsin buffer (40 mM ammonium-bicarbonate in 9% acetonitrile/91% water)) overnight at 37ºC. The supernatant was transferred to a sample vial before the gel piece was extracted a second time with 15 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water. The combined extracts were centrifuged and 25μl of the supernatant were transferred to a sample vial to allow LC-MS (Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry) analysis using an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo) system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were trapped on an AcclaimPepmap 100 C18 3µm, 0.075x2mm (Thermo) trap column and separated on a Thermo AcclaimPepmap RSLC C18 2µm, 0.075x150mm analytical column, using a gradient from 97% A (0.1% formic acid) to 35% B (0.1% formic acid in CAN) over 90 min, flow 0.3µl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in 3 sec cycles where the MS spectra were recorded with the orbitrap analyzer at resolution 120000 allowing the collection of up to 4e5 ions for maximal 50 msec before switching to MSMS mode. Multicharged ions (threshold 5e4) were fragmentated with equal priority by HCD (30% collision energy) and CID (35% collision energy, 10 msec activation, Q 0.25) using quadrupole isolation with 1.6 Da width and 21 sec dynamic exclusion. HCD ions (up to 5e4 ions) were collected for max 200 msec in the orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 15000. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) ions were recorded in the ion trap (rapid mode) aiming at higher sensitivity (threshold 1e4).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed and analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific version 2.2) using Sequest as search engine. MSMS spectra recorded in the ion trap were processed with 0.6 Da mass tolerance, orbitrap data with 0.02 Da. Raw data were recalibrated with the mouse Swissport database (version 2017-10-25) and searched with the following settings: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, trypsin cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages, carbabmidomethyl as fixed modification on cysteine, oxidation as optional modification on methionine, deamidation optional on Gln and Asn, protein N-terminus optionally acetylated. The percolator node was used with FDR 0.01. The minora feature detector was activated for label free quantification using 2 min RT alignment and precursor intensity normalized to total peptide amount. Peptide amounts were calculated from precursor intensities (area based) and normalized to total peptide amounts. Protein hits with more than 1 peptide/protein were accepted, minimum replicate features were set to 50%.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) represent a diverse group of small membrane-encapsulated particles involved in cell-cell communication, but the technologies to characterize EVs are still limited. Hypoxia is a typical condition in solid tumors, and cancer-derived EVs support tumor growth and invasion of tissues by tumor cells. We found that exposure of renal adenocarcinoma cells to hypoxia induced EV secretion and led to notable changes in the EV protein cargo in comparison to normoxia. Proteomics analysis showed overrepresentation of proteins involved in adhesion, such as integrins, in hypoxic EV samples. We further assessed the efficacy of time-gated Raman spectroscopy (TG-RS) and surface-enhanced time-gated Raman spectroscopy (TG-SERS) to characterize EVs. While the conventional continuous wave excitation Raman spectroscopy did not provide a notable signal, prominent signals were obtained with the TG-RS that were further enhanced in the TG-SERS. The Raman signal showed characteristic changes in the amide regions due to alteration in the chemical bonds of the EV proteins. The results illustrate that the TG-RS and the TG-SERS are promising label free technologies to study cellular impact of external stimuli, such as oxygen deficiency, on EV production, as well as differences arising from distinct EV purification protocols.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Carcinoma, Extracellular vesisles, Mouse, Kidney

### Affiliations
 University of Oulu
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Disease Networks Research Unit, Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Kvantum Institute, Infotech Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland

### Submitter
Anatoliy Samoylenko

### Lab Head
Dr Seppo Vainio
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Disease Networks Research Unit, Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Kvantum Institute, Infotech Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland


