### Accession
PXD025273

### Title
Transplant Model Ischemic Conditioning Causes Tissue Leakage and Suppressed Inflammation in a Porcine Kidney

### Description
Background: Remote Ischemic Conditioning (RIC) has been proposed as a therapeutic intervention to circumvent the Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) that is inherent to organ transplantation. Using a porcine kidney transplant model, we aimed to decipher the subclinical molecular effects of a RIC regime, compared to non-RIC controls. Methods: Kidney pairs (n = 8+8) were extracted from brain dead donor pigs and transplanted in juvenile recipient pigs following a period of cold ischemia. One kidney in each pair was subjected to RIC prior to reperfusion, while the other served as non-RIC control. We designed an advanced integrative -Omics strategy combining transcriptomics, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics to deduce molecular signatures in kidney tissue that could be attributed to RIC. Results: In kidney grafts taken out 10 h after transplantation we detected minimal molecular perturbations following RIC compared to non-RIC at the transcriptome level, but more pronounced effects at the proteome level. In particular, we noted that RIC resulted in response suppression of tissue inflammatory profiles. Furthermore, an accumulation of muscle extracellular matrix assembly proteins in RIC tissues was detected at the protein level, which may result in response to muscle tissue damage and/or fibrosis. Conclusions: Our data identifies subtle molecular phenotypes in porcine kidneys subjected to RIC which could aid further optimisation of remote ischaemia protocols in renal transplantation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Sample preparation. In accordance with the transcriptomics study, sixteen tissue samples (weighing approximately 20 mg) were lysed using a Precellys 24 homogeniser (Bertin Instruments) in 30 µL RIPA and 6M urea lysis buffer per 1 mg of tissue. Samples were reduced with 200 mM TCEP at 55°C for 1 hour and alkylated with 375 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature. Following this, protein precipitation via methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed. The resulting pellet was dried and resuspended in 50 µL TEAB and the protein concentration determined using a BCA assay (Pierce). In total, 100 µg of protein was digested by trypsin using the SMART method (Thermo Scientific). In brief, each sample was loaded into a SMART digestion tube (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat no 60109-103) containing 150 µL of SMART digestion buffer. These were then incubated at 70°C at 1400 rpm for 2 hours on a heat shaker (Eppendorf) and spun at 2500 x g for 5 min, with collection of the supernatant. Samples were de-salted using SOLA SPE plates (Thermo Scientific, Cat no 60109-103). Columns were equilibrated using 100% acetonitrile (ACN), then 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid TFA. The samples were then diluted with 1% TFA and pulled through the column using a vacuum pump. They were then washed with 0.01% TFA and eluted in 100 µL 65% acetonitrile. Eluates were dried using a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB for TMT labelling. TMT labelling and high pH fractionation. TMT 10plex reaction groups were used to label the digested peptides. Groups comprised of 8 samples (4 sets of RIC and non-RIC) and two pools; one undiluted, and one 5 times diluted. For labelling, 41 µL of TMT label was added to each sample and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. To quench the reaction, 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. Equal volumes of each sample were then pooled into 2 groups, and de-salted using Sep-Pak C18 columns. The resulting eluent was dried using a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in 120 µL of buffer A (98% MilliQ-H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). The two combined TMT 10plex experiments were then pre-fractionated using high pH 10.0 reversed-phase liquid chromatography (HPLC) into a total of 60 fractions. Fractions were subsequently concatenated into a total of 20 samples and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis. The proteomic sample preparation strategy is summarized in Figure 1. Phosphoproteomics. For phosphopeptide enrichment, 50 µg of protein was removed from each of the 16 tissue samples, and pooled into their respective RIC and non-RIC groups. Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin, and desalted as above.  Peptides (~400 µg) were eluted from Sep-Pak cartridges in 500 µL buffer B (65% ACN, 35% MilliQ-H2O, and 0.1% TFA). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using an Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) column with the aid of a Bravo Automated Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent). Mass Spectrometry analysis. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis was undertaken using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra reversed-phase HPLC system with on-line coupling to a Q Exactive High Field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm × 75 µm, 2 µm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 60 min gradient of 2–35% ACN in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% FA, and the flow rate was ~ 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent analysis mode for automated switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full MS survey scans were acquired from 400–2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for high collision energy dissociation fragmentation. MS2 fragment ion resolution was set to 15,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer (v2.3; total proteome) and MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0; phosphoproteome) software packages. Search parameters included the allowance of two missed trypsin cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while TMT6plex (N-term, K), oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications where appropriate. The data was searched against porcine protein sequences using the UPR_Sus scrofa fasta file along with the corresponding decoy reverse database. Only unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Remote ischaemic conditioning, Proteomics, Integrative omics, Inflammation, Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Darragh O'Brien

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK


