### Accession
PXD037551

### Title
Novel cellular systems unveil mucosal melanoma initiating cells and a role for PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in mucosal melanoma fitness

### Description
Mucosal Melanomas (MM) are highly aggressive neoplasms arising from mucosal melanocytes. Current treatments offer a limited survival benefit for patients with advanced MM; moreover, the lack of pre-clinical cellular systems has significantly limited the understanding of their immunobiology. By morphology, ultrastructure and phenotype analysis, this study reports the validation and functional characterization of five cell lines obtained from human melanomas arising from the sino-nasal mucosa and designated as SN-MM1-5. Compared to the normal counterpart, the proteomic profile of SN-MM is consistent with transformed melanocytes showing a heterogeneous degree of melanocytic differentiation and activation of cancer-related pathways. All SN-MM cell lines resulted tumorigenic in vivo in NOD/SCID mice. Of relevance, the microscopic analysis of the corresponding xenotransplants allowed the identification of clusters of MITF-/CDH1-/CDH2+/ZEB1+/CD271+ cells, supporting the existence of melanoma initiating cells also in MM, as confirmed on clinical samples. The proteomic analysis of SN-MM cell lines revealed that RICTOR, a subunit of mTORC2 complex, is the most significantly activated upstream regulator, suggesting a relevant role for the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in these neoplasms. Accordingly, Akt activation, as measured by pAkt(Ser473) and pAkt(Thr308), was observed in all SN-MM and resulted constitutive and sustained by PTEN loss in SN-MM2 and SN-MM3 . A functional role for PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway was confirmed by PI3K chemical inhibitor LY294002 which significantly impaired SN-MM cell lines viability. Overall, these novel and unique cellular systems represent relevant experimental tools for a better understanding of the immunobiology of these neoplasms and, as extension, to MM from other sites.

### Sample Protocol
4x104 M3-NHEM and 1-1.5x105 SN-MM cells were seeded in 12-well plates in 1 mL complete medium. Cells were collected , washed, and lysed, as described in the Western blotting Materials and Methods Section. After cell lysis, the proteins were digested with trypsin. 40 µg of protein were reduced in 25 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 2.5 μL of 200 mM DTT (Sigma) at 60°C for 45 minutes and next alkylated with 10 μL 200 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 1 hour at RT in dark conditions. Iodoacetamide excess was removed by the addition of 200 mM DTT. The digests were dried by Speed Vacuum and then desalted. Trypsin-digested sample proteins were analyzed with a micro-LC (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) system coupled with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source. Stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA). Mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flowrate of 15.0 µL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min.

### Data Protocol
For identification purposes the samples were subjected to a data dependent acquisition (DDA) while the quantification was performed through a data independent analysis (DIA) approach. The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) using trypsin as enzyme, with 2 missed cleavages, a search tolerance of 50 ppm for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 01/02/2018, containing 42271 sequence entries), with a false discovery rate fixed at 1%.  Lael-free quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the DIA files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test (p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.3). Multivariate statistical analysis was performed through MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (www.metaboanalyst.org). Cluster analysis was done by k-means after assessing the best number of clusters maximizing the average silhouette width. Bioinformatic analysis was carried out using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA, USA), Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), STRING software (https://string-db.org) and R version 4.2.0 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) was used for statistical analysis including the use of the following packages: (“ComplexHeatmap”, “ggplot2”, “ggpubr”, “PCAtools”, “factoextra”)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pre-clinical models, Mucosal melanomas, Melanosomes, Proteomics, Cell line-derived xenografts, Cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD - University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD - University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy


