### Accession
PXD020696

### Title
IFITM3 amino acid mutants phosphoproteomics

### Description
To investigate the role of IFITM3 in B-ALL, patient derived xenograft cells PDX2 were transduced with either a the constitutively membrane associated IFITM3-Y20E mutant or EV control. Additional mutation of PIP3 binding sites within the conserved internal loop region - K83/K104 or R85/R87/K88 - were introduced to test the predicted function of these sites.

### Sample Protocol
Patient-derived B-ALL (PDX2) cells transduced with HA-tagged IFITM3-Y20E or empty vector (EV) control were incubated with 2.5 μg ml-1 of polyclonal anti-HA (Abcam) for 5 min at 37 ºC at 5% CO2. Cellular extracts were prepared in urea lysis buffer, sonicated, centrifuged, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide.  15mg total protein for each sample was digested with trypsin, and 500mg total protein for each sample was digested with LysC/trypsin for IMAC analysis.  Samples were purified over C18 columns and dried in a lyophilizer. Dried samples were resuspended and enriched with Fe-IMAC beads (#20432), purified over C18 STAGE tips (Rappsilber). Replicate injections of each sample were run non-sequentially on the instrument. Peptides were eluted using 150-minute (IMAC) linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min.  Tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using a top-twenty MS/MS method, a dynamic repeat count of one, and a repeat duration of 30 sec.  Real time recalibration of mass error was performed using lock mass (Olsen) with a singly charged polysiloxane ion m/z = 371.101237.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University (Eng, Huttlin, Villen). Files were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens FASTA database.  A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions.  Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed.  Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were allowed as variable modifications.  Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using a 1% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a -/+ 5ppm mass error range and presence of a phosphorylated residue.  All quantitative results were generated using Skyline (MacLean) to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments.  Accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein&#xa0;3 (IFITM3) has previously been identified as an endosomal protein that blocks viral infection<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we studied clinical cohorts of patients with B&#xa0;cell leukaemia and lymphoma, and identified IFITM3 as a strong predictor of poor outcome. In normal resting B&#xa0;cells, IFITM3 was minimally expressed and mainly localized in endosomes. However, engagement of the B&#xa0;cell receptor (BCR) induced both expression of IFITM3 and phosphorylation of this protein at Tyr20, which resulted in the accumulation of IFITM3 at the cell surface. In B&#xa0;cell leukaemia, oncogenic kinases phosphorylate IFITM3 at Tyr20, which causes constitutive localization of this protein at the plasma membrane. In a mouse model, Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> naive B&#xa0;cells developed in normal numbers; however, the formation of germinal centres and the production of antigen-specific antibodies were compromised. Oncogenes that induce the development of leukaemia and lymphoma did not transform Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells. Conversely, the phosphomimetic IFITM3(Y20E) mutant induced oncogenic PI3K signalling and initiated the transformation of premalignant B&#xa0;cells. Mechanistic experiments revealed that IFITM3 functions as a PIP3&#xa0;scaffold and central amplifier of PI3K signalling. The amplification of PI3K signals depends on IFITM3 using two lysine residues (Lys83 and Lys104) in its conserved intracellular loop as a scaffold for the accumulation of PIP3. In Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells, lipid rafts were depleted of PIP3, which resulted in the defective expression of over 60&#xa0;lipid-raft-associated surface receptors, and impaired BCR signalling and cellular adhesion. We conclude that the phosphorylation of IFITM3 that occurs after B&#xa0;cells encounter antigen induces a dynamic switch from antiviral effector functions in endosomes to a PI3K amplification loop at the cell surface. IFITM3-dependent amplification of PI3K signalling, which in part acts downstream of the BCR, is critical for the rapid expansion of B&#xa0;cells with high affinity to antigen. In addition, multiple oncogenes depend on IFITM3 to assemble PIP3-dependent signalling complexes and amplify PI3K signalling for malignant transformation.

### Keywords
Pdx b-all b-cell

### Affiliations
City of Hope
Department of Systems Biology, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, CA, USA

### Submitter
Mark Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Muschen
Department of Systems Biology, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, CA, USA


