### Accession
PXD030764

### Title
Proteome analysis of mixed fatty acid treated hepatocytes

### Description
How hepatocytes respond to a fatty acid stimulus is the topic of continuous research, since it is essential for our understanding of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease a pathology with a hard to detect onset, estimated to be present in a quarter of the adult human population. As advanced stages include cirrhosis and development of hepatocellular carcinoma, early detection and intervention is crucial. To improve our understanding of the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease we treated a human hepatoma cell line model, HepG2, with increasing concentrations of common fatty acids namely myristic, palmitic and oleic acid. To reproduce more representative conditions, we also included combinations of these fatty acids and monitored the cellular response with an in-depth proteomics approach and imaging techniques. The two saturated fatty acids presented a similar phenotype of a dose dependent decrease of proliferation rates and little lipid droplet formation. Interestingly, our data corroborated that this drop in proliferation rates was due to delayed cell cycle progression following myristic acid treatment, whereas palmitic acid led to cellular apoptosis. In contrast, oleic acid, as well as saturated fatty acid mixtures with oleic acid, led to a dose dependent increase of lipid droplet volume without the adverse impact on proliferation. Comparing the outcomes from harmful single fatty acid treatments and the well tolerated fatty acid mixes, we were able to differentiate between fatty acid specific cellular responses and likely common lipotoxic denominators.  Two of them, A2M and SERPINA3, are modulators of the innate immune system and are likely involved in the inflammation occurring on systemic level. The remaining four include transcription factors like H2AFY, which recently has been proposed as a biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma. Conclusively, our study not only manages to contextualise proteome alterations following fatty acid treatment, but also highlights differences between cellular effects of two common saturated fatty acids.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation HepG2 cells were seeded in 6 well plates and grown to approximately 80% confluency prior to lipid loading. After 24h of treatment cells were washed 3 times with ice cold PBS (SIGMA) and collected in 300µL lysis buffer (100mM Tris pH = 8, 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40mM chloroacetamide). A sonication probe at 90% amplitude (counting to 1500J) was used to lyse the cell suspension followed by a reduction and alkylation step. A 30min 3500g centrifugation step at 4°C was performed to remove all insoluble debris. Protein content was estimated using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Thermo Fisher Scientific) after which 100µg of protein per each sample was precipitated overnight with 3 volumes of acetone. The following day, protein pellets were re-dissolved in 25% trifluoroethanol (in 100 mM Tris pH8.5), diluted to 10% trifluoroethanol with ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Pre-fractionation We utilised a high- pH reversed- phase C18 column from Waters (Xbridge Peptide BEH 186008979, inner diameter 2.1mm; length 50mm; 2.5µm particle size) for pre-fractionation on an Agilent 1100 & 1200 series HPLC system. 20µg of peptides dissolved in solvent A (0.1% triethylamine (N,N-diethylethanamine), pH10) was loaded onto the column and a gradient starting with 3% solvent B (100% acetonitrile) rising to 30% B within 30min was employed with a constant flow rate of 300µl/min at 50°C column temperature. The gradient continued to 60% B at 41.3min, 95% B at 44.6min and stayed at 95% B for another 2min followed by a final decrease to 3% B at 54min. Fractionation collection applied a pooling (Kulak et al. 2017). In summary, 54 fractions (300µl each) were collected and pooled in an online fashion into 8 fractions using the Agilent 1200 fraction collector system. Fraction 1 was combined with fractions 9, 17, 25, 33, 41 and 49, fraction 2 was combined with fractions 10, 18, 26, 34, 42 and 50, etc. into Eppendorf low-bind 96 deep well plates. These deep plates were subsequently dried in a Thermo Fisher vacuum concentrator for 24h at room temperature. Samples were redissolved in 200µl of a ddH2O: acetonitrile 1:1 (vol:vol) mixture (0.1% formic acid) and further combined to a total of 4 fractions (fraction 1+5, 2+6, etc.). Finally, samples were transferred to glass vials (Bruckner), dried for another 6h at 30°C, dissolved in 10µl 3% acetonitrile (+ 0.1% formic acid) and kept at -20°C until measurement.  LC-MS/MS proteomics measurement Peptide fractions were analysed by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora (Ionoptics) nanocolumn (C18, 1.6 µm, 250 x 0.075 mm). Separation was carried out at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient, where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid: 0-18min: 2%B; 18-100min: 2-25%B; 100-107min: 25-35%B, 107-108min: 35-95%B; 108-118min: 95%B, 118-118.1min: 95-2%B; 118.1-133min: 2%B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 200 - 2000 m/z, 4Hz, capillary 1600V, dry gas flow 3L/min with 150°C, nano Booster 0.2bar, precursor acquisition control top20 (CID). Peptide fractions were analysed by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora (Ionoptics) nanocolumn (C18, 1.6 µm, 250 x 0.075 mm). Separation was carried out at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient, where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid: 0-18min: 2%B; 18-100min: 2-25%B; 100-107min: 25-35%B, 107-108min: 35-95%B; 108-118min: 95%B, 118-118.1min: 95-2%B; 118.1-133min: 2%B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 200 - 2000 m/z, 4Hz, capillary 1600V, dry gas flow 3L/min with 150°C, nano Booster 0.2bar, precursor acquisition control top20 (CID).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Data analysis, database search and quantitation were carried out by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) software. SwissProt human fasta file (downloaded on 06.04.2019, 20467 sequences) containing most common protein contaminants was used as a database. False discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, peptide-to-spectrum (PSM) as well as protein matches was set to 1 %. Peptide tolerance was ± 20 and ± 4.5 for the first and main peptide search, respectively. Product mass tolerance was ± 0.5 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static and methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification. Minimum required peptide length was six amino acids and maximum number of allowed tryptic mis-cleavages was two. Match between runs was enabled in the retention time window of 3 min and alignment window of 20 min. No intensity threshold for individual spectra was defined. For statistical analysis Perseus (v1.6.15.0) was employed. Protein quantitation was based on label free quantitation (LFQ), with a minimum of 2 peptides per protein (unique and razor) as quantitation requirement. This resulted in a list of 5548 proteins with their corresponding LFQ values. Contaminants were removed and the matrix was filtered to contain at least 3 valid values in at least one group (control or ATGL–KO). This reduced the matrix to 5322 proteins and the remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution (downshift 1.8, width 0.5). Consequently, Student t-tests were performed with the following criteria: p-value of at least 0.05, S0 of 0.1 and permutation-based FDR set to 5% to correct for multi-testing.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a pathology with a hard-to-detect onset and is estimated to be present in a quarter of the adult human population. To improve our understanding of the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, we treated a human hepatoma cell line model, HepG2, with increasing concentrations of common fatty acids, namely myristic, palmitic and oleic acid. To reproduce more physiologically representative conditions, we also included combinations of these fatty acids and monitored the cellular response with an in-depth proteomics approach and imaging techniques. The two saturated fatty acids initially presented a similar phenotype of a dose-dependent decrease in growth rates and impaired lipid droplet formation. Detailed analysis revealed that the drop in the growth rates was due to delayed cell-cycle progression following myristic acid treatment, whereas palmitic acid led to cellular apoptosis. In contrast, oleic acid, as well as saturated fatty acid mixtures with oleic acid, led to a dose-dependent increase in lipid droplet volume without adverse impacts on cell growth. Comparing the effects of harmful single-fatty-acid treatments and the well-tolerated fatty acid mixes on the cellular proteome, we were able to differentiate between fatty-acid-specific cellular responses and likely common lipotoxic denominators.

### Keywords
Nafld, Myristic acid, Oleic acid, Hepg2, Palmitic acid

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, 1060 Vienna, Austria
Medical University Graz

### Submitter
Juergen Gindlhuber

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Department of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, 1060 Vienna, Austria


