### Accession
PXD044301

### Title
WELFARE OF RAINBOW TROUT AT SLAUGHTER: INTEGRATING BEHAVIOURAL, PHYSIOLOGICAL, PROTEOMIC AND QUALITY INDICATORS

### Description
This study compared the brain proteome response of fish submitted to cold shock by fast-chilling (FC) as a novel stunning method (with fish immersed in liquid water at -8ºC), asphyxia (ASP) (as the currently used method), electrical stunning (ES) and anaesthesia (AN) with MS-222, by integrating it with physiological, behavioural and quality welfare indicators. Fish trials were conducted in triplicate tanks and two fish per tank were randomly sampled for MS analysis. One of the objectives of this integrative work was to disclose most significant changes in the brain proteome of rainbow trout (O. mykiss) subjected to four types of stunning methods that could help to elucidate about welfare standards.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction, brain samples (n = 6, 2 fish per triplicate tanks, randomly selected) were solubilized with 1500 μL of extraction buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris pH 8.5), 15 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck KGaA) and 6 μL of 250 mM EDTA. Samples were homogenized with a tissue lyser (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) with 5 mm metal beads for 3 cycles of 30 s, at frequency 25/s. Homogenates were incubated at 4°C for 30 min, in constant rotation, and centrifuged at 13,000 g, 4 °C for 15 min to remove insoluble material. Liver protein extracts were diluted in the corresponding initial buffer and the protein content measured with Bradford assay using BioRad Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent 1X (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, USA) and the BSA Standard Set (Bio-Rad). Extracts were then depleted of non-protein contaminants using the ReadyPrep™ 2D Clean-up kit (Bio-Rad), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cleaned protein pellet was further resuspended in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitors for 10 min at 95ºC at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Samples were then prepared following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol, as described elsewhere (1). Enzymatic digestion was performed with 2 µg Trypsin/LysC overnight at 37 ºC at 1000 rpm. nanoLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides (500 ng) were analyzed by online nanoLC using an UltiMate TM 3000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL min-1. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL min-1. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA, with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) positive mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV and capillary temperature was 275 °C. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chrom. peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. DDA settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45 s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass and spectrum data type profile. MS analyses were performed at the Proteomics Scientific Platform of i3S, Porto, Portugal.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw MS data were processed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) on Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 and searched against the Protacanthopterygii database (taxon ID 41705; Release 2022_04; 803,964 sequences) plus contaminants, for protein identification.  for protein identification. The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids and 144 as maximum. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification (TOP3) was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on t-test (background based). Processing workflow results, i.e., .msf files (magellan storage files), were imported into Scaffold (v.5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at a probability higher than 95% to achieve an FDR lower than 0.1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability (protein Decoy FDR < 0.1%) by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) and contained at least two identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein abundance was estimated based on TOP3 Precursor Intensity and normalized values (against the sum of all ion intensities in each sample replicate) were log10 transformed prior to statistical analysis to ensure a Gaussian distribution of the residuals. The residuals’ normality and homoscedasticity were confirmed using the IBM SPSS Statistics software v.25.0. Statistical analyses of proteomics data were performed in the Perseus software (4), including only proteins quantified in at least 4 out 6 replicates per stunning condition.  (1)Hughes, C.S.; Moggridge, S.; Müller, T.; Sorensen, P.H.; Morin, G.B.; Krijgsveld, J. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments, Nat. Protocols 2019, 14(1), 68-85. (2) Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. Empirical Statistical Model To Estimate the Accuracy of Peptide Identifications Made by MS/MS and Database Search. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74 (20), 5383–5392. (3) Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Keller, A.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. A Statistical Model for Identifying Proteins by Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75 (17), 4646–4658. (4) Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M.Y.; Geiger, T., Mann, M.; Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 731–740.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Farmed fish, Brain, Fish welfare, Shotgun proteomics, Oncorhynchus mykiss

### Affiliations
Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Portugal University of Algarve (UAlg), Portugal
Universidade Algarve

### Submitter
Ana Paula Farinha

### Lab Head
Dr Marco A. Cerqueira (Project responsible), Pedro M. Rodrigues
Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Portugal University of Algarve (UAlg), Portugal


