### Accession
PXD004686

### Title
Novel insight into the composition of human single-stranded DNA-binding protein 1 (hSSB1)-containing protein complexes

### Description
Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins are essential cellular components required for the protection, metabolism and processing of single-stranded DNA. Human single-stranded DNA-binding protein 1 (hSSB1) is one such protein, with described roles in genome stability maintenance and transcriptional regulation. As yet, however, the mechanisms through which hSSB1 functions and the binding partners with which it interacts remain poorly understood. In this work, hSSB1 was immunoprecipitated from cell lysate samples that had been enriched for non-soluble nuclear proteins and hSSB1-associating proteins identified by mass spectrometry. In doing so, 334 potential hSSB1-associating proteins were identified, with known roles in a range of distinct biological processes. Unexpectedly, whilst hSSB1 has largely been studied in a genome stability context, few other DNA repair or replication proteins were detected. By contrast, a large number of proteins were identified with roles in mRNA metabolism, reflecting a currently emerging area of hSSB1 study. In addition, numerous proteins were detected that comprise various chromatin-remodelling complexes. These findings provide new insight into the binding partners of hSSB1 and will likely function as a platform for future research.

### Sample Protocol
hSSB1 was immunoprecipitated from HeLa whole cell lysates which had been previously enriched for non-soluble nuclear proteins via sub-cellular fractionation. Here, cells were resuspended in Buffer A (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 nM KCl, 0.05 mM DTT, 0.05% Triton X-100, 1x protease inhibitors 1x phosphatase inhibitors), vortexed at maximum speed for 5 s, then incubated at 4 oC with agitation for 10 minutes before passing through a 26 gauge needle 6 times. Solutions were then centrifuged at 500 x G for 10 minutes at 4 oC and the supernatant (cytoplasmic fraction) removed. Nuclei were washed once in Buffer A before resuspension in Buffer C (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.05 mM EDTA, 420 mM NaCl, 25% glycerol, 0.05% Triton X-100, 1x protease inhibitors 1x phosphatase inhibitors). Solutions were vortexed at maximum speed for 15 s, then incubated at 4 oC with agitation for 30 minutes, before centrifugation at 2,000 x G for 10 minutes at 4 oC. Supernatant (soluble nuclear fraction) was collected and the pellet washed once with Buffer C. The pellet was resuspended in Buffer C containing 4,000 units of micrococcal nuclease, vortexed for 15 s and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature with agitation. Solutions were centrifuged at 21,000 x G for 10 minutes and the supernatant (chromatin-bound fraction) collected.   hSSB1 was then immunoprecipitated from these samples by overnight incubation at 4oC with anti-hSSB1-bound protein G dynabeads. Beads were then washed 5x with immunoprecipitation buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 5% glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. Proteins were eluted by incubation in 3x SDS loading dye at 80 oC for 5 minutes.   Eluent samples were separated on a 10% acrylamide Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast SDS-PAGE Gel (Bio-Rad, Gladesville, NSW) to a depth of 8 mM. The gel was stained with colloidal coomassie brilliant blue G-250 and the sample divided in eight 1 mM gel bands. In-gel digestion was performed using an Agilent Bravo automated liquid handling platform (Agilent Technologies, Mulgrave, Victoria) to achieve the following: 90 minutes incubation in de-stain buffer (50% v/v acetonitrile, 25 mM NH4HCO3), dehydration for 10 minutes using a SpeedVac, 20 minutes incubation in alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide), overnight trypsin digestion (0.4 g trypsin, 10% acetonitrile, 25mM NH4HCO3), trypsin inactivation with 5% formic acid and peptide elution in extraction buffer (1% formic acid, 60% acetonitrile). Peptides were dried using a SpeedVac, resuspended in 5% formic acid and analysed using an Agilent HPLC CHIP QTOF 6530 system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto an Agilent (Agilent Technologies) G4240-62010 large capacity chip in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile with a flow rate of 2.5 l min-1. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile to 0.1% formic acid excluding acetonitrile. The MS1 analyzer acquired ions from 100m/z to 1700m/z at a rate of 10 spectra/s. The MS2 analyzer acquired ions from 50m/z to 1700m/z at a rate of 3spectra/s. A maximum of 10 precursors were selected per cycle and ions were excluded after 1 spectra and released after 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained in this way was processed using Spectrum Mill (Agilent technoliges, B.04.00.127) and extracted data searched against the Swiss-Prot Human (version 11/2014) database. Search parameters included tryspin digestion, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and methionine oxidation. Detected proteins were manually sorted based on their predominant known biological process as given by UniProt (www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin remodelling, Ints3, Mrna metabolism, Nabp2, Hssb1

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Research, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation at the Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia
Hill Laboratory

### Submitter
Dorothy Loo

### Lab Head
Dr Derek John Richard
School of Biomedical Research, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation at the Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia


