### Accession
PXD012964

### Title
Measuring glycolytic flux in single yeast cells with an orthogonal synthetic biosensor

### Description
Metabolic heterogeneity modulates productivity, antibiotic resistance and cancer aggressiveness. Since metabolic fluxes represent the functional output of metabolism, with glycolytic flux correlating with highly-productive phenotypes and cancer, such flux map will be indicative of the cellular metabolic state. Therefore, the quantification of metabolic fluxes is vital to identify the existence of metabolic subpopulations and to understand the process of their emergence at the single-cell level. However, so far inference of metabolic fluxes in individual cells is not possible as no method is available.  Here, we developed a biosensor for glycolytic flux measurements in single yeast cells drawing on the robust correlation between fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) and flux levels in yeast, and using the B. subtilis FBP-binding transcription factor CggR. We followed a systematic engineering approach starting from promoter design, computational protein design and protein engineering, accompanied by strict characterization of the biosensor using different biochemical methods, proteomics, metabolomics and physiological analyses. As proof of principle, we applied the biosensor in vivo in the search for metabolic subpopulations in yeast cultures and, using fluorescence microscopy, we demonstrated that quiescent yeast cells have low glycolytic fluxes in comparison to coexisting dividing cells. We anticipate that our biosensor will contribute with unprecedented resolution for the study of metabolic subpopulations, to understand how and why metabolic subpopulations emerge and, very importantly, give clues on how to counteract the undesirable effects of such.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellet was reconstituted in 40 µL 2% sodium-deoxycholate (SDC); 10 mM TCEP; 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated two times for 10 seconds using a UP200St VialTweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH, Germany). Heat treatment was performed for 10 minutes at 95°C. After cooling, the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay for each sample (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Sample aliquots containing 100 µg of protein were used for the following steps, Alkylation was performed by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15mM and incubation for 45 minutes at RT, in the dark. The samples were diluted to 1% SDC using 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and mass spectrometry grade Trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:50 (µg Trypsin:µg Protein) and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C, 400 rpm. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Sample cleanup by solid phase extraction was performed with Pierce® C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer instructions. The eluate fraction was dried under vacuum and reconstituted with 20 µL of a mixture of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) as described recently60 with a few modifications. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 100 min and to 45% B over 20 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions using rapid scan speed. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 ms (MS) and 25 ms (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c, UniProt, download date: 15/12/2016) including common contaminants, like keratins) and CggR from Bacillus subtilis (strain 168, total of 14,248 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This data was further processed and statistically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script60. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic heterogeneity between individual cells of a population harbors significant challenges for fundamental and applied research. Identifying metabolic heterogeneity and investigating its emergence require tools to zoom into metabolism of individual cells. While methods exist to measure metabolite levels in single cells, we lack capability to measure metabolic flux, i.e., the ultimate functional output of metabolic activity, on the single-cell level. Here, combining promoter engineering, computational protein design, biochemical methods, proteomics, and metabolomics, we developed a biosensor to measure glycolytic flux in single yeast cells. Therefore, drawing on the robust cell-intrinsic correlation between glycolytic flux and levels of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), we transplanted the B.&#xa0;subtilis FBP-binding transcription factor CggR into yeast. With the developed biosensor, we robustly identified cell subpopulations with different FBP levels in mixed cultures, when subjected to flow cytometry and microscopy. Employing microfluidics, we were also able to assess the temporal FBP/glycolytic flux dynamics during the cell cycle. We anticipate that our biosensor will become a valuable tool to identify and study metabolic heterogeneity in cell populations.

### Keywords
Yeast, Mcherry, Cggr

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


