### Accession
PXD015253

### Title
BMP-inhibition in Drosophila secondary cells remodels the seminal proteome, and self and rival ejaculate functions

### Description
Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) exert potent effects on male and female fitness. These rapidly evolving and molecularly diverse proteins derive from multiple male secretory cells and tissues. In Drosophila melanogaster most SFPs are produced in the accessory glands, which are composed of ~1000 fertility-enhancing ‘main cells’ and ~40, more functionally cryptic, ‘secondary cells’. Previous work shows that inhibition of BMP-signalling in secondary cells suppresses secretion, leading to a surprising uncoupling of normal female post-mating responses: refractoriness stimulation is impaired, but offspring production is not. Secondary cell secretions might therefore make a highly specific contribution to the seminal proteome and ejaculate function; alternatively, they might play a more global – but hitherto-undiscovered – role in regulating SFPs and their interconnected functions. Here, we present data that supports the latter model. We show that in addition to previously reported phenotypes, secondary cell-specific BMP-inhibition compromises sperm storage and increases female sperm use efficiency. Moreover, it alters sperm competition: second male sperm enter storage more slowly, ejaculates are ejected later, and first male paternity share improves. This result suggests a novel constraint on ejaculate evolution whereby female refractoriness and sperm competitiveness cannot be simultaneously maximised. Using quantitative proteomics, we reveal changes to the seminal proteome that surprisingly encompass alterations to main cell-derived proteins, indicating important cross-talk between classes of SFP-secreting cells. Our results demonstrate that ejaculate composition and function emerge from the integrated action of multiple secretory cell-types suggesting that modification to the cellular make-up of seminal fluid-producing tissues is an important factor in ejaculate evolution.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, we pooled 20 pairs of accessory glands, which we dissected under a light microscope on ice in a drop of ice-cold PBS. We took care to remove the seminal vesicles and testes, and severed the glands from the distal end of the ejaculatory duct. Dissected glands were then transferred to an Eppendorf tube containing 25µl of PBS, which we stored at -80°C. In total, we had 20 samples: five for each of the four treatment permutations (mated, Dad; pre-mating, Dad; mated, control; pre-mating, control). We ran this experiment five times in order to produce five independent biological replicates. We prepared our samples for proteomic analysis in line with the previously published GASP protocol. The glandular tissue was first macerated using a clean pestle for a timed interval of one minute. To lyse the cells, we added 25µl of Pierce RIPA Buffer, which we dripped over the pestle to flush residual tissue back into the sample. Next, we incubated the lysate with 50mM of the reducing agent DTT for approximately 10 to 20 minutes. To this, we added at room temperature an equal volume of 40% acrylamide/Bis solution (37.5:1) to facilitate cysteine alkylation to propionamide. Next, we added 5µl of 10% APS and an equivalent quantity of TEMED to trigger the polymerization of acrylamide and form a gel plug. This plug was subsequently shredded via centrifugation through a membrane-less Spin-X filter insert (CLS9301). Gel-fragments from this process were fixed in 40% ethanol/5% acetic acid before washing with a solution of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1.5M Urea, and 0.5M Thiourea, which was then removed with acetonitrile. 250µl of dilute trypsin was next added and the solution left at 37°C overnight to promote digestion of the immobilised peptides. The resulting peptides were extracted via two repeated ACN replacements, dried, desalted in Sola SPE columns, and then suspended in 0.1% FA (formic acid), 2% ACN before LC-MS/MS analysis. For peptide analysis, we used a LC-MS/MS platform composed of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptide loading took place in a solution of 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN on a trap column (PepMAPC18, 300µm x 5m, 5µm particle) For separation, we used an easy spray column (PepMAP C18, 75µm x 500m, 2µm particle) with a gradient 2% ACN to 35% ACN in 0.1% FA in 5% DMSO. For MS spectra collection, we used a resolution of 70,000 in profile mode on the Q-Exactive (ion target = 3x106). We selected the top 15 most intense features selected for subsequent MS/MS analysis (resolution of 17,500). The following parameters were set: dynamic exclusion=27 seconds; AGC target=1x105; isolation width=1.6m/z; and maximum acquisition time=100ms.

### Data Protocol
We imported the RAW data into Progenesis QIP (version 4.1.6675.48614), exporting spectra as MGF files using the 200 most intense peaks without deconvolution for searching. Peptide identification used the D. melanogaster UniProt reference proteome as a search target, with database retrieval conducted on 27/09/2017 (23306 sequences) in Mascot 2.5.1. Search parameters were set as follows: Oxidation (M), Propionamide (K), and Deamidation (N,Q) as variable modifications; Propionamide (C) asa fixed modification; one missed cleavage site; 0.05 Da fragment mass accuracy; 10ppm precursor accuracy. Prior to importing the search results into Progenesis for quantification via the Top3 method, we applied a peptide-level 1% FDR alongside a further Mascot ion cut-off of 20. The resulting protein abundance data was subsequently normalised using the internal Progenesis algorithm to a set of housekeeping proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) exert potent effects on male and female fitness. Rapidly evolving and molecularly diverse, they derive from multiple male secretory cells and tissues. In <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, most SFPs are produced in the accessory glands, which are composed of &#x223c;1,000 fertility-enhancing "main cells" and &#x223c;40 more functionally cryptic "secondary cells." Inhibition of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in secondary cells suppresses secretion, leading to a unique uncoupling of normal female postmating responses to the ejaculate: refractoriness stimulation is impaired, but offspring production is not. Secondary-cell secretions might therefore make highly specific contributions to the seminal proteome and ejaculate function; alternatively, they might regulate more global-but hitherto undiscovered-SFP functions and proteome composition. Here, we present data that support the latter model. We show that in addition to previously reported phenotypes, secondary-cell-specific BMP signaling inhibition compromises sperm storage and increases female sperm use efficiency. It also impacts second male sperm, tending to slow entry into storage and delay ejection. First male paternity is enhanced, which suggests a constraint on ejaculate evolution whereby high female refractoriness and sperm competitiveness are mutually exclusive. Using quantitative proteomics, we reveal changes to the seminal proteome that surprisingly encompass alterations to main-cell-derived proteins, indicating important cross-talk between classes of SFP-secreting cells. Our results demonstrate that ejaculate composition and function emerge from the integrated action of multiple secretory cell types, suggesting that modification to the cellular make-up of seminal-fluid-producing tissues is an important factor in ejaculate evolution.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Seminal fluid, Sexual selection, Sperm competition

### Affiliations
Edward Grey Institute Department of Zoology University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart Wigby
Edward Grey Institute Department of Zoology University of Oxford


