### Accession
PXD034769

### Title
Quantification of ATIs in Wheat by LC-MS/MS – LFQ IonTrap

### Description
A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro).

### Sample Protocol
Samples Durum wheat cultivar Svevo wild type - Sample 1 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Durum wheat CRISPR-Cas9 edited lines in the ATI subunits CM3 and CM16 - R5P8 - Sample 3 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Bread Wheat cultivar Bobwhite wild type - - Sample 4 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Bread Wheat cultivar Bobwhite silenced by RNAi in the three ATI genes CM3, CM16 and 0.28 - Sample 5 (a,b,c - 3 replicates) Extraction Wholemeal flour (25 mg) of each sample was extracted two times with 1 mL 50% 1-propanol in Tris-HCl (0.5 mol/L, pH 8.8) (v/v) containing 1% dithiothreitol (DTT) (w/v) (Svevo: 2 × 1.3 mL and R5P8b: 2 × 2.1 mL; Bobwhite and 22-2, 2 × 2.8 mL). For each extraction step, the samples were vortexed for 2 min and then stirred at 60 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatants were collected in 15 mL tubes. The solutions were homogenized by shaking. Aliquots (150 µL containing 150 µg protein) were transferred in 1.5 mL tubes. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (600 µL) overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone (200 µL).  Digestion The protein pellets of the TEP extraction containing 150 µg protein were resuspended with 30 µL urea (8 mol/L) and Abic (0.1 mol/L, pH 7.8), reduced with 30 µL DTT (15 mmol/L in Abic) and alkylated with 30 µL iodoacetamide (55 mmol/L in Abic). Prior to digestion, proteins were precipitated with cold acetone, after drying, the pellet was resuspended with Abic and digested with trypsin (10 µL, 0.1 mg trypsin per mL in 1 mmol/L HCl).

### Data Protocol
A Thermo UltiMate 3000 capillary-flow UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was equipped with a C18 column (nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 300 µm × 150 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). A gradient from 1% B (B: 80% ACN in water (v/v) with 0.1% FA) to 40% B in 50 min was applied, followed by a 10 min gradient from 40% B to 95% B that facilitates elution of large peptides, at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. Peptide detection was done with a Bruker amaZon Speed Ion Trap (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) in the enhanced resolution mode, DDA mode (= switching to MS/MS mode for eluting peaks). MS-scans were recorded (range: 350-1600 Da) and the 8 highest peaks were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were identified with MASCOT MS/MS Ions Search using the UniProtKB Taxonomy: Viridiplantae (Green plants). Peptides were manually identified and curated with DataAnaylsis 4.0 (Bruker) based on MS1 peak area of selected peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitation of wheat proteins is still a challenge, especially regarding amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs). A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro). To characterize the wheat proteins on protein level, complementary techniques as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gel electrophoresis were performed. The targeted approach with SIDA was able to quantitate all ATIs, even at low levels, but an optimized extraction is necessary. The labeled iTRAQ approach revealed an indistinct performance. LFQ with low resolution equipment (IonTrap) showed similar results for major ATIs, but low abundance ATIs as CM1, were not detectable. DDA measurements with an Orbitrap system and evaluation using MaxQuant showed that the relative quantitation was dependent on the wheat species. The combination of manual curation of the MaxQuant search with Skyline revealed a very good performance. The DIA approach with analytical flow found similar results compared to absolute quantitation except for some minor ATIs, which were not detected. Comparison of applied methods revealed that peptide selection is a crucial step for protein quantitation. Wheat proteomics faces challenges due to the high genetic complexity, the close relationship to other cereals and the incomplete, redundant protein database requiring sensitive, precise and accurate LC-MS/MS methods.

### Keywords
Amylase/trypsin inhibitor; wheat; crsipr-cas9; rnai;

### Affiliations
Core Facility Mass Spectrometry BOKU, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria
AGES - Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety
Institute for Animal Nutrition and Feed
Spargelfeldstraße 191 | 1220 Vienna 

### Submitter
Stefano D'Amico

### Lab Head
Dr Clemens Grünwald-Gruber
Core Facility Mass Spectrometry BOKU, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria


