### Accession
PXD003653

### Title
Protein precipitation of diluted samples with acetone leads to higher protein recovery and reproducibility in comparison with TCA/acetone approach

### Description
Proteomic approaches are extremely valuable in many fields of research, where mass spectrometry methods have gained an increasing interest especially due to the ability to perform quantitative analysis. Nonetheless, sample preparation prior to mass spectrometry analysis is of the utmost importance. In this work two protein precipitation approaches, widely used for cleaning and concentrating protein samples, were tested and compared in a case of very diluted samples solubilized in a strong buffer (containing SDS). The amount of protein recovered after acetone and TCA/acetone precipitation was assessed, as well as the protein identification and relative quantification by SWATH-MS yields which were compared with the results from the same sample without precipitation. With this study it was possible to conclude that, in the case of diluted samples in denaturing buffers, the use of cold acetone as precipitation protocol is more favourable than the use of TCA/acetone in terms of reproducibility in protein recovery, number of identified and quantified proteins. Furthermore, the reproducibility in relative quantification of the proteins is even higher in samples precipitated with acetone when comparing to the original sample.

### Sample Protocol
Cortex tissue was isolated from wistar rats. After isolation in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.4 with protease inhibitors (Roche) the tissue was subjected to ultrasonication on ice with a 3 mm ultrasonic probe (Vibra-cell 130 watt, Sonics) from 40% to 50% amplitude with 30 s cycles (1 s on,1 s off). After 5 min centrifugation at 5,000xg the supernatant was centrifuged at 144,000xg at 4°C for 1 h (Beckman Coulter), 8 volumes of cold acetone were added to the supernatant (the soluble fraction) and kept for 20 min at -80°C to precipitate the protein content, which was then recovered by centrifugation at 3,220xg for 20 min and redisolved in 0.5 M of TEAB with the help of ultrasonication using a cuphorn device. Protein quantity was assessed using 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare), and the sample was stored at -80°C until further use. To test the best precipitation procedure for diluted samples, the sample prepared as described above was diluted to 0.1 µg/µL in SDS buffer (1.7% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris buffer at pH 6.8). Then 300 µL of sample was precipitated with 2 different procedures: i) Cold acetone, 3 replicates of the sample were precipitated with 6 volumes of cold acetone, then kept at -80°C for at least 20 min and centrifuged at 20,000xg for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellet was dissolved in 20 µL of SDS buffer; ii) TCA/acetone, 3 replicates of the sample were precipitated with 20% final concentration of TCA, then kept at -80°C for at least 20 min and centrifuged at 20,000xg for 20 min at 4°C, 300 µL of cold acetone were added to the pellet, kept at -80°C for at least 20 min and centrifuge as described above. The pellet was dissolved in 20 µL of SDS buffer. Ultrasonic energy using the cuphorn was used to help dissolve the protein pellets. The protein content was assessed using the Direct Detect® (Millipore). Two µL of a concentrated solution of glycerol (50%) and bromophenol blue was added to each sample. Also 3 replicates of 30 µg each of the original sample were prepared for SDS-page by adding Laemmli buffer. All the samples were boiled for 5 min and acrylamide was added as an alkylating agent. An SDS-PAGE was partially run in a “4–20% Mini-Protean® TGX™ Gel” (Bio-Rad) for 15 minutes at 110V andproteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. The lanes were sliced into 9 bands and each band was sliced in smaller pieces and, processed in three fractions (of three bands each). Gel pieces were destained, dehydratedand rehydrated on 70 µL of trypsin (0.01 µg/µL solution in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) followed by an overnight digestion (at room temperature). After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential addition of three solutions of increasing percentage of acetonitrile (30%, 50%, and 98%) in 1% formic acid (FA). and cleaned using solid phase extraction with C18 sorbent (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies). The eluted peptides were evaporated and solubilised in mobile phase for LC-MS/MS analysis. The Triple TOF™ 5600 System (ABSciex) was operated in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA); followed by SWATH acquisition. . Peptide were resolved by LC (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a MicroLC ChromXP C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm, 120Å, Eksigent) at 5 µL/min with a 45 min linear gradient of 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA, and eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, ABSciex). IDA experiments were performed by analysing 10 µL (of 30 µL) of each fraction of each replicate sample. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z for 100 ms each). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 70 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and 1 MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 20 s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread (CES) of 5. The 3 fractions of each sample were combined into a single sample and adjusted to 30 µL, and 10 µL of each sample was used  for quantitative analysis by SWATH-MS. The SWATH setup was essentially as in Gillet et al (MCP, 2012), with the same chromatographic conditions used above. The mass spectrometer operated in a looped product ion mode specifically tuned to allow a quadrupole resolution of 25 m/z mass selection. A set of 30 overlapping windows was used covering the precursor mass range of 350–1100 m/z. A 250 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 100 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1100 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centred upon the window with a CES of 15.

### Data Protocol
A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments or using all files from the samples of each procedure (referred to as “All Library” or “Procedure Library”, respectively), and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0, ABSciex). Search parameters used were the following: SwissProt database (release 2015_07), against rattus norvergicus, using acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification and the gel based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR.  Data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, ABSciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the ProteinPilot™ software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins in library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches. In SWATH™ Acquisition data, peptides are confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups, which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Target fragment ions, up to 5, were selected and peak groups were scored. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in all the four replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 minutes. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total area.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic approaches are extremely valuable in many fields of research, where mass spectrometry methods have gained an increasing interest, especially because of the ability to perform quantitative analysis. Nonetheless, sample preparation prior to mass spectrometry analysis is of the utmost importance. In this work, two protein precipitation approaches, widely used for cleaning and concentrating protein samples, were tested and compared in very diluted samples solubilized in a strong buffer (containing SDS). The amount of protein recovered after acetone and TCA/acetone precipitation was assessed, as well as the protein identification and relative quantification by SWATH-MS yields were compared with the results from the same sample without precipitation. From this study, it was possible to conclude that in the case of diluted samples in denaturing buffers, the use of cold acetone as precipitation protocol is more favourable than the use of TCA/acetone in terms of reproducibility in protein recovery and number of identified and quantified proteins. Furthermore, the reproducibility in relative quantification of the proteins is even higher in samples precipitated with acetone compared with the original sample.

### Keywords
Protein precipitation; acetone; tca/acetone; swath

### Affiliations
Center for Neurosciences and cell biology, Coimbra, Portugal
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neurosciences and cell biology, Coimbra, Portugal


