### Accession
PXD028804

### Title
Proteomic identification of an endogenous synaptic SUMOylome in the developing rat brain

### Description
Synapses are highly specialized structures that interconnect neurons to form functional networks dedicated to neuronal communication. During brain development, synapses undergo activity-dependent rearrangements leading to both structural and functional changes. Many molecular processes are involved in this regulation, including post-translational modifications by the Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier SUMO. To get a wider view of the panel of endogenous synaptic SUMO-modified proteins in the mammalian brain, we combined subcellular fractionation of rat brains at the post-natal day 14 with denaturing immunoprecipitation using SUMO2/3 antibodies and tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomal preparation was adapted from previously published protocols (Loriol, et al. 2014). Fresh forebrains of four PND14 rats were homogenized in 26 mL of ice-cold Sucrose Buffer (0.32 M Sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Roche, 20 mM NEM) using a 30 ml glass-Teflon homogenizer with 12 gentle strokes. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min at RT in a JA4.2 rotor (Beckman). The supernatant was then layered by 2 ml on the top of a four-step Percoll-sucrose density gradient (2 mL of 20% Percoll, 2 mL of 10% Percoll, 2 mL of 6% Percoll, and 2 mL of 2% Percoll in Sucrose Buffer) and centrifuged at 18 000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C in a SW41Ti rotor (Beckman). Synaptosomal fraction was recovered at the 10-20% interface Percoll layers. This fraction was then washed in 10 mL of HEPES Buffer (5 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM NaH2PO4, 5 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM Glucose, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Roche, 10 mM NEM) and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min in JA25.5 rotor (Beckman). The synaptosomal pellet was resuspended in Denaturing Lysis Buffer (20 mM Sodium Phosphate buffer pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% DOC, 1% SDS, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Roche, 10 mM NEM), supplemented with 50 mM DTT and boiled for 10 min at 95°C.  The denaturing immunoprecipitation protocol was adapted from Becker et al., 2013. Briefly, the denaturated synaptosomal fractions were diluted in Dilution Buffer (20 mM NaPi pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% DOC, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Roche, 10 mM NEM) to obtain a final concentration of 0.1% SDS. The lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g at 4°C. 8 mg of proteins, corresponding to synaptosomes isolated from ten PND14 rat brains, were incubated with 160 µg of immobilized SUMO-2/3 mouse monoclonal antibody, or mouse IgG antibody as a negative control, overnight at 4°C under soft rotation. Beads were washed 3 times for 5 minutes at 4°C in Wash Buffer (20 mM NaPi pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% DOC, 0.1% SDS, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Roche). Beads were additionally washed in Wash Buffer containing 500 mM NaCl for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins bound to the beads were then eluted 3 times for 30 min at 37°C with 200 µl of Wash Buffer supplemented with 0.5 mg/mL of SUMO2 peptide (CQIRFRFDGQPINE). Eluates were pooled and subjected to TCA precipitation. Proteins from synaptosomal preparations or  immunoprecipitation eluates were separated on SDS-PAGE on Bis-Tris gradient gel (4-20%, Mini-PROTEAN®, BioRad) and colored by Coomassie staining (Imperial blue). Each lane was manually excised into bands and proteins contained into gel slices were reduced/alkylated and digested by a treatment with DTT/IAA and trypsin. Peptides extracted were separated using a nanoHPLC (Ultimate 3000, ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides separation was performed on a 75 µm i.d. × 500 mm (3 µm, 100 Å) Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific) with an appropriate gradient. NanoHPLC was coupled to Q-exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), operating in data dependent MS/MS mode (dd-MS2).  Loriol C, Casse F, Khayachi A, Poupon G, Chafai M, Deval E, Gwizdek C, Martin S. 2014. mGlu5 receptors regulate synaptic sumoylation via a transient PKC-dependent diffusional trapping of Ubc9 into spines. Nat Commun.5:5113. Epub 2014/10/15. Becker J, Barysch SV, Karaca S, Dittner C, Hsiao HH, Berriel Diaz M, Herzig S, Urlaub H, Melchior F. 2013. Detecting endogenous SUMO targets in mammalian cells and tissues. Nat Struct Mol Biol. Apr;20:525-531. Epub 2013/03/19.

### Data Protocol
Data were reprocessed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 equipped with Sequest HT. Files were searched against the Swissprot Rattus FASTA database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Developping rat brain, Synapse, Sumo

### Affiliations
Université Côte d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Côte d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France

### Submitter
Carole Gwizdek

### Lab Head
Dr Stéphane MARTIN
Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Côte d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France


