### Accession
PXD036610

### Title
Protein interactors of MEG-1 in C. elegans embryos

### Description
In animals with germ plasm, specification of the germline involves “germ granules”, cytoplasmic condensates that enrich maternal transcripts in the germline founder cells. In C. elegans embryos, P granules enrich maternal transcripts, but surprisingly P granules are not essential for germ cell fate specification. Here we have described a second condensate in the C. elegans germ plasm. Like canonical P-bodies found in somatic cells, “germline P-bodies” contain regulators of mRNA decapping and deadenylation and, in addition, the intrinsically-disordered proteins MEG-1 and MEG-2 and the TIS11-family RNA-binding protein POS-1. Embryos lacking meg-1 and meg-2 do not stabilize P-body components, miss-regulate POS-1 targets, miss-specify the germline founder cell, and do not develop a germline. Our findings suggest that specification of the germ line involves at least two distinct condensates that independently enrich and regulate maternal mRNAs in the germline founder cells.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans expressing endogenously tagged MEG-1::GFP or untagged MEG-1 (N2) as a negative control were used. Embryos were collected in biological duplicate by bleaching from synchronized adult worms. Embryo lysates were incubated with anti-GFP nanobody conjugated beads, washed in IP buffer, and eluted in 1% SDS. Samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetomide TCA/acetone precipitated, in solution digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC/MS/MS on QE-Plus in FTFT at resolution 140K/35K with total 120min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) software. Default settings were used except that ‘Match between runs’ was turned on. Search parameters were as follows: Cysteine carbamidomethyl was included as a fixed modification, and variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and the maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 4. Trypsin was used as the digestion enzyme, a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Database search was performed against Uniprot C. elegans database (UP000001940_6239.fasta). False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. Protein groups were further analyzed using Perseus. Common contaminants, reverse proteins and proteins only identified by site were filtered out. LFQ values were log2 transformed. Two-sample t-tests were performed.

### Publication Abstract
In animals with germ plasm, specification of the germline involves 'germ granules', cytoplasmic condensates that enrich maternal transcripts in the germline founder cells. In Caenorhabditis elegans embryos, P granules enrich maternal transcripts, but surprisingly P granules are not essential for germ cell fate specification. Here, we describe a second condensate in the C. elegans germ plasm. Like canonical P-bodies found in somatic cells, 'germline P-bodies' contain regulators of mRNA decapping and deadenylation and, in addition, the intrinsically-disordered proteins MEG-1 and MEG-2 and the TIS11-family RNA-binding protein POS-1. Embryos lacking meg-1 and meg-2 do not stabilize P-body components, misregulate POS-1 targets, mis-specify the germline founder cell and do not develop a germline. Our findings suggest that specification of the germ line involves at least two distinct condensates that independently enrich and regulate maternal mRNAs in the germline founder cells. This article has an associated 'The people behind the papers' interview.

### Keywords
P-bodies, C. elegans, Germ granules, Meg-1

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Madeline Cassani

### Lab Head
Dr Geraldine Seydoux
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


