### Accession
PXD002277

### Title
Lysine succinylation is a frequently occurring modification in prokaryotes and eukaryotes and extensively overlaps with acetylation

### Description
Recent studies have shown that lysines can be posttranslationally modified by various types of acylations. However, except for acetylation, very little is known about their scope and cellular distribution. We mapped thousands of succinylation sites in bacteria (E. coli), yeast (S. cerevisiae), human (HeLa) cells, and mouse liver tissue, demonstrating widespread succinylation in diverse organisms. A majority of succinylation sites in bacteria, yeast, and mouse liver were acetylated at the same position. Quantitative analysis of succinylation in yeast showed that succinylation was globally altered by growth conditions and mutations that affected succinyl-coenzyme A (succinyl-CoA) metabolism in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, indicating that succinylation levels are globally affected by succinyl-CoA concentration. We preferentially detected succinylation on abundant proteins, suggesting that succinylation occurs at a low level and that many succinylation sites remain unidentified. These data provide a systems-wide view of succinylation and its dynamic regulation and show its extensive overlap with acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were prepared from the indicated samples and succinylated (or acetylated) peptides were enriched using polyclonal antibodybeads (immunechem). Peptides were eluted with acidified water and immediately seperated by micro-scale SCX chrmatography.Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The Q-Exactive was operated using Xcalibur 2.2 in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition as described elsewhere (Kelstrup et al., 2012 and Michalski et al., 2011). Peptides were fragmented using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (Olsen et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (development v1.2.7.1; http://www.maxquant.org/) as described previously (Cox et al., 2011). Parent ion (MS) and fragment (MS2) spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database genome release r63, January 5, 2010, and E. coli, human, and mouse data were searched against the UniProt species-specific fasta files from the April 2012 release. The search was performed using the integrated Andromeda search engine and both forward and reversed (decoy) versions of the databases ( Cox et al., 2011). Peptides were identified by a target-decoy based strategy ( Elias and Gygi, 2007), allowing a maximum false discovery rate of <1%. We applied further strict criteria on MS2 identification by requiring a PEP score < 0.01 and an Andromeda peptide score > 45, resulting in estimated FDRs that were below 1% ( Table S10). The confidence of any given peptide identification is indicated by the PEP and Andromeda scores; high-confidence identifications have lower PEP scores and higher Andromeda scores (for more details, see Cox and Mann, 2008 and Cox et al., 2011). Mass recalibration was performed using high confidence identifications based on an initial “first search” using a 20 parts per million (ppm) mass tolerance for parent ion masses and 20 ppm (HCD) for fragment ions. Spectra were subsequently searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm for parent ions and 20 ppm (HCD) for fragment ions, with strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. Succinyllysine adds a 100.0160 mass shift that is readily distinguishable from acetylation (42.0106), malonylation (86.0004), propionylation (56.0262), and crotonylation (69.0340), since the orbitrap analyzer used for fragment scans has a ppm-range mass accuracy. Methylmalonylation has an identical mass as succinylation and is not distinguishable in the MS, but antibody enrichment should specifically select for succinylated lysine as we were unable to detect substantial enrichment of other acylations (data not shown) and we observed altered succinylation levels upon manipulation of the enzymes regulating succinyl-CoA formation in yeast, suggesting that we primarily detect succinylation by this method. MS raw data are available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have shown that lysines can be posttranslationally modified by various types of acylations. However, except for acetylation, very little is known about their scope and cellular distribution. We mapped thousands of succinylation sites in bacteria (E.&#xa0;coli), yeast (S.&#xa0;cerevisiae), human (HeLa) cells, and mouse liver tissue, demonstrating widespread succinylation in diverse organisms. A majority of succinylation sites in bacteria, yeast, and mouse liver were acetylated at the same position. Quantitative analysis of succinylation in yeast showed that succinylation was globally altered by growth conditions and mutations that affected succinyl-coenzyme A (succinyl-CoA) metabolism in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, indicating that succinylation levels are globally affected by succinyl-CoA&#xa0;concentration. We preferentially detected succinylation on abundant proteins, suggesting that succinylation occurs at a low level and that many succinylation sites remain unidentified. These data provide a systems-wide view of succinylation and its dynamic regulation and show its extensive overlap with acetylation.

### Keywords
Human, Yeast, Mouse, Liver, Bacteria, Succinylation, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics
The NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Weinert, Chunaram Choudhary
The NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


