### Accession
PXD012986

### Title
Reproducibility, specificity and accuracy of DIA quantification - DDA analysis

### Description
Data dependent acquisition (DDA) is the method of choice for mass spectrometry based proteomics discovery experiments, data-independent acquisition (DIA) is steadily becoming more important. One of the most important requirement to perform a DIA analysis is the availability of spectral libraries for the peptide identification and quantification. Several researches were already conducted regarding the creation of spectral libraries from DDA analyses and obtaining identifications with these in DIA measurements. But so far only few experiments were conducted, to estimate the effect of these libraries on the quantitative level. In this work we created a spike-in gold standard dataset with known contents and ratios of proteins in a complex sample matrix. With this dataset, we first created spectral libraries using different sample preparation approaches with and without sample prefractionation on peptide and protein level. Two different search engines were used for protein identification. In total, five different spike-in states were compared with DIA analyses, comparing eight different spectral libraries generated by varying approaches and one library free method, as well as one default DDA analysis. Not only the number of identifications on peptide and protein level in the spectral libraries and the corresponding analyses was inspected, but also the number of expected and identified significant quantifications and their ratios were thoroughly examined. We found, that while libraries of prefractionationed samples are generally larger, the actually yielded identifications are not increased compared to repetitive non-fractionated measurements. Furthermore, we show that the accuracy of the quantifications is also highly dependent on the applied spectra library and also whether the peptide or protein level is analysed. Overall, the reproducibility and accuracy of DIA is superior to DDA in all analysed approaches.

### Sample Protocol
For teh complete protocol, see manuscript. Following is an excerpt: Frozen C2C12 cells were warmed up within a water bath (37°C) and taken into culture in a 58 cm² petri dish (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) within 10 ml DMEM (Gibco®, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) standard medium containing 15 % (v/v) FCS (Gibco®), 2 % (v/v) sodium pyruvate (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 1 % (v/v) non-essential amino acids (Biochrom) and 1 % (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Pan Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany). The cells were cultivated in an incubator (37°C, 5 % CO2), the medium was changed every two days and the cells were split at a confluency of approx. 70 %. For this, the cells were washed with 5 ml PBS (Gibco®), then detached with 1.5 ml 0.05 % Trypsin/1 M EDTA (Gibco®) for 3 min inside the incubator and further the activity of trypsin was stopped by the addition of standard medium.  Before lysis, cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000x g for 10 min and then lysed in 30 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.5, 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea using glass beads and sonication (4 x 1 min on ice). After lysate transfer into a fresh tube glass beads were washed with distilled water, the resulting solution was combined with the lysate (resulting in 5.3 M urea and 1.5 M thiourea concentrations) and cleared by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 min.  As spike-in proteins we chose 13 non-mouse proteins with varying physico-chemical properties (see supplementary Table S1 for detailed information and UniProt accessions): human α-synuclein, β-lactoglobulin from bovine milk, fibrinogen α, β and γ from human plasma (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger, human hemoglobin α and β, lipases 1, 2 and 3 from Candida rugosa, lysozyme from chicken egg white and myoglobin from equine skeletal muscle (Sigma-Aldrich, part of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, unless otherwise stated). The fibrinogen α, β and γ were contained in the same solution, as were the hemoglobin α and β and the lipases 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Therefore, the relative amounts of these proteins are equal in all spike-in levels. The spike-ins were combined in a manner to yield in a comparable overall sample amount and physiologically plausible protein concentrations. The gold standard spike-in sample set (GS) consisting of five samples was prepared as follows: a constant amount of C2C12 lysate as background matrix was spiked with varying amounts of the 13 spike-in proteins in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) as specified in Table 1.  For spectral library generation (in-solution digest, protein fractionation and peptide fractionation) C2C12 lysate was mixed with equal amounts of the spike-in proteins (called master mix, MM, in the following) as specified in supplementary Table S2.

### Data Protocol
For the complete protocol, see teh manuscript. Following is an excerpt: DDA data were analyzed with a KNIME (35) workflow using OpenMS and PIA (36) nodes (workflows are deposited inside PRIDE with the data ). In brief, MS/MS spectra were identified using the target-decoy approach with Mascot 2.5, MS-GF+ (37) and X!Tandem (38) and searches were combined using PIA, maintaining a PSM and protein level FDR of 1%. Peptide-features were detected and quantified using the FeatureFinderMultiplex. This algorithm uses the areas under the curves of the peptide isotope ion trails in the MS1 scans for the respective quantifications. The identifications were mapped to the features, aligned and normalized using the respective OpenMS nodes. Prior to the protein quantification using Top3 peptide abundancies, protein inference was conducted using PIA. The quantities for sequence based peptides was inferred from the quantities of peptides distinguishing different modifications by summing up the respective raw quantities, which is the default approach in OpenMS. The resulting peptide and protein quantifications were statistically analyzed as described below (see 2.2.4).

### Publication Abstract
Currently data-dependent acquisition (DDA) is the method of choice for mass spectrometry-based proteomics discovery experiments, but data-independent acquisition (DIA) is steadily becoming more important. One of the most important requirements to perform a DIA analysis is the availability of suitable spectral libraries for peptide identification and quantification. Several studies were performed addressing the evaluation of spectral library performance for protein identification in DIA measurements. But so far only few experiments estimate the effect of these libraries on the quantitative level.In this work we created a gold standard spike-in sample set with known contents and ratios of proteins in a complex protein matrix that allowed a detailed comparison of DIA quantification data obtained with different spectral library approaches. We used in-house generated sample-specific spectral libraries created using varying sample preparation approaches and repeated DDA measurement. In addition, two different search engines were tested for protein identification from DDA data and subsequent library generation. In total, eight different spectral libraries were generated, and the quantification results compared with a library free method, as well as a default DDA analysis. Not only the number of identifications on peptide and protein level in the spectral libraries and the corresponding DIA analysis results was inspected, but also the number of expected and identified differentially abundant protein groups and their ratios.We found, that while libraries of prefractionated samples were generally larger, there was no significant increase in DIA identifications compared with repetitive non-fractionated measurements. Furthermore, we show that the accuracy of the quantification is strongly dependent on the applied spectral library and whether the quantification is based on peptide or protein level. Overall, the reproducibility and accuracy of DIA quantification is superior to DDA in all applied approaches.Data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange repository with identifiers PXD012986, PXD012987, PXD012988 and PXD014956.

### Keywords
Peptide identification, Spectral library, Data-independent acquisition (dia), Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Medical Faculty,
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Julian Uszkoreit

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center


