### Accession
PXD017217

### Title
Endometrial cancer FFPE tissue SWATH-MS study

### Description
A specific form of endometrial cancer (EC) can develop in breast cancer patients previously treated with tamoxifen (ET), an antagonist of estrogen receptor (ER) α that inhibits proliferation of ER positive breast cancer. ET tumors have a different phenotype than endometrial tumors which typically develop de novo without previous exposure to tamoxifen (EN). Here we aimed to identify specific protein markers that could serve as specific molecular targets in either phenotype. A set of total 45 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) endometrial tumor tissue and adjacent myometrial tissue samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS in SWATH-MS mode. We found that calcyphosin (CAPS) levels were elevated in EN tumors compared to ET tumors. The higher CAPS level in EC tissue invading to myometrium support its relationship to EC aggressiveness. Further, stathmin (STMN1) levels were found significantly elevated in ET vs. EN tumors and significantly associated with patient survival. This finding connects elevated levels of this cell cycle regulating, proliferation-associated protein with tamoxifen exposure. In a summary, using SWATH-MS we show that CAPS and STMN1 should be recognized as clinicopathologically different EC markers of which STMN1 is specifically connected with a previous tamoxifen exposition.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from endometrial FFPE tissue was performed as previously described (PMID: 28402678). Of 47 tissue samples involved in the study, 45 samples were available for the proteomics measurement (Data file S1): 15 ET, 19 EN and 11 M samples. Protein concentration in the extracts was determined using the RC-DC method (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). 20 µg of extracted total protein was digested to peptides using a filter-aided sample preparation protocol (PMID: 31315058) and desalted as previously published (PMID: 19053527). Desalted peptide samples were dissolved in 19 µl of loading buffer (LB) (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in water), then vortexed and sonicated for 5 min. Peptide concentration in samples was estimated by Nanodrop measurement at 220 and 280 nm. Samples were then diluted in LB to a uniform absorbance of 0.070 at 220 nm. 19 µl of sample aliquots were spiked-in with 0.5 µl of a 4x diluted iRT peptide mix (Biognosys, Switzerland) and 8 µl of the sample was injected to a column.  For the preparation of a spectral library, three sample pools were prepared from all aliquots of all (i) ET samples, (ii) EN samples and (iii) M samples, respectively. Moreover, a pool from all samples in the set was prepared and fractionated using hydrophilic chromatography (HILIC) as described previously (PMID: 31315058). 11 fractions were collected in a peak-dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
Database search for spectral library generation The spectra were searched using the search engines X! TANDEM Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) and Comet version "2015.02 rev. 3" against the reviewed canonical human Uniprot database (20160401) using Trypsin digestion and allowing 2 missed cleavages. Included were 'Carbamidomethyl (C)' as static and 'Oxidation (M)' as variable modifications. The mass tolerances were set to 50 ppm for precursor-ions and 0.1 Da for fragment-ions. Spiked in reference peptides were used for retention time calibration (iRT Kit, Biognosis, Schlieren, Switzerland) across the data set. The analyzed mass range was between m/z 350 and m/z 2000. The identified peptides were processed and analyzed through the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010) using PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet scoring. Spectral counts and peptides for ProteinProphet were filtered at FDR of 0.009747 mayu-protFDR (=0.794757 iprob).  SWATH-MS data analysis The data was analyzed using a pipeline configured on the iPortal platform in the Aebersold lab at ETH Zurich, Switzerland. The raw SWATH wiff files were converted using ProteoWizard to profile mzXML files (PMID: 18606607). The extraction of the data was performed using the OpenSWATH workflow (PMID: 24727770). An m/z fragment ion extraction window of 0.05 Th and an RT extraction window of ±5 min were used. The best models to separate true from false positives (per run) were determined by pyProphet with 10 cross-validations. The runs were subsequently aligned with a target FDR of 0.01 for aligned features (PMID: 27479329). Background signals were extracted for features that could not be confidently identified (PMID: 27479329). The data was then processed using the R 3.4/Bioconductor package SWATH2Stats (PMID: 27054327). Precursors had to pass an m-score threshold of 0.0004 in at least of 20% of the 45 files to be selected for further analysis. This threshold resulted in an estimated protein FDR of 0.01 (using an estimated fraction of false targets or π0-value of 0.12 for estimating the FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stathmin, Ffpe, Endometrial cancer, Calcyphosin, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


