### Accession
PXD022861

### Title
IMProv: A Resource for Crosslink-Driven Structure Modeling that Accommodates Protein Dynamics

### Description
Crosslinking and hydrogren-deuterium exchange data of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 used for integrative modelling.

### Sample Protocol
HX:  Stock solution of PRC2 was diluted to 5 µM in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl and 2 mM TCEP. For equilibration, the complex was incubated for 1 hour on ice prior to performing HX–MS analyses. Experiments were carried out by adding an equal volume of 90% D2O (in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl and 2 mM TCEP) to 2.5 µL of 5 µM protein solution at 4 °C. Three different deuteration time points for labelling (1 min, 10 min and 100 min) were acquired in three independent replicates. For protein digestion under quenching conditions, 1 µL sample was added to 4 µL of 10x concentrated pitcher fluid from Nepenthes sp, dissolved in 100 mM Gly-HCl, pH 2.5 (see full text refs). Digestion was performed at 10°C for 2 min. Proteolytic digests were directly loaded onto a self-made pre-concentration column at 4°C, followed by a 10 min gradient of 10 – 40% acidified acetonitrile, using an Eksigent nanoLC-ultra-2D pump coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex, Concord, Canada) as described in detail elsewhere (see full text refs).   XL: For chemical crosslinking, PRC2 was buffer exchanged into 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4 with all other components unchanged. Crosslinking was performed for 10 min at room temperature with DSS or BS3 at a 1:200 protein:reagent mass ratio at 2 mg/mL protein concentration. Final concentration of DMSO was 5.3% for DSS crosslinking; no DMSO was present for BS3. Crosslinking was quenched with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Crosslinked protein was then denatured by the addition of 6 mM DTT and incubated for 30 min at 55 °C, followed by alkylation with the addition of 16 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin was added at a 1:20 protein-to-enzyme mass ratio and incubated for 3.5 hrs at 37 °C. Tryptic digests were quenched with 0.5% formic acid (ACS reagent grade ≥98%, Thermo Scientific) to yield a final concentration of 1.66 µM. 1 µL of the quenched digest was loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 guard column (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm particles, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by an nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific) and separated by a PepMap reverse-phase C18 (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particles, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at 55 °C. Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min on a 60 min 5 – 40 %B gradient. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% v/v formic acid in 3% acetonitrile (LC–MS grade; Thermo Scientific), mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Data from an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) were acquired in OT/OT mode. Parameters were as follows: spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and transfer capillary temperature set to 300 °C. MS scans were acquired at a 120,000 resolution and 350 – 1250 Th mass range. Cycle time was set to 3 seconds, where the most intense ions above an intensity of 5.0 x 104 in charge states 4 – 8 were selected for fragmentation by HCD using a quadrupole isolation width of 1.5 Th and NCE = 32%. MS/MS data were acquired with a 15,000 resolution and a 1.0 x 105 target AGC and 100 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
HX: Database-driven peptide identification for library generation was performed with MASCOT v2.4 (Matrix Science). Briefly, fragment ion spectra were searched against a custom database containing all five PRC2 proteins with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, with a probability cut-off of p = 0.05. The preliminary peptide library was imported into the Mass Spec Studio for further filtering and deuteration analysis (see full text refs). Spectral quality was assessed based on absolute intensity, signal-to-noise-ratio and spectral overlap with co-eluting peptides on the MS1 level. Only those demonstrating complete isotopic envelopes kept. Relative deuteration levels were manually validated and exported from the Studio. Calculation of protection factors was performed as described elsewhere (see full text refs). HX–MS measurements were collected in triplicate at all three time points.  XL: Raw MS data was processed using CRIMP in the Mass Spec Studio (version 2.2) (52). XL–MS data analysis was as follows: crosslink insertion was limited to K and KSTY residues on the linked peptides (i.e. only one non-K linkage allowed). Default parameters were used with the following exceptions: MinCharge = 3, MaxCharge = 8, ChargeStatesString = 1,2,3, PercentEValueThreshold = 50, MS MassTolerance = 5 ppm, MS/MS MassTolerance = 5 ppm, ElutionWidth = 0.33. Crosslinked peptide spectral matches were manually validated. Validated crosslinks with an FDR ≥ 0.5% were forwarded for modeling. To access and review the annotated spectra, download a version of the free Mass Spec Studio (version 2.4 or later), unzip the folder and open the .mssproj file

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics methodology has expanded to include protein structural analysis, primarily through cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HX-MS). However, while the structural proteomics community has effective tools for primary data analysis, there is a need for structure modeling pipelines that are accessible to the proteomics specialist. Integrative structural biology requires the aggregation of multiple distinct types of data to generate models that satisfy all inputs. Here, we describe IMProv, an app in the Mass Spec Studio that combines XL-MS data with other structural data, such as cryo-EM densities and crystallographic structures, for integrative structure modeling on high-performance computing platforms. The resource provides an easily deployed bundle that includes the open-source Integrative Modeling Platform program (IMP) and its dependencies. IMProv also provides functionality to adjust cross-link distance restraints according to the underlying dynamics of cross-linked sites, as characterized by HX-MS. A dynamics-driven conditioning of restraint values can improve structure modeling precision, as illustrated by an integrative structure of the five-membered Polycomb Repressive Complex 2. IMProv is extensible to additional types of data.

### Keywords
Integrative modelling, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Software

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Professor, Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Robson DNA Science Centre, Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta http://structurems.ucalgary.ca

### Submitter
Daniel Ziemianowicz

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Professor, Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Robson DNA Science Centre, Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta http://structurems.ucalgary.ca


