### Accession
PXD021186

### Title
ATP-Citrate lyase fuels axonal transport across species

### Description
Microtubule (MT)-based transport is an evolutionary conserved processed finely tuned by posttranslational modifications. Among them, tubulin acetylation, which is catalyzed by the α-tubulin N-acetyltransferase 1, Atat1, facilitates the recruitment and processivity of molecular motors along MT tracks. However, the mechanisms that controls Atat1 activity remains poorly understood. Here we show that a pool of vesicular ATP-citrate lyase Acly acts as a rate limiting enzyme to modulate Atat1 activity by controlling availability of Acetyl-CoA. In addition, we showed that Acly expression is reduced upon loss of Elongator activity, further connecting Elongator to Atat1 in the pathway regulating -tubulin acetylation and MT-dependent transport in projection neurons across species. Remarkably, comparable defects occur in fibroblasts from Familial Dysautonomia (FD) patients bearing an autosomal recessive mutation in the gene coding for the Elongator subunit ELP1. Our data may thus shine new light on the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying FD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were trypsinized and analyzed by LC-MSMS using the Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed using the maxquant  and the proseus software tools

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule (MT)-based transport is an evolutionary conserved process finely tuned by posttranslational modifications. Among them, &#x3b1;-tubulin acetylation, primarily catalyzed by a vesicular pool of &#x3b1;-tubulin N-acetyltransferase 1 (Atat1), promotes the recruitment and processivity of molecular motors along MT tracks. However, the mechanism that controls Atat1 activity remains poorly understood. Here, we show that ATP-citrate lyase (Acly) is enriched in vesicles and provide Acetyl-Coenzyme-A (Acetyl-CoA) to Atat1. In addition, we showed that Acly expression is reduced upon loss of Elongator activity, further connecting Elongator to Atat1 in a pathway regulating &#x3b1;-tubulin acetylation and MT-dependent transport in projection neurons, across species. Remarkably, comparable defects occur in fibroblasts from Familial Dysautonomia (FD) patients bearing an autosomal recessive mutation in the gene coding for the Elongator subunit ELP1. Our data may thus shine light on the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying FD.

### Keywords
Citrate, Transport

### Affiliations
Technion
1Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases and Personalized Medicine, School of Molecular Cell Biology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise Faculty for Life Sciences, Sagol School of Neurosciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Weil
1Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases and Personalized Medicine, School of Molecular Cell Biology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise Faculty for Life Sciences, Sagol School of Neurosciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel


