### Accession
PXD003850

### Title
Glucose-regulated and drug perturbed beta-cell phosphoproteome reveals molecular mechanisms controlling insulin secretion

### Description
Insulin-secreting beta cells play an essential role in maintaining physiological blood glucose levels, and their dysfunction leads to the development of diabetes. To elucidate the signaling events regulating insulin secretion, we applied a recently developed proteomics and phosphoproteomics workflow. We quantified the time-resolved phosphoproteome of beta cells following their exposure to glucose and in combination with small molecule compounds that promote insulin secretion. The quantitative phosphoproteome of 30,000 sites clustered into three main groups in concordance with the modulation of three key signaling pathways. In addition to their differential modulation of key cellular kinases, all compounds affected pathways regulating the cell cycle. A high-resolution time course revealed key novel regulatory sites in early and late insulin secretion, and unexpected connections to epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Our comprehensive and multi-parametric phosphoproteomics study reveals that control of insulin secretion is embedded in an unexpectedly broad and complex range of cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in GdmCl buffer. Details about the proteome preparation are described by Kulak et al. (Kulak et al., 2014). The phosphoproteome preparation was performed according to the protocol developed by Humphrey et al (Humphrey et al., 2015). After alkylation and reduction, proteins were digested and desalted. After elution, samples were separated by HPLC and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data was analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (Cox and Mann, 2008), versions 1.4.1.2 and employing Andromeda for database search (Cox et al., 2011). The MS/MS spectra were matched against the Human UniProt FASTA database (September 2014) with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline and between aspartic acid and proline. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine and/or phosphorylation of serine, threonine tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. Label free proteome analysis was performed in MaxQuant. For proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, where possible, the identity of peptides present but not sequenced in a given run was obtained by transferring identifications across liquid chromatography (LC)-MS runs. This is a feature in the MaxQuant software used to analyze all data (Cox and Mann, 2008; Geiger et al., 2012). For phosphopeptide identification, an Andromeda minimum score and minimum delta score threshold of 40 and 17 was used, respectively. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion and peptide had to be fully tryptic. The ‘identify’ module in MaxQuant was used to filter identifications at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin-secreting beta cells play an essential role in maintaining physiological blood glucose levels, and their dysfunction leads to the development of diabetes. To elucidate the signalling events regulating insulin secretion, we applied a recently developed phosphoproteomics workflow. We quantified the time-resolved phosphoproteome of murine pancreatic cells following their exposure to glucose and in combination with small molecule compounds that promote insulin secretion. The quantitative phosphoproteome of 30,000 sites clustered into three main groups in concordance with the modulation of the three key kinases: PKA, PKC and CK2A. A high-resolution time course revealed key novel regulatory sites, revealing the importance of methyltransferase DNMT3A phosphorylation in the glucose response. Remarkably a significant proportion of these novel regulatory sites is significantly downregulated in diabetic islets. Control of insulin secretion is embedded in an unexpectedly broad and complex range of cellular functions, which are perturbed by drugs in multiple ways.

### Keywords
Beta cells, Systems biology, Phoshoproteome, Islets, Insulin secretion

### Affiliations
Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry
University of Rome Tor Vergata

### Submitter
Francesca Sacco

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry


