### Accession
PXD001726

### Title
Venom proteomics of Indonesian king cobra

### Description
Complementary bottom-up MS/MS analyses contributed to complete a locus-resolved venom phenotype map for O. hannah, the world's longest venomous snake and a species of medical concern across its wide distribution range in forests from India through Southeast Asia. Its venom composition convincingly explains the main neurotoxic effects of human envenoming caused by king cobra bite. The integration of efficient chromatographic separation of the venom components, and locus-resolved toxin identification through top-down and bottom-up MS/MS-based species-specific database searching, promises a bright future to the field of venom research.

### Sample Protocol
RP-HPLC-fractionated proteins were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and submitted to SDS-(15%)PAGE under reducing conditions. Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250-stained bands were excised from the gel and and subjected to in-gel reduction (10 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylation (50 mM iodacetamide), followed by overnight sequencing-grade trypsin digestion (66 ng/L in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% acetonitrile; 0.25 g/sample). Tryptic digests were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, redissolved in 15 L of 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an HPLC system (Agilent, Waldbron, Germany).

### Data Protocol
MSMS spectra were interpreted manually (de novo sequencing), and/ or searched against both a O. hannah venom protein database and against the UniProtKB/TrEMBL and NCBI non-redundant databases, using X!Tandem und Peptideshaker.

### Publication Abstract
We report on the first application of top-down mass spectrometry in snake venomics. De novo sequence tags generated by, and ProSight Lite supported analysis of, combined collisional based dissotiations (CID and HCD) recorded in a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap instrument in data-dependent mode identified a number of proteins from different toxin families, namely, 11 three-finger toxins (7-7.9 kDa), a Kunitz-type inhibitor (6.3 kDa), ohanin (11.9 kDa), a novel phospholipase A2 molecule (13.8 kDa), and the cysteine-rich secretory protein (CRISP) ophanin (25 kDa) from Indonesian king cobra venom. Complementary bottom-up MS/MS analyses contributed to the completion of a locus-resolved venom phenotypic map for Ophiophagus hannah, the world's longest venomous snake and a species of medical concern across its wide distribution range in forests from India to Southeast Asia. Its venom composition, comprising 32-35 proteins/peptides from 10 protein families, is dominated by &#x3b1;-neurotoxins and convincingly explains the main neurotoxic effects of human envenoming caused by king cobra bite. The integration of efficient chromatographic separation of the venom's components and locus-resolved toxin identification through top-down and bottom-up MS/MS-based species-specific database searching and de novo sequencing holds promise that the future will be bright for the field of venom research.

### Keywords
Snake venomics; elapidae; king cobra; ophiophagus hannah; top-down proteomics; top-down venomics

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
UC San Diego

### Submitter
Daniel Petras

### Lab Head
Dr Roderich Süssmuth
TU Berlin


