### Accession
PXD004069

### Title
Sus scrofa (pig) small intestinal mucosa LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this study, we applied the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) technique to detect alterations in the proteomic profile of the jejunal mucosa using a porcine model in which piglets were offered the protein-limited (PL) diet. Protein identification and quantification for iTRAQ experiments were performed using ProteinPilot (v4.0.8085) software. The LC-MS/MS data were searched against the UniProtKB (sus scrofa). To minimize the false discovery rate (FDR), a threshold for protein identification was applied, with the confident value > 95% (amount to the confident value “unused ProtScore” > 1.3 in ProteinPilot software), and at least one unique peptide was considered for protein identification. Proteins that were quantified with fold change > 2.0 were considered to be differentially expressed proteins. We identified 5275 proteins, 202 of which were differentially expressed. Furthermore, we adopted function annotation analysis of all identified proteins and function enrichment analysis of all differentially expressed proteins to explore more meaningful proteins and pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Individual mucosal scrapings were ground in liquid nitrogen and then lysed in a solution containing 200 μl of L3 buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8, 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2 M EDTA, 1× protease inhibitors cocktails), 800μl of ice-cold acetone, and 10 mM dithiothreitol. The suspensions were incubated at -20 °C for 2 h. After centrifugation at 13,000 ×g for 20 min at 4 °C, the precipitated pellets were resuspended in 800μl of ice-cold acetone and 10 mM dithiothreitol. The suspensions were further centrifuged at 13,000 ×g for 20 min at 4 °C to collect the precipitated pellets, then vacuum dried. The dried precipitated pellets were dissolved in 200 μl of L3 buffer. Subsequently, total protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay.
Equiponderant proteins from each animal were pooled based on groups, and then, each pooled sample was divided into three equal parts (named CON1~3 and PL1~3, respectively) as three technical replicates. Subsequently, an aliquot of 100 μg of protein from each fraction was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA). Samples were iTRAQ labelled as following: CON1, 113; CON2, 114; CON3, 115; PL1, 116; PL2, 117; PL3, 118. The labelled peptides were then mixed and vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software v4.5 for data analysis. For protein identification, the Paragon algorithm2 which was integrated into ProteinPilot was employed against Uniprot Sus scrofa database (33958 items, update in Oct. 2014) for database searching. The parameters were set as follows: the instrument was TripleTOF 5600, iTRAQ quantification, cysteine modified with lodoacetic acid; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, trypsin digestion, the quantitate, bias correction and background correction were checked for protein quantification and normalization. For FDR calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate FDR using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline software, integrated in the ProteinPilot software) algorithm. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide and unused value more than 1.3 were considered for further analysis. Among the identified peptides, some of them were excluded from the quantitative analysis for anyone of the following reasons. (1) The peaks corresponding to the iTRAQ labels were not detected. (2) The peptides were identified with low identification confidence. (3) The peptides were claimed by more than one protein. (4) The S/N (signal-to-noise ratio) for any peptide ratio was too low. (5) Peptides with a combined feature probability < 30%, because of semitryptic peptides, peptides missing an iTRAQ reagent label, peptides with low probability modifications and peptides with large delta masses. We took the 2.0-fold change as the threshold to identify significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary protein limitation (PL) is not only beneficial to human health but also applied to minimize nitrogen excretion in livestock production. However, the impact of PL on intestinal physiology is largely unknown. In this study, we identified 5275 quantitative proteins using a porcine model in which pigs suffered PL. A total of 202 proteins |log<sub>2</sub> fold-change|&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1 were taken as differentially expressed proteins and subjected to functional and pathway enrichment analysis to reveal proteomic alterations of the jejunal mucosa. Combining with the results of western blotting analysis, we found that protein/carbohydrate digestion, intestinal mucosal tight junction and cell adhesion molecules, and the immune response to foreign antigens were increased in the jejunal mucosa of the pigs upon PL. In contrast, amino acid transport, innate and auto immunity, as well as cell proliferation and apoptosis were reduced. In addition, the expression of functional proteins that involved in DNA replication, transcription and mRNA splicing as well as translation were altered in the jejunal mucosa in response to PL. Furthermore, PL may reduce amino acid transport and cell proliferation through the depression of mTOR pathway. This study provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the small intestinal response to PL.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Jejunal mucosa, Pig

### Affiliations
State Key Lab of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University
Jingdong Yin, State Key Lab of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jingdong Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Jingdong Yin, State Key Lab of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University
Jingdong Yin, State Key Lab of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University


