### Accession
PXD005361

### Title
Nicotine-induced protein expression profiling reveals mutually altered proteins across four human cell lines

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic strategies can profile the expression level of proteins in response to external stimuli. Nicotine affects diverse cellular pathways, however, the nicotine-induced alterations on the global proteome across human cell lines have not been fully elucidated. We measured perturbations in protein levels resulting from nicotine treatment in four cell lines - HEK, HeLa, PaSC, and SH-SY5Y- in a single experiment using tandem mass tags (TMT10-plex) and high-resolution mass spectrometry. We quantified 8590 proteins across all cell lines. Of these, nicotine increased the abundance of 31 proteins 1.5-fold or greater in all cell lines. Likewise, considering proteins with altered levels in at least 3 of the 4 cell lines, 64 were up-regulated, while 1 was down-regulated. Gene ontology analysis revealed that ~40% of these proteins were membrane-bound, and functioned in transmembrane signaling and receptor activity. We highlighted proteins, including APP, APLP2, LAPTM4B, and NCOA4, which were dysregulated by nicotine in all cell lines investigated and may have implications in downstream signaling pathways, particularly autophagy. Using the outlined methodology, studies in additional (including primary) cell lines will provide further evidence that alterations in the levels of these proteins are indeed a general response to nicotine and thereby merit further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion. Cells were homogenized by 10 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle and incubated at 4°C with gentle agitation for 30 min. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (room temperature, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, 4 parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, 1 part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and 3 parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 13 h with Lys-C protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C. Tandem mass tag labeling. Approximately 50 μg of peptides from each sample were labeled with TMT reagent. A total of 5 μL of the 20 ng/μL stock of TMT reagent was added to the peptides along with 20 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) for 15 min. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters). Off-line basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation. We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using BPRP HPLC [28]. We used an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280 nm wavelength) from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions. Fractions were collected into a 96-well plate from left to right along a row. Samples were consolidated into 12 by combining the columns of the 96-well plate    (outlined in Supplemental Figure 5 of [29]). Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Our mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary column was a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by ~30 cm of GP-18 resin (1.8 μm, 200 Å, Sepax, Newark, DE). For each analysis, we loaded ~2 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 3 h gradient of 6 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ~450 nL/min. Each analysis used the Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT method [30]. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a TopSpeed of 2 sec. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC 4 × 103; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum using our recently described method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches [30]. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55; AGC 5 × 104; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 60,000 at 200 Th).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline [31]. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database. This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis [31, 32]. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) [33, 34]. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously [31], while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously [31]. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio less than 100, or with no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification [4]. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples. Protein quantification values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel or SAS JMP.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic strategies can profile the expression level of proteins in response to external stimuli. Nicotine affects diverse cellular pathways, however, the nicotine-induced alterations on the global proteome across human cell lines have not been fully elucidated. We measured perturbations in protein levels resulting from nicotine treatment in four cell lines-HEK, HeLa, PaSC, and SH-SY5Y-in a single experiment using tandem mass tags (TMT10-plex) and high-resolution mass spectrometry. We quantified 8590 proteins across all cell lines. Of these, nicotine increased the abundance of 31 proteins 1.5-fold or greater in all cell lines. Likewise, considering proteins with altered levels in at least three of the four cell lines, 64 were up-regulated, while one was down-regulated. Gene ontology analysis revealed that &#x223c;40% of these proteins were membrane bound, and functioned in transmembrane signaling and receptor activity. We highlighted proteins, including APP, APLP2, LAPTM4B, and NCOA4, which were dysregulated by nicotine in all cell lines investigated and may have implications in downstream signaling pathways, particularly autophagy. Using the outlined methodology, studies in additional (including primary) cell lines will provide further evidence that alterations in the levels of these proteins are indeed a general response to nicotine and thereby merit further investigation.

### Keywords
Sps-ms3, Tmt, Pancreas, Nicotine, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School  Cell Biology USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School  Cell Biology USA


