### Accession
PXD018848

### Title
Systematic Analysis of the Lysine Crotonylome and multiple PTM analysis (acetylation, succinylation and crotonylation) in Candida albicans

### Description
LC-MS/MS was used to carry out the analysis of the crotonylome in C. albicans (Candida albicans) comprehensively in our study. Generally, 5242 specific crotonylated sites of 1584 crotonylated proteins were detected among 9038 proteins in C. albicans. The crotonylome involved in the regulation of metabolism through the bioinformatics analysis. Moreover, the crotonylated proteins related to biosynthesis and carbon metabolism were prevalence phenomenon. Moreover, a universal rule were found in crotonylated motifs: D/E were found in the position (+1, +2 or +3) and K/R were found in the position (+5 or +6) of the residue; A/E/F/G/P/W/Y were found in the -1 position and A/K/R were found in the position (-5, -6, -7 or -8) of the residue. As far as we know, crotonylated histone sites that screened in C. albicans of this study have not been reported before. Furthermore, a variety of connections in PPI (protein-protein interaction network) of ribosome, oxidative phosphorylation, nucleus and proteasome were modified by acetylation, succinylation and crotonylation. Sir2 inhibitor AK-1 was able to promote histone lysine crotonylation and non-histone lysine crotonylation.

### Sample Protocol
Strains culture, protein extraction and trypsin digestion. C.albicans strain SC5314 (ATCC MYA-2876) was isolated in 1984 from a candidemia patient and we obtained it from the ATCC. Strains were cultured at 28 ℃ with shaking of 220 rpm then 1:10 inoculated into YPD, and cultivated under the same conditions for 4-6 h till OD600 reaches up to 0.8 before extracting crude protein. Cells were firstly centrifuged at 4000～6000 rpm (4℃), then resuspended and washed the pellet with PBS three times before centrifuging.  We used liquid nitrogen to grind the sample then dissolved the powder in lysate (1% protease inhibitors, 3 μM TSA, 8 M urea, 1% TritonX-100, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM NAM) to sonicate on ice. The suspension were centrifugated at 4 ℃ (12 000 g) for 1h to collect supernatant, then added TCA (15%) for protein precipitation at -20 ℃ overnight. We used cold acetone to wash precipitate three times and 8 M urea to redissolve the protein, then determined the concentration with BCA kit.  The protein solution was added DTT (5 mM, 56℃, 30min) and IAA (11 mM, 15 min) in turn and away from light. Then we added TEAB (100 mM) to dilute the urea concentration and trypsin (1:50 and 1:100) to digest the protein twice. IP buffer (1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was added in tryptic peptides and anti-crotonylation antibody agarose conjugated beads (Jingjie PTM Bio, China) were blended with peptides at 4℃ overnight. After washing beads by IP buffer and double distilled water, we used 0.1% TFA to elute the enriched peptides, then dried and desalted peptides by C18 ZipTips for analysis. LC-MS/MS analyze lysine crotonylation. (Ⅰ)LC-MS/MS analysis. We used solvent A [0.1% formic acid dissolve in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 98% H2O] to dissolve the tryptic peptides from SC5314, then separated peptides by EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo) at 700 nL/min. Gradient solvent B (0.1% formic acid dissolve in 90% acetonitrile) was increasing from 8%-23% (36 min) to 23%-35% (18 min), then climbing and holding at 80% (3 min). The peptides were injected into NSI source and separated by Q ExactiveTM HF-X (MS/MS, Thermo). The ion source voltage was 2.0 kV. The ion and secondary fragments of peptide were detected and analyzed by Orbitrap. The m/z scan range of first-level mass spectrometry was 350-1600 m/z. The resolution was 60,000 of first-level mass spectrometry and 15,000 of secondary-level mass spectrometry. AGC was 1E5, the signal threshold was 5000 ions, the maximum injection time was 100 ms, and the exclusion duration time was set at 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database search. Secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved by Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Retrieval parameter setting: the database was UniProt Candida albicans strain SC5314 (6035 sequences), the anti-library was added to calculate the FDR, and the common contamination library was added too; cleavage enzyme was set as trypsin/P and missing points was set at 4; the mass error tolerance of primary parent ions of first search and main search was 20 ppm and 5 ppm respectively, the secondary fragment ions’ mass error tolerance was 0.02 Da; fixed modification was set as cysteine alkylation, variable modification was set as methionine oxidation, n-terminal acetylation of protein, crotonylation modification. Protein identification and FDR identified by PSM were set at 1%. (Ⅲ)Bioinformatics analysis. GO annotation. The annotation of Gene Ontology (GO) based on cellular component, biological process and molecular function, which came from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Domain annotation. The software InterProScan based on the protein sequence algorithm and InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) were used to annotate the protein domain of the identified modified proteins. KEGG pathway annotation. We used KEGG online service tool KAAS to analyze and annotate proteins’ database, then we used KEGG mapper to match the corresponding pathways. Subcellular localization. We annotated the subcellular localization of the identified proteins using wolfpsort (a software for predicting subcellular localization). Functional enrichment analysis. The enrichment analysis for the GO, KEGG pathway and domains were performed separately. The category with p<0.05 is approbatory. Analysis of motif. When the number of peptides in the form of a characteristic sequence is more than 20, and P＜0.000001, the characteristic sequence form is considered as a motif of crotonylated peptides. We used motif-x to analyze the sequence models constituted with particular amino acids (10 amino acids downstream and upstream around the crotonylated sites). Enrichment-based clustering analysis. After protein enrichment analysis, we used the function x=−log10 (p value) to transforme p value and one-way hierarchical clustering to cluster the category. The “heatmap.2” function was used to make visualized heat map.    Protein-protein interaction network. The network of protein-protein interactions were obtained from STRING database version 10.5. And we used cytoscape software to visualize the PPI network. STRING defined by a standard of a confidence score. In this study, we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.9 (highest confidence).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. albicans; crotonylome; histone; lysine crotonylation motif; ppi

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, Nanjing 210042, China

### Submitter
xiaowei  zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofang Li
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, Nanjing 210042, China


