### Accession
PXD009563

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana responds to colonisation of Piriformospora indica by secretion of symbiosis specific proteins

### Description
Plants interact with a wide variety of fungi in a mutualistic, parasitic or neutral way. The associations formed depend on the exchange of nutrients and signalling molecules between the partners. The latter include a diverse set of protein classes, of which some have been demonstrated to be functionally implicated in defence, nutrient uptake and establishing a symbiotic relationship. Here, we have analysed the secretomes of the mutualistic, root-endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica and Arabidopsis thaliana when cultivated alone or in a co-culture. More than one hundred proteins were identified as differentially secreted, including proteins associated with growth, development, abiotic and biotic stress response and mucilage. One protein found in the co-culture is PLAT1 (Polycystin, Lipoxygenase, Alpha-toxin and Triacylglycerol lipases). PLAT1 has not been associated with plant-fungal-interaction before and is known to play a role in abiotic stress responses. It co-localizes with Brassicaceae-specific endoplasmic reticulum bodies (ER bodies), which are involved in the formation of the defence compound scopolin. We observed degraded ER bodies in P. indica infected Arabidopsis roots and plat1 mutants were stronger colonised than wild tyype (WT) plants. Furthermore, PLAT1 RNA (ribonucleic acid) and scopolin levels were detected to be regulated by the fungus in a stage-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant of liquid spent culture medium was filtered [0.22 µm PES (Polyethersulfone) Corning bottle top filter Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany] and treated with a protease inhibitor cocktail [1 tablet cOmplete Ultra, Mini, EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid)-free, Easypack (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) per 100 ml medium]. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to gain a final concentration of 0.1 % TFA. Chromabond C4 SPE (solid phase extraction) cartridges (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) were reconstituted with 3 ml acetonitrile (ACN) and 3 ml 0.1% TFA. Each 20 ml spent medium of 10 biological replicates of plant, fungus, co-culture or mock samples were aspirated (vacuum-driven) through the SPE cartridges. Subsequently, the cartridges were washed with 3 ml 5 % MeOH (methanol), 0.1% TFA, and the enriched proteins were eluted from the C4 resin with 3 ml 0.1% TFA in ACN/H2O (80%/ 20%, v/v). The eluates were freeze-dried in a Christ alpha 2-4 lyophilizer (Christ, Osterode am Harz, Germany). The lyophilised powder was resolubilised in 100 µl denaturation buffer, i.e. 50 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) in 50/50 trifluoroethanol (TFE)/H2O (v/v) by ultrasonification in the water bath for 15 min and heat treatment at 90°C for 10 min. For reduction of oxidised cysteine thiol residues 4 µl 500 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] in 100 mM TEAB was added for 1 h incubation at 55°C. Cysteine thiol alkylation was performed by addition of 4 µl 625 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM TEAB and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were cleaned-up by MeOH/H2O/chloroform precipitation using the protocol of {Wessel 1984 #2971} and the precipitate was resolubilised in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB by 15 min ultrasonic bath treatment. Total protein concentration was determined by the Merck Millipore Direct Detect (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) system according the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin and LysC protease mix (Promega Cat. # V5072) was added to the samples at a ratio of 1:25 protease mix to protein. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by addition of 10 µl 10% HCOOH, and the samples were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were resolubilised in 25 µl 0.05% TFA, 2% ACN by 15 min ultrasonic bath treatment. Finally, samples were filtered through 10 kDa PES molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filters (VWR International, Radnor, PA, USA) for 15 min at 16000 g transferred into HPLC (High-performance liquid chromatography) vials and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS (Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry) analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched online using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, Thermo Fischer) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min. Further peptide separation on an analytical column was performed on an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of eluent (A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and eluent (B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN/H2O (90%/ 10%, v/v). Gradient elution was performed as follows: 0 min at 4% B, 5 min at 6% B, 25 min at 8% B, 65 min at 20% B, 80 min at 30% B, 90 min at 50% B, 95-100 min at 96% B, 100.1-120 min at 4% B.  A stainless-steel emitter in the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to generate positively charged ions at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120k FWHM using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 100 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. HCD fragmentation at 30% normalised collision energy (NCE) generated MS2 ions, which were scanned at 15k FWHM using a maximum ITmax of 100 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8 and Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database of A. thaliana and Piriformospora indica (2017/02/05, YY/DD/MM) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK), Sequest HT (integral version of PD 2.1) and MS Amanda 1.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic methionine oxidation and static cystheine carbamidomethylation. At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for positive protein hits. The algorithms TargetP, SignalP and Predotar were used for predicting subcellular localisation {Emanuelsson 2007 #2945}, {Small 2004 #2946}.

### Publication Abstract
Plants interact with a wide variety of fungi in a mutualistic, parasitic or neutral way. The associations formed depend on the exchange of nutrients and signalling molecules between the partners. This includes a diverse set of protein classes involved in defence, nutrient uptake or establishing a symbiotic relationship. Here, we have analysed the secretomes of the mutualistic, root-endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica and Arabidopsis thaliana when cultivated alone or in a co-culture. More than one hundred proteins were identified as differentially secreted, including proteins associated with growth, development, abiotic and biotic stress response and mucilage. While some of the proteins have been associated before to be involved in plant-microbial interaction, other proteins are newly described in this context. One plant protein found in the co-culture is PLAT1 (Polycystin, Lipoxygenase, Alpha-toxin and Triacylglycerol lipase). PLAT1 has not been associated with plant-fungal-interaction and is known to play a role in abiotic stress responses. In colonised roots PLAT1 shows an altered gene expression in a stage specific manner and plat1 knock-out plants are colonised stronger. It co-localises with Brassicaceae-specific endoplasmic reticulum bodies (ER-bodies) which are involved in the formation of the defence compound scopolin. We observed degraded ER-bodies in infected Arabidopsis roots and a change in the scopolin level in response to the presence of the fungus.

### Keywords
Scopolin, Er body, Piriformospora indica, Plat, Secretome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute


