### Accession
PXD007763

### Title
Phosphorylation of iRhom2 controls stimulated proteolytic shedding by the metalloprotease ADAM17/TACE

### Description
TACE (TNFa Converting Enzyme), is responsible for cleavage (‘shedding’) of membrane-tethered signaling molecules such as TNF of EGFR ligands. TACE interacts with iRhom2, which mediates the exit of TACE from the endoplasmic reticulum. In this study we analyze a new role for iRHOM2, where a fraction of the protein remains in the membrane and the phosphorylation of different residues in its cytoplasmatic tail is necessary for TACE shedding function.

### Sample Protocol
IP samples were subjected to overnight digestion with porcine trypsin in 2M urea, 50mM tris pH7.5 and 1mM DTT. Cysteines alkilation was performed treating the digested peptides with iodoacetamide 0.5mg/ml, final concentration, for 30min. After that samples were acidified with TFA, final concentration 0.1% v/v and peptides were purified and desalted using the C18 StageTips protocol. Samples were analysed into a analysed on a Q-Exactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to a nano uHPLC.

### Data Protocol
Analysis were performed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1, using human and mouse databases, Carbamylation as fixed and phospho (STY), N-terminal acetylation (protein) and oxidation (M)as variable modifications. The abundance of the different phosphopeptides was determined as the ratio obtained by dividing the intensity of the phosphopeptides by the intensity of the corresponding protein in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Cell surface metalloproteases coordinate signaling during development, tissue homeostasis, and disease. TACE (TNF-&#x3b1;-converting enzyme), is responsible for cleavage ("shedding") of membrane-tethered signaling molecules, including the cytokine TNF, and activating ligands of the EGFR. The trafficking of TACE within the secretory pathway requires its binding to iRhom2, which mediates the exit of TACE from the endoplasmic reticulum. An important, but mechanistically unclear, feature of TACE biology is its ability to be stimulated rapidly on the cell surface by numerous inflammatory and growth-promoting agents. Here, we report a role for iRhom2 in TACE stimulation on the cell surface. TACE shedding stimuli trigger MAP kinase-dependent phosphorylation of iRhom2 N-terminal cytoplasmic tail. This recruits 14-3-3 proteins, enforcing the dissociation of TACE from complexes with iRhom2, promoting the cleavage of TACE substrates. Our data reveal that iRhom2 controls multiple aspects of TACE biology, including stimulated shedding on the cell surface.

### Keywords
Irhom2 tace phosphorylation

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre MRC Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine The University of Edinburgh Western General Hospital Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR

### Submitter
Alfonso Bolado

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander von Kriegsheim
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre MRC Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine The University of Edinburgh Western General Hospital Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR


