### Accession
PXD009051

### Title
Identification of UFBP1 interacting proteins

### Description
UFBP1 (UFM1-binding and PCI domain-containing protein 1, also called DDRGK domain-containing protein 1, Dashurin, or C20orf116) is a protein that also participates in the ufmylation conjugating systems besides the E1 ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 5 (UBA5), the E2, UFM1-conjugating enzyme 1 (UFC1), and the E3, UFM1-protein ligase 1 (UFL1). Although this protein play important roles in the ufmylation, its other biological functions have not been explored. To identify the UFBP1 interacting proteins, we expressed GFP (control sample) and FLAG-UFBP1 (experimental sample) in HEK293T cells and purified UFBP1 and its interacting proteins for MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Ten 10-cm plates of HEK293T cells were cultured in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin, and streptomycin. Cells were transfected using polyethyleneimine (PEI) transfection reagents. Forty-eight hours after transfection, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, collected, and lysed in the modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA) with freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) under brief mild sonication. Cell lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel at 4 C for 10 h. Gel was washed three times with TBST and again three times with TBST containing 0.3 M NaCl. The FLAG-tagged UFBP1 and its interacting proteins were eluted with TBST containing 200 g/mL FLAG peptides. The purified proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in gel. The extracted peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed in an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) in a 120 min LC gradient. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive-ion mode with an automated data-dependent MS/MS analysis. For each precursor MS scan (350-1800 m/z), the 15 most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analyses in the collision-induced dissociation mode with a 2 Da isolation window for the selected precursor ion in MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.1) against the UniProt human protein database (released in July 2017). The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. The maximal trypsin missed-cleavage sites were set to two. MaxQuant label-free quantification (MaxLFQ) was used to obtain relative abundance of identified proteins. The interacting proteins were obtained from a volcano plot constructed in Perseus from three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modification by ubiquitin-fold modifier 1, UFM1, regulates many biological processes such as response to endoplasmic reticulum stress and regulation of tumor progression. A recent study has indicated that the UFM1-binding and PCI domain-containing protein 1 (UFBP1) is required for the conjugation of UFM1 to a substrate. However, other biological functions of UFBP1 have not been explored. Here, we use immunoprecipitation and label-free quantitative proteomics to identify UFBP1-interacting proteins in a mammalian cell line. About 80 potential interacting proteins are obtained from MS analyses of three biological replicates. Bioinformatics analyses of these proteins suggest that UFBP1 may participate in the regulation of protein folding, stability, and trafficking. Biochemical experiments discover that UFBP1 expression downregulates the protein level and reduces the stability of several of its interacting proteins, while UFBP1 knockdown increases their protein levels. Protein synthesis inhibition and proteasomal inhibition experiments reveal that UFBP1 promotes their ubiquitination and degradation. Experiments using a model UFBP1-interacting protein ANT3 demonstrate that UFBP1 enhances the interaction between ANT3 and its E3 ligase and thus promotes its ubiquitination and degradation. Our work elucidates a novel molecular mechanism by which UFBP1 regulates protein ubiquitination and degradation.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens, Orbitrap, Interacting proteins, 293t, Ufbp1

### Affiliations
Soochow University
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences Soochow University Yunxuan Building 1328 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China

### Submitter
Dan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Xu
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences Soochow University Yunxuan Building 1328 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China


