### Accession
PXD034529

### Title
Organophosphorus pesticides catalyze protein crosslinking

### Description
Exposure to organophosphorus pesticides (OP) can have chronic adverse effects that are independent of inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, the classic target for acute OP toxicity.  In pure proteins, the organophosphorus pesticide chlorpyrifos oxon induces a crosslink between lysine and glutamate (or aspartate) with loss of water.  Tubulin is particularly sensitive to OP-induced crosslinking.  Our goal was to explore OP-induced crosslinking in a complex protein sample, MAP-rich tubulin from Sus scrofa, and to test 8 OP for their capacity to catalyze isopeptide crosslinking.  We treated 100 µg of MAP-rich tubulin with 100 µM chlorpyrifos, chlorpyrifos oxon, methamidophos, paraoxon, diazinon, diazoxon, monocrotophos, or dichlorvos.  Each sample was separated on SDS PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue.  Five gel slices (at about 30, 50, 150, and 300 kDa, and the top of the separating gel) were removed from the lanes for each of the eight OP samples and from untreated control lanes.  These gel slices were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion.  MSMS fragmentation spectra of the tryptic peptides were examined for isopeptide crosslinks.  Sixteen spectra yielded convincing evidence for isopeptide crosslinked peptides.  Ten were from the chlorpyrifos oxon reaction, 1 from dichlorvos, 1 from paraoxon, 1 from diazinon, and 3 from diazoxon. It was concluded that catalysis of protein crosslinking is a general property  of organophosphorus pesticides and pesticide metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Summary MAP-tubulin treated with 8 OP  Reaction with organophosphate Two mg of MAP-rich tubulin were dissolved in 4 ml of 20 mM Tris/Cl buffer, pH 8.5, containing 0.01% sodium azide to make 0.5 mg MAP-rich tubulin per ml.  Two µl of 10 mM organophosphate (chlorpyrifos, chlorpyrifos oxon, methamidophos, paraoxon, diazinon, diazoxon, monocrotophos, or dichlorvos) in acetonitrile were mixed with 0.2 ml of 0.5 mg/ml MAP-rich tubulin to give 100 µM OP and 100 µg MAP-rich tubulin.  Reactions were incubated at 37°C for 48 hours, in a humidified chamber, in the dark.  Eight hundred and fifty microliters of 20 millimolar ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 was added to 160 µl of each reaction mixture to give 0.08 mg/ml MAP-rich tubulin.  The mixtures were injected into 3 ml Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassettes, 7000 molecular weight cut-off (Thermo Scientific/Pierce Protein Research Products #66370, Waltham, MA) and dialyzed against 450 ml of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 4°C to remove the unreacted OP.  SDS PAGE Dialyzed samples were concentrated to about 2 µg/µl MAP-rich tubulin by vacuum centrifugation.  Seventy micrograms of MAP-rich tubulin from each sample loaded into a 4-22% gradient SDS PAGE.  Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 and destained with water.  Gel bands at about 30, 50, 150, and 300 kDa, and the top of the separating gel were removed and subjected to in-gel digestion.  Trypsic digestion In-gel tryptic digestion (with dithiothreitol reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation) was performed on gel slices as previously described 16.  Extracted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation in a Savant SpeedVac centrifuge and redissolved in 10 µl of water.  Data acquisition Peptide separation was performed with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), at 36°C.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm x 2 cm; Thermo Scientific, cat# 165535) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min and washed with 100% solvent A for 10 minutes.  Then, they were transferred to a Thermo Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm with 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific, cat# ES803) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 9 to 25% solvent B in 27 min, 25 to 35% solvent B in 5 min, 35 to 99% solvent B in 4 min, hold at 99% solvent B for 4 min, from 99 to 9 % solvent B in 4 min, hold at 9% solvent B for 16 min. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Data were collected using data dependent acquisition.  A survey full scan MS (from 350-1800 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap in positive ion mode, with a resolution of 120,000.  The AGC target (Automatic Gain Control for setting the ion population in the Orbitrap before collecting the MS) was set at 4 x 105 and the ion filling time was set at 100 msec.  The 25 most intense ions with charge state of 2-6 were isolated in a 3 sec cycle and fragmented using high-energy collision induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy.  Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.  The AGC target for MS/MS was set at 5 x 104, ion filling time at 60 msec, and dynamic exclusion at 30 sec after 1 time with a 10 ppm mass window.  Data were reported in *.raw format.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Method MAP-tubulin treated with 8 OP  Batch Tag Web search for crosslinked peptide candidates The *.mgf files were subjected to a database search using the Batch Tag Web algorithm in Protein Prospector version 6.2.1.  Searches were performed on the Protein Prospector website https://prospector.ucsf.edu [prospector.ucsf.edu].   Database search parameters for KD and KE crosslinked peptides included: database—User protein sequences: Neurofilament heavy polypeptide (XP_005670835); Microtubule-associated protein 2 isoform X8 (XP_013839898); Microtubule-associated protein 1B isoform X1 (XP_003134080); Microtubule-associated protein tau isoform X16 (XP_020922473); Tubulin alpha 1A (NP_001302639); and Tubulin beta 4B (XP_003122400) all from Sus scrofa pasted into the user protein window in FASTA format; Species—all; enzyme—trypsin, missed cleavages—3; expect calc method—none; protein N term—unchecked; protein C-term—unchecked; uncleaved—checked; parent mass tolerance—20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance—30 ppm; precursor charge state—2, 3, 4, 5; masses—monoisotopic; modification defect—0.00048 Da; instrument—ESI Q high res; link search type—user defined link; link aa—E, D, protein C term K, protein N-term; mod comp ion—K, D, and E; mod range-- -18 to 4000 Da; bridge comp—H-2O-1; msms mass peaks—80; max mod—2; variable modification—oxidation methionine; fixed modification—carbamidomethyl cysteine.   Database searches created a list of peptides that Protein Prospector considered to be crosslinked between KD and KE.  The list of potentially crosslinked peptides, along with parameters indicating the level of confidence in the assignment, were displayed in Protein Prospector/Search Compare.  Screening Search Compare results. To reduce the number of crosslink peptide candidates and aid in the identification of crosslinked peptides, the Search Compare list was screened manually.  Candidate crosslinked peptides were selected for further evaluation if they met the following criteria: charge state 2, 3, 4, 5; Score > 20; score difference > 1; % matched intensity > 40%; and at least 4 amino acids in each peptide.  Manual evaluation of crosslinked peptide candidates Crosslinked peptides were ultimately identified by manual evaluation. For a crosslink candidate to be accepted as a crosslinked peptide there must be amino acid sequence support for both peptides and there must be at least one crosslink specific amino acid, defined by two crosslink specific ions.   Sequence support consists of the following features. 1) A series of non-crosslink specific masses in the MS/MS spectrum must correspond to an amino acid sequence from each peptide in a crosslink candidate.  Suitable sequences include an N-terminal sequence, a C-terminal sequence, or an internal fragment.  Sequences must be at least 2 amino acids long. 2) At least one crosslink specific amino acid is essential.  A series of crosslink specific amino acids is frequently encountered. 3) Neutral loss of amino acids from the parent ion.  Neutral losses can be N terminal amino acids (ladder sequence) from one peptide, C terminal amino acids (peeling sequence) from one peptide, a combination of N-terminal and C-terminal amino acids from one peptide, or a mixture of N-terminal and C terminal amino acids from both peptides.  By definition, the amino acids that are neutral losses from the parent ion contain residues from both peptides and are therefore crosslink specific amino acids.  Adduct formation by organophosphates on lysine.   MSMS data were searched for peptide adducts formed by the OP using the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 with the Sequest database search engine (last used Oct 2020).  Searches employed Processing Method “PWF fusion basic Sequest HR” and Consensus method “CWF Basic”.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure to organophosphorus pesticides (OP) can have chronic adverse effects that are independent of inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, the classic target for acute OP toxicity. In pure proteins, the organophosphorus pesticide chlorpyrifos oxon induces a cross-link between lysine and glutamate (or aspartate) with loss of water. Tubulin is particularly sensitive to OP-induced cross-linking. Our goal was to explore OP-induced cross-linking in a complex protein sample, MAP-rich tubulin from <i>Sus scrofa</i> and to test 8 OP for their capacity to promote isopeptide cross-linking. We treated 100 &#x3bc;g of MAP-rich tubulin with 100 &#x3bc;M chlorpyrifos, chlorpyrifos oxon, methamidophos, paraoxon, diazinon, diazoxon, monocrotophos, or dichlorvos. Each sample was separated using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie blue. Five gel slices (at about 30, 50, 150, and 300 kDa, and the top of the separating gel) were removed from the lanes for each of the eight OP samples and from untreated control lanes. These gel slices were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. MSMS fragmentation spectra of the tryptic peptides were examined for isopeptide cross-links. Sixteen spectra yielded convincing evidence for isopeptide cross-linked peptides. Ten were from the chlorpyrifos oxon reaction, 1 from dichlorvos, 1 from paraoxon, 1 from diazinon, and 3 from diazoxon. It was concluded that catalysis of protein cross-linking is a general property of organophosphorus pesticides and pesticide metabolites. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034529.

### Keywords
Map-rich tubulin, Crosslinks, Isopeptide, Chlorpyrifos oxon, Protein prospector

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska, USA

### Submitter
Lawrence Schopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Oksana Lockridge
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska, USA


