### Accession
PXD015930

### Title
Identification of differentially expressed proteins in sugarcane responding to Xanthomonas albilineans infection using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics

### Description
This study was to determine quantitative proteome changes in sugarcane cultivars LCP 85-384 (resistance to leaf scald) and ROC20 (susceptible to leaf scald) to understand the molecular insights into defense mechanism of sugarcane against X. albilineans using a high-throughput iTRAQ-based technique

### Sample Protocol
Two sugarcane cultivars contrasting for leaf scald, LCP 85-384 (resistant) and ROC20 (susceptible) that were originated from the Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, Sugar Research Station (St. Gabriel, USA) (Milligan et al., 1994) and Taiwan Sugar Corporation (Taiwan, China) (Peng, 1996), respectively, were used for X. albilineans inoculation. Plantlets of two cultivars were grown in a growth room at 28 oC, 60% humidity, and 16/8 h (light/dark) photoperiod. At 3‒5 leaf stage and approximately 15‒20 cm high, the plantlets were inoculated with X. albilineans strain Xa-FJ1 by cutting leaf blades at mid-length with sterilized scissors previously dipped in a bacterial suspension of 108 CFU/mL of viable X. albilineans

### Data Protocol
The desalted peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents (iTRAQ® Reagent-8PLEX Multiplex Kit, Sigma-Aldrich, Shanghai, China), following the manufacturer’s instructions

### Publication Abstract
Sugarcane can suffer severe yield losses when affected by leaf scald, a disease caused by <i>Xanthomonas albilineans</i>. This bacterial pathogen colonizes the vascular system of sugarcane, which can result in reduced plant growth and plant death. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the resistance of sugarcane to leaf scald, a comparative proteomic study was performed with two sugarcane cultivars inoculated with <i>X. albilineans</i>: one resistant (LCP 85-384) and one susceptible (ROC20) to leaf scald. The iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification) approach at 0 and 48 h post-inoculation (hpi) was used to identify and annotate differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). A total of 4295 proteins were associated with 1099 gene ontology (GO) terms by GO analysis. Among those, 285 were DEPs during <i>X. albilineans</i> infection in cultivars LCP 85-384 and ROC20. One hundred seventy-two DEPs were identified in resistant cultivar LCP 85-384, and 113 of these proteins were upregulated and 59 were downregulated. One hundred ninety-two DEPs were found in susceptible cultivar ROC20 and half of these (92) were upregulated, whereas the other half corresponded to downregulated proteins. The significantly upregulated DEPs in LCP 85-384 were involved in metabolic pathways, the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway. Additionally, the expression of seven candidate genes related to photosynthesis and glycolytic pathways, plant innate immune system, glycosylation process, plant cytochrome P450, and non-specific lipid transfer protein was verified based on transcription levels in sugarcane during infection by <i>X. albilineans.</i> Our findings shed new light on the differential expression of proteins in sugarcane cultivars in response to infection by <i>X. albilineans</i>. The identification of these genes provides important information for sugarcane variety improvement programs using molecular breeding strategies.

### Keywords
Saccharum spp

### Affiliations
gansanji
National Engineering Research Center for Sugarcane, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China

### Submitter
meng jianyu

### Lab Head
Dr Gao Sanji
National Engineering Research Center for Sugarcane, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China


