### Accession
PXD022252

### Title
Dual DNA/protein tagging of open chromatin unveils dynamics of epigenomic landscapes in leukemia

### Description
The architecture of chromatin specifies eukaryotic cell identity by controlling transcription factor access to sites of gene regulation. Here we describe a dual transposase/peroxidase approach, integrative DNA And Protein Tagging (iDAPT), which detects both DNA (iDAPT-seq) and protein (iDAPT-MS) associated with accessible regions of chromatin. In addition to direct identification of bound transcription factors, iDAPT enables the inference of their gene regulatory networks, protein interactors, and regulation of chromatin accessibility. We applied iDAPT to profile the epigenomic consequences of granulocytic differentiation of acute promyelocytic leukemia, yielding previously undescribed mechanistic insights with potential therapeutic implications. Our findings demonstrate the power of iDAPT as a discovery platform for both the dynamic epigenomic landscapes and their transcription factor components associated with biological phenomena and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin-labeled nuclei were pelleted, washed with 1x quenching buffer, resuspended in 500 μL RIPA containing protease inhibitors, and frozen at -80 °C. Lysates were thawed on ice, sonicated via a Sonic Dismembrator 100 (Fisher Scientific, setting 3, 15 s, 4 pulses), and incubated on ice for 30 min after the addition of 1 μL benzonase (EMD Millipore). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (15,000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C), quantified via the detergent-compatible Bradford assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and subjected to either Western blotting or quantitative mass spectrometry analyses as described below. For NB4 cell analysis, an additional endogenous peroxidase blocking step was added after nuclear extraction and before tagmentation: nuclei were resuspended in 500 μL 1xPBS containing 1% BSA, 0.03% hydrogen peroxide, and 0.1% NaN3 and incubated on ice for 30 min. Nuclei were pelleted and washed 4x with 1xPBS/1% BSA (3000 x g, 5 min, 4 °C). Residual hydrogen peroxide was monitored by colorimetric assessment of supernatant via Quantofix peroxides test stick (Sigma).  250 μg (K562) or 150 μg (NB4) lysate was reduced with 5 mM DTT and then added to 60 μL (K562) or 90 μL (NB4) Pierce streptavidin bead slurry equilibrated 2x with RIPA buffer. Lysate/bead mixture was incubated with end-to-end rotation overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed 3x with RIPA, 2x with 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, and resuspended with 100 μL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, with beads resuspended and incubated with end-to-end rotation for 5 min per wash. 1 μL mass spectrometry-grade LysC (Wako) was added to each tube and incubated at 37 °C for 3 h with mixing, and an additional 1 μL mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added, followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C with mixing. Beads were magnetized, and eluate was collected and subjected to downstream TMT labeling.   Peptides were processed using the SL-TMT method28. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL), of which 10 μL was added to each peptide suspension (100 μL) with 30 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. The pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).  We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using BPRP HPLC95. We used an Agilent 1200 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280 nm wavelength) from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a 50-min linear gradient from 9% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate 600 μL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, which were consolidated into 24 super-fractions96. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher). For each analysis, approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated using a 150 min gradient of 8 to 28% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of 450-500 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method26,27, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification97. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 2e5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 1.4e4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5e5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline98. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of MSConvert. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database. This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.   Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)99,100. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously98, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100, missing MS3 spectra, or isolation specificity < 0.7 were excluded from quantification101.   PSM intensities were normalized by taking the median intensity of streptavidin and trypsin PSMs per sample as a normalization factor, as these proteins are added to each sample in equal amounts post-enrichment. Normalized PSMs were then log2-transformed and collapsed to proteins by arithmetic average, with priority given to uniquely mapping peptides. Hierarchical clustering, Pearson correlation, and principal component analyses were performed at the protein level. The limma package in R was used to determine differential protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hematopoietic cancer cells, Idapt, Tmt

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Harvard University

### Submitter
Jonathan Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Lee
Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.


