### Accession
PXD017253

### Title
IMPAIRED CHONDROCYTE U3 SNORNA EXPRESSION IN OSTEOARTHRITIS AND ITS IMPACT ON THE CHONDROCYTE’S PROTEIN TRANSLATION APARATUS

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic debilitating joint disease which is strongly associated with ageing. OA involves pathological cellular processes in all joint structures and affects articular cartilage integrity, leading to dysfunctional joint articulation. The biomolecular processes that catalyze the disturbances in the articular chondrocyte phenotype leading to OA are poorly understood, and it is expected that a comprehensive understanding of the avenues leading to catabolic changes and disruption of articular chondrocyte homeostasis will provide important cues for future treatments of the condition. Chondrocytes are specialized secretory cells with highly active protein translational machinery, enabling the synthesis and maintenance of the protein-rich cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM). Disturbances in chondrocyte protein translation in cartilage development and OA are connected to mTOR activity, ER stress, unfolded protein response (UPR)and CHOP-mediated apoptosis. These responses change the downstream translational activity of the biosynthesized ribosome. The assembled mammalian ribosome is built from ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), together with more than 80 different protein subunits. At the heart of the ribosome, the 18S rRNA guides the decoding of the mRNA message, while an ancient ribozyme activity in the 28S rRNA forms the core of the peptidyltransferase center that polymerizes the amino acid sequence encoded by the mRNA into functional proteins. Post-transcriptional maturation of rRNAs is an integral part of the biosynthesis of ribosomes and ribonucleolytic processing of the major 47S rRNA precursor into mature 18S, 5.8S, and 28S rRNAs is rate limiting for ribosome biogenesis. The U3 small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) is an evolutionarily highly conserved box C/D-class snoRNA which catalyzes the endoribonucleolytic processing of the 5’ external transcribed spacer (ETS) of the 47S pre-rRNA by base complementarity-guided pre-rRNA substrate recognition and plays a crucial role in the maturation of 18S rRNA. Although extensively studied in yeast, it was only recently demonstrated that U3 snoRNA is indispensable for rRNA maturation in human cells.  Pathways controlling ribosome activity have previously been described in the regulation of chondrocyte homeostasis. We here now postulate that not only ribosome activity is involved in chondrocyte homeostasis, but that OA pathophysiological situations can also cause alterations in chondrocyte ribosome biogenesis with consequences for cellular protein translation. Since U3 snoRNA-driven rRNA production is rate-limiting in ribosome biogenesis, we hypothesized that the U3 snoRNA is critical for chondrocyte homeostasis. In this study we therefor aimed to determine whether OA pathophysiological conditions interact with chondrocyte U3 snoRNA levels, thereby influencing rRNA levels and chondrocyte translation capacity.

### Sample Protocol
SW1353 cells were cultured in phenol free DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, F7524), 0.2% Amphotericin B (Gibco), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Sigma) and 1% L-Glutamin. Transfection of U3 antisense oligonucleotide and scrambled oligonucleotide (ASO) was carried out using HiPerfect transfection reagent (Qiagen). Knockdown of U3 snoRNA was confirmed by qPCR analysis.To digest cell lysates we used 10 ug of each sample and trypsin digested using the following protocol. Protein samples were detergent treated with 1% RapiGest (Waters) (incubated at 800C for 10 minutes), sequential reduction and alkylation were performed at the end of incubation in ~0.7 mM DTT (Sigma) (incubated at 600C for 10 minutes) and then ~2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) (incubated 30 min in the dark). For proteins digestion trypsin was added at the ratio of 1:50 and incubated overnight at 37 C on the rotor, on the following day the same amount was added to the samples and incubated for 1 hour at 37 C. Detergent inactivation accomplished by using 0.5% v/v final concentration of TFA (Sigma) and incubated for 45min at 37C. Soluble phase was taken out after centrifugation at 13 000 g for 15 min.Samples were concentrated and purified using Millipore Ziptips C18 (Sigma), 250 ng for cell lysates proteins and 2 ul for media proteins were used to inject into column. Proteins were analysed on Q-exactive Orbitrap Mass spectrometer as described previously (Peffers, Beynon, & Clegg, 2013).

### Data Protocol
Generated Thermo RAW files were converted to mgf files in order to identify proteins with Mascot (Matrix Science), also Thermo RAW files were identified and quantified with ProgenesisQI™ (Waters) software, differentially expressed (DE) proteins were defined with FDR p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Although pathways controlling ribosome activity have been described to regulate chondrocyte homeostasis in osteoarthritis, ribosome biogenesis in osteoarthritis is unexplored. We hypothesized that U3 snoRNA, a non-coding RNA involved in ribosomal RNA maturation, is critical for chondrocyte protein translation capacity in osteoarthritis. U3 snoRNA was one of a number of snoRNAs with decreased expression in osteoarthritic cartilage and osteoarthritic chondrocytes. OA synovial fluid impacted U3 snoRNA expression by affecting U3 snoRNA gene promoter activity, while BMP7 was able to increase its expression. Altering U3 snoRNA expression resulted in changes in chondrocyte phenotype. Interference with U3 snoRNA expression led to reduction of rRNA levels and translational capacity, whilst induced expression of U3 snoRNA was accompanied by increased 18S and 28S rRNA levels and elevated protein translation. Whole proteome analysis revealed a global impact of reduced U3 snoRNA expression on protein translational processes and inflammatory pathways. For the first time we demonstrate implications of a snoRNA in osteoarthritis chondrocyte biology and investigated its role in the chondrocyte differentiation status, rRNA levels and protein translational capacity.

### Keywords
Translation, Snorna, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Musculoskeletal Biology 1, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Aibek Smagul

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
Musculoskeletal Biology 1, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom.


