### Accession
PXD026863

### Title
Analysis of tetraspanin distribution on plasma and serum extracellular vesicles indicates that separate subpopulations carries CD9, CD63 and CD81

### Description
The ability to isolate extracellular vesicles (EVs) from blood is vital in the development of EVs as disease biomarkers. Both serum and plasma can be used, but few studies have compared these sources in terms of the quantity and type of EVs that are obtained. The aim of this study was therefore to determine the presence of different subpopulations of EVs in plasma and serum. Blood samples were collected from healthy subjects, from which plasma and serum were isolated in parallel. ACD-A or EDTA tubes were used for the collection of plasma, while serum was obtained in clot activator tubes. We previously developed a method utilising a combination of density cushion and size exclusion chromatography to isolate EVs from plasma with minimal contamination of lipoprotein particles. In the current study, we applied this method to both EDTA-plasma and serum. In addition, EVs were isolated by a combination of density cushion and density gradient or by bead immune capturing (anti-CD63, anti-CD9, and anti-CD81 beads). The subpopulations of EVs were analysed by nanoparticle tracking analysis, Western blot, single particle interferometric reflectance imaging sensing, conventional and nano flow cytometry, magnetic bead enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and mass spectrometry.This study shows that a larger number of CD9+ EVs are present in EDTA-plasma compared to ACD-plasma and serum, and the presence of CD41a on theses EVs suggests that they are released from platelets. Furthermore, only a small number of EVs in blood were double positive for CD63 and CD81. The CD63+ EVs were enriched in serum, while CD81+ vesicles were the rarest subpopulation in both plasma and serum.  Together, these findings show that multiple subpopulations of EVs are present in blood including CD9+/CD41a+, CD9+/CD63+/CD41+, CD63+/CD41a+, CD63+/CD9+/CD81−, CD81+/CD9+/CD63−, and CD9+/CD63+/CD81+ and that their presence is dissimilar in EDTA-plasma, ACD-plasma and serum.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and digestion for mass spectrometry analysis The proteomic analysis was performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. Samples were isolated with Protocol 2, and in total 40 µg per sample was used, with three biological replicates for each EV subpopulation. A reference pool was constructed consisting of 4.5 µg from each of the nine samples. The samples and reference pool were digested with trypsin using the suspension trapping (S-Trap™, Protifi) spin column digestion method according to the manufacturer´s instructions. Samples in 2% SDS were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 min) and alkylated using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (RT, 20 min). Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid, mixed with S-Trap binding buffer (90%MeOH in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)), transferred to S-Trap™ micro spin columns and washed several times with binding buffer. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, at 37°C by addition of 1 µg Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight in a humidified chamber. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation in three steps – 1) 50 mM TEAB, 2) 0.2% formic acid, and 3) 50% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid – and the eluates were pooled. The peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, resolved in 50 mM TEAB, and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. The combined purified samples were pre-fractionated into 40 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0 × 150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 400 µl/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid.   nanoLC-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (350 × 0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using a linear gradient from 5% to 33% B over 77 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 3 min and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120,000 resolution, and MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent multinotch mode where CID spectra of the most intense precursor ions were recorded in the ion trap at a collision energy setting of 35 for 3 s (‘top speed’ setting). Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, charge states 2-7 were selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s and 10 ppm. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50,000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at a collision energy of 65 using the synchronous precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was against human Swissprot Database version March 2019 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland) using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) as the search engine with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-labelled modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. Percolator was used for PSM validation with a strict FDR threshold of 1%, and the quantified proteins were filtered at 5% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences in order to minimise redundancy. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with a 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalised within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 based on the total peptide amount. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for the relative quantification. A reference sample made from a mix of all the samples was used as the denominator for calculating of the ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Subpopulations, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Serum, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Krefting Research Centre Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy University of Gothenburg  Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Lässer
Krefting Research Centre Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy University of Gothenburg  Sweden


