### Accession
PXD030535

### Title
Metal removal capability of two cyanobacterial species in autotrophic and mixotrophic mode of nutrition

### Description
Background: Cyanobacteria are ecologically significant prokaryotes that can be found in heavy metals contaminated environments. As their photosynthetic machinery imposes high demands for metals, homeostasis of these micronutrients has been extensively considered in cyanobacteria. Recently, most studies have been focused on different habitats using microalgae leads to a remarkable reduction of an array of organic and inorganic nutrients, but what takes place in the extracellular environment when cells are exposed to external supplementation with heavy metals remains largely unknown.  Methods: Here, extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) production in strains Nostoc sp. N27P72 and Nostoc sp. FB71 was isolated from different habitats and thenthe  results were compared and reported .  Result: Cultures of both strains, supplemented separately with either glucose, sucrose, lactose, or maltose showed that production of EPS and cell dry weight were boosted by maltose supplementation. The production of EPS (9.1 ± 0.05 μg/ml) and increase in cell dry weight (1.01 ± 0.06 g/l) were comparatively high in Nostoc sp. N27P72 which was isolated from lime stones.The cultures were evaluated for their ability to remove Cu (II), Cr (III), and Ni (II) in culture media with and without maltose. The crude EPS showed metal adsorption capacity assuming the order Ni (II)> Cu (II)> Cr (III) from the metal-binding experiments .Nickel was preferentially biosorbed with a maximal uptake of 188.8 ± 0.14 mg (g cell dry wt) -1 crude EPS. We found that using maltose as a carbon source can increase the production of EPS, protein, and carbohydrates content and it could be a significant reason for the high ability of metal absorbance. FT-IR spectroscopy revealed that the treatment with Ni can change the functional groups and glycoside linkages in both strains. Results of Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC–MS) were used to determine the biochemical composition of Nostoc sp. N27P72, showed that strong Ni (II) removal capability could be associated with the high silicon containing heterocyclic compound and aromatic diacid compounds content.  Conclusion: The results of this studyindicatede that strains Nostoc sp. N27P72 can be a good candidate for the commercial production of EPS and might be utilized in bioremediation field as an alternative to synthetic and abiotic flocculants.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical composition of extracts of Nostoc sp. N27P72 was evaluated by a coupled gas chromatography –mass spectrometry (GC-MS). The separation of compounds and their analysis was performed by agilent 7000 series Quadrupole GC-MS system with electron impact ionization. The total GC run time was 32 min and the carrier gas was helium. The initial oven temperature was held at 90 °C for 1 min and then reached 300 °C in 13 min, then it was held at this temperature for 20 min. the injector temperature was 300 °C. Interpretation on mass spectrum GC-MS was conducted using the database of National Institute Standard and Technology (NIST) having more than 62,000 patterns and Fiehn Mass Spectra Libraries. The spectrum of the unspecified component was equaled with the spectrum of the identified components stored in the NIST library. The Name, Molecular weight, and Structure of the components of the test materials were ascertained (39).

### Data Protocol
Interpretation on mass spectrum GC-MS was conducted using the database of National Institute Standard and Technology (NIST) having more than 62,000 patterns and Fiehn Mass Spectra Libraries. The spectrum of the unspecified component was equaled with the spectrum of the identified components stored in the NIST library. The Name, Molecular weight, and Structure of the components of the test materials were ascertained (39).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metal removal capability; extracellular polymeric substances; nostoc; cyanobacteria; mixotrophic media culture.

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Converging Sciences and Technologies, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Iran, Mailbox: 775/14515, Postcode: 1477893855, ORCID: 0000-0001-6656-777X
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Converging Sciences and Technologies, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch, Tehran,

### Submitter
Bahareh Nowruzi

### Lab Head
Dr Bahareh Nowruzi
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Converging Sciences and Technologies, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Iran, Mailbox: 775/14515, Postcode: 1477893855, ORCID: 0000-0001-6656-777X


