### Accession
PXD001011

### Title
Quantitative proteome profiling of CNS-infiltrating autoreactive CD4+ cells reveals selective changes during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis

### Description
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a murine model of multiple sclerosis, a chronic neurodegenerative and inflammatory autoimmune condition of the central nervous system (CNS). Pathology is driven by the infiltration of autoreactive CD4+ lymphocytes into the CNS where they attack neuronal sheaths causing ascending paralysis. We used an isotope-coded protein labelling approach to investigate the proteome of CD4+ cells isolated from the spinal cord and brain of mice at various stages of EAE progression in two EAE disease models; PLP139-151-induced relapsing-remitting EAE and MOG35-55-induced chronic EAE, which emulate the two forms of human multiple sclerosis. A total of 1120 proteins were quantified across disease onset, peak-disease and remission phases of disease and of these, 13 up-regulated proteins of interest were identified with functions relating to the regulation of inflammation, leukocyte adhesion and migration, tissue repair and the regulation of transcription/translation. Proteins implicated in processes such as inflammation (S100A4 and S100A9) and tissue repair (Annexin A1), which represent key events during EAE progression were validated by quantitative PCR. This is the first targeted analysis of autoreactive cells purified from the CNS during EAE, highlighting fundamental CD4+ cell-driven processes that occur during the initiation of relapse and remission stages of disease.

### Sample Protocol
15µg protein from each control or disease stage (naive control, disease onset, peak-disease +/- remission) were reduced, alkylated and then labelled with ICPL 0, ICPL 6 and ICPL 10 for MOG35-55-EAE samples or with ICPL 0, ICPL  4, ICPL 6 and ICPL 10 for PLP139-151-EAE samples, respectively, according to protocols provided with the SERVA ICPL Quadruplex PLUS Kit instructions. Following labelling, samples were combined (triplex for MOG35-55-EAE; 45µg total protein or quadruplex for PLP139-151-EAE; 60µg total protein). Protein was then precipitated using acetone precipitation as described in the provided protocols followed by solubilisation in 20µL 1x LDS loading buffer with 20mM DTT using sonication. Samples were heated at 95°C for 10 min, allowed to cool and separated by LDS-PAGE on a 1mm 4-12% NuPAGE® Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using MOPS running buffer at 200V for 50 min.  Following separation, gel bands were visualized using colloidal coomassie blue staining (Amersham Biosciences, USA) prior to manual excision and in-gel reduction (DTT), alkylation (iodoacetamide) and tryptic digestion (100ng modified porcine trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were extracted from the gel plugs using sonication in 50% ACN with 0.1% TFA followed by 100% ACN. Combined peptide eluates for each gel band were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and each was reconstituted using 2% ACN with 0.1% TFA.  For the triplex data, an Agilent 1100 system was operated using binary gradients of mobile phase A (0.1% TFA in 95%  H2O, 5% ACN) and B (0.1% TFA in 95% ACN, 5%  H2O). The Agilent 1100 was controlled using the Hystar software platform (V3.2-SR2, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).  Peptide samples were eluted and separated directly over an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (180μm i.d. × 15cm, 5μm particle size, 100Å, Dionex) at a flow rate of 1µL/min. The peptides were eluted with an ACN gradient of 0% B for 10 min, 0 to 48% solvent B in 54 min, 48 to 60% solvent B in 5 min, 60 to 80% solvent B in 0.5 min, followed by 80% B for 5 min.  Fifteen second fractions were collected onto a MTP 384 MALDI 800μm AnchorChip target (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using a Proteineer Fraction Collector (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). A supporting liquid (50% ACN in 0.1% TFA) was added discontinuously over the last 2 sec during deposition onto the MALDI target via sheath flow to reduce peak tailing. After the spots air dried, 1µL of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix solution was added manually to each fraction according to Zhang et al. and left to dry. For calibration spots 1µL of Bruker Daltonics Peptide Calibration Standard II (dissolved in 125μL of 0.1% TFA) was mixed with 99μL of 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA and 600nL deposited onto the target. After drying, 0.8µL of matrix solution was subsequently added and left to dry.   MS analysis was performed on an Ultraflex III MALDI-TOF/TOF system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in reflectron positive ion mode, using WARP-LC (V1.2 Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with flexControl.  For the quadraplex data, an UltiMate 3000 RS Nano/Cap System (Dionex, California, USA) was operated using binary gradients of mobile phase A (0.05% TFA in 98%  H2O, 2% ACN) and B (0.04% TFA in 80% ACN, 20%  H2O) and controlled using Hystar (V3.2-SR2, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). A micro-WPS-3000 autosampler (Dionex, California, USA) injected 5μL samples onto an Acclaim Pepmap 100 trap column (75µm × 2cm, 3µm, 100Å). Sample loading was performed at 3μL/min at 0% B for 10 min. For analytical separation the trap was switched inline to an Acclaim Pepmap100 C-18 analytical column (75µm × 15cm, 3µm, Dionex, California, USA) running at 300nL/min. Peptides were eluted with 4-8% B in 1 min, 8-42% B in 44 mins, 42-90% B in 5 min followed by 90% B for 10 min. Fractions (15 s) were collected onto a MTP 384 MALDI 800μm AnchorChip target (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using a Proteineer Fraction Collector (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), as described previously.18 Briefly, eluate was mixed with CHCA matrix, supplied by a syringe pump (Cole-Parmer, Illinois, USA), in a MicroTee junction (PEEK, 1/32 in, Upchurch Scientific). Matrix consisted of 748μL 95% ACN in 0.1% TFA, 36μL saturated CHCA in 90% ACN and 0.1% TFA, 8μL of 10% TFA and 8μL of 100mM ammonium phosphate. 1µL of Peptide Calibration Standard II (Bruker, Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) dissolved in 125μL 0.1% TFA was mixed with 99μL 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA and 150μL of matrix.  600nL of this mixture was deposited onto calibration spots.  MS and MS/MS analyses were performed using an UltrafleXtreme MALDI-TOF/TOF system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in reflectron positive ion mode, using WARP-LC (V1.2 Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with flexControl.

### Data Protocol
For the triplex data, laser power and detector gain was operator determined to provide optimal MS intensity and resolution. 500 and 400 laser shots were collected for both sample and calibration spots respectively using an acquisition m/z range of 700-4500. Following MS collection, MS spectra were smoothed (Gaussian, 1 cycles, width - m/z 0.05), and baseline subtracted (TopHat). Peak masses and intensities were detected with flexAnalysis using the SNAP algorithm. WARP-LC was used to calculate a compound list for automated MS/MS based on a preset LC-MALDI method. MS/MS instrument settings were defined by the LIFT method. Following automated MS/MS acquisition, MS/MS spectra were imported into Proteinscape version 3.0.0346 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and submitted to Mascot (V2.3.02) for identification using the following search parameters:  Taxonomy, Mus musculus; Database, Swiss-Prot release 2013_04; Maximum missed cleavages, 1; MS tolerance, 50ppm, MS/MS tolerance, 0.8Da; Enzyme, Arg C; Variable modifications, oxidation (M), ICPL_0 (Lysine), ICPL_0 (Protein N-terminal), ICPL_6 (Lysine), ICPL_6 (Protein N-terminal), ICPL_10 (Lysine), ICPL_10 (Protein N-terminal); fixed modifications; carbamidomethyl (cysteine).  Similarly for the quadraplex data, Laser power was operator determined to provide optimal MS intensity and resolution. 3000 laser shots were collected for both sample and calibration spots. Acquisition settings: m/z range of 700-4000, 5.0 × reflector gain and 2.00 GS/s acquisition rate. MS spectra were smoothed (Gaussian, 1 cycles, width - m/z 0.02), and baseline subtracted (TopHat). Peak masses and intensities were detected in flexAnalysis using the SNAP algorithm. WARP-LC was used to calculate a compound list for automated MS/MS based on a preset LC-MALDI method. MS/MS instrument settings were defined by the LIFT method. Following automated MS/MS acquisition, MS/MS spectra were imported into Proteinscape version 3.0.0346 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and submitted to Mascot (V2.3.02) for identification using the following search parameters: Taxonomy, Mus musculus; Database, Swiss-Prot release 2013_04; Maximum missed cleavages, 1; MS tolerance, 50ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.8Da; Enzyme, Arg-C; Fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), ICPL_0 (Lysine), ICPL_0 (Protein N-terminal), ICPL_4 (Lysine), ICPL_4 (Protein N-terminal), ICPL_6 (Lysine), ICPL_6 (Protein N-terminal), ICPL_10 (Lysine), ICPL_10 (Protein N-terminal) . To prepare a list of candidate peptides for quantitation, all protein identifications with at least one identification with an ion score greater than the identity threshold were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a murine model of multiple sclerosis, a chronic neurodegenerative and inflammatory autoimmune condition of the central nervous system (CNS). Pathology is driven by the infiltration of autoreactive CD4(+) lymphocytes into the CNS, where they attack neuronal sheaths causing ascending paralysis. We used an isotope-coded protein labeling approach to investigate the proteome of CD4(+) cells isolated from the spinal cord and brain of mice at various stages of EAE progression in two EAE disease models: PLP139-151-induced relapsing-remitting EAE and MOG35-55-induced chronic EAE, which emulate the two forms of human multiple sclerosis. A total of 1120 proteins were quantified across disease onset, peak-disease, and remission phases of disease, and of these 13 up-regulated proteins of interest were identified with functions relating to the regulation of inflammation, leukocyte adhesion and migration, tissue repair, and the regulation of transcription/translation. Proteins implicated in processes such as inflammation (S100A4 and S100A9) and tissue repair (annexin A1), which represent key events during EAE progression, were validated by quantitative PCR. This is the first targeted analysis of autoreactive cells purified from the CNS during EAE, highlighting fundamental CD4(+) cell-driven processes that occur during the initiation of relapse and remission stages of disease.

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Isotope coded protein labelling (icpl), Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (eae), Maldi-tof/tof., Cd4+ t lymphocyte

### Affiliations
University of Adelaide
Adelaide Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
Lyron Winderbaum

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hoffmann
Adelaide Proteomics Centre


