### Accession
PXD012373

### Title
Nuclear pore component Nup155 is part of the p53 network in liver cancer

### Description
Cancer-relevant signalling pathways rely on bidirectional nucleocytoplasmic transport events through the nuclear pore complex (NPC). However, mechanisms by which individual NPC components (Nups) participate in the regulation of these pathways remain poorly understood. We discovered by integrating large scale proteomics, polysome fractionation and a focused RNAi approach that Nup155 controls mRNA translation of p21 (CDKN1A), a key mediator of the p53 response. The underlying mechanism involves transcriptional regulation of the putative tRNA and rRNA methyltransferase FTSJ1 by Nup155. Furthermore, we observed that Nup155 and FTSJ1 are p53 repression targets and accordingly found a correlation between the p53 status, Nup155 and FTSJ1 expression in murine and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Our data suggest an unanticipated regulatory network linking translational control by and repression of a structural NPC component modulating the p53 pathway through its effectors.

### Sample Protocol
mass spectrometry  Lysates isolated from nonsense-(QIAGEN, All-Stars duplex) and Nup155-siRNA transfected cells (72h) treated with Nutlin-3a for 24h were processed and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Two distinct siRNAs against Nup155 were used and for each one of them a biological duplicate was analysed (four samples in total). For each condition harvested cells (PBS, concentration 106/100µL) were lysed in urea buffer (10 M urea in 250 mMNH4HCO3) and 2% (w/v) Rapigest (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) reaching a final concentration of 4 M and 0.2% (w/v), followed by three sonication steps of 30 s each in a vial tweeter interrupted by a cool down on ice for 1 minute. Reduction of solubilized proteins was achieved by using 10 mM DTT (at 37°C for 30 min). The addition of 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes resulted in alkylation of cysteine rests. The protein digestion was performed by incubation with LysC (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) using a dilution of 1:100 (w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C followed by dilution of urea concentration to 1.5 M and addition of trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) to a dilution of 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37°C. After digestion samples were acidified with 10% (v/v) TFA. The cleavage of Rapigest allowed to proceed at 37°C for 30 min. Digested samples were clarified by centrifugation (17,000x g for 5 min at RT) followed by a desalting step using C18 SEP-pack columns (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). During the desalting procedure, peptides were labeled by reductive dimethylation as described in 51. Controls were labeled using light formaldehyde (mass shift +28) while Nup155-siRNA transfected samples were labeled using deuterated (heavy) formaldehyde (mass shift +32). Labeling efficiency (>95%) was assessed by LC-MS/MS on an aliquot of each sample. Control and siRNA treated samples were then mixed 1:1 and subjected to off-line high-pH peptide fractionation as described previously52. Thirty fractions were collected for each sample and pooled into 10 final fractions that were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Fracionated peptides were analysed in a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) equipped with a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). For data acquisition in a data-dependent mode a TOP-20 strategy was used: survey MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the orbitrap (R = 30,000 FWHM) fragmenting up to twenty of the most abundant ions per full scan by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzing them in the ion fall (LTQ). For full scans ion targets were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans. Rejected were charge states “1” and “unknown”. Repeat count  = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ± 15 ppm enabled for dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 and searched against the human Swiss Prot entries of the Uniprot release 2012_14 with the Andromeda search engine using the following search parameters: 1. Requirement of full tryptic specifity (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline; 2. Only two missed cleavages were allowed; 3. Carbamidomethylation (C) was used as fixed modification; 4. Variable modifications were oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term); 5. 20 ppm (for precursor ions) and 0.5 Da (for fragment ions) were set for mass tolerance; 6. The option “Match between runs” was limited to a time window of 2 minutes. The reversed sequences of the target database served as decoy database. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % at both peptide and protein level using target-decoy strategy 55. For quantitative analysis, the MaxQuant output was processed using routines written in R (version 2.14.2). Only protein groups being identified by at least 2 razor + unique peptides, with a ratio count ≥ 2 and a ratio variability < 100 were retained (3,523  protein groups). In order to exclude off-target effects, the replicates from the two independent siRNAs were averaged and the R-package ‘‘fdrtool’’ was used to fit a two components model on the averaged ratio distribution. Protein groups with a ratio belonging to the non-null component (q value < 0.1) were considered as affected by the depletion of Nup155.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-relevant signalling pathways rely on bidirectional nucleocytoplasmic transport events through the nuclear pore complex (NPC). However, mechanisms by which individual NPC components (Nups) participate in the regulation of these pathways remain poorly understood. We discover by integrating large scale proteomics, polysome fractionation and a focused RNAi approach that Nup155 controls mRNA translation of p21 (CDKN1A), a key mediator of the p53 response. The underlying mechanism involves transcriptional regulation of the putative tRNA and rRNA methyltransferase FTSJ1 by Nup155. Furthermore, we observe that Nup155 and FTSJ1 are p53 repression targets and accordingly find a correlation between the p53 status, Nup155 and FTSJ1 expression in murine and human hepatocellular carcinoma. Our data suggest an unanticipated regulatory network linking translational control by and repression of a structural NPC component modulating the p53 pathway through its effectors.

### Keywords
Nuclear pore, Liver, Cancer, P53

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany


