### Accession
PXD013116

### Title
Asparagine hydroxylation is likely to be a reversible post-translational modification

### Description
Amino acid hydroxylation is a common post-translational modification, which generally regulates protein interactions or adds a functional group that can be further modified. Such hydroxylation is currently considered irreversible, necessitating the degradation and re-synthesis of the entire protein to reset the modification. Here we present evidence that the cellular machinery can reverse FIH-mediated asparagine hydroxylation on intact proteins. These data suggest that asparagine hydroxylation is a flexible and dynamic post-translational modification akin to modifications involved in regulating signalling networks, such as phosphorylation, methylation and ubiquitylation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with the different plasmids indicated. The different treatments were done 24 hours post-transfection. The cells were lysed and we immunoprecipitated the protein transfected with anti-FLAG, anti-myc or anti GFP agarose for 2 hours. Lysis and wash buffers was supplemented with 1 mM NOG. All the samples were digested with trypsin and also with GluC for the GFP-HIF1α and processed as previously described (Turriziani et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data was analysed by the MaxQuant software packages using the pre-selected conditions for LFQ analysis. Specifically, MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database with a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm (for MS and MS/MS). Carbamylation (c) was selected as fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-terminal acetylation (protein) and oxidation (M) for the interaction expression screen, oxidation (MKPNH) for the hydroxylation screen. FDR was set to 0.01. Peak matching was selected and was limited to within a 0.7 min. elution window with a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm. The intensities were averaged across technical replicates. Normalisation of hydroxylated peptides was performed by dividing the intensity of the modified by the matching unmodified peptide. Ratio were converted into estimated occupancies by dividing the ratio by itself + 1 (x/(x+1)) using the Perseus software. For the dependent peptide search MaxQuant (1.6.7) was used with the pre-configured parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Amino acid hydroxylation is a common post-translational modification, which generally regulates protein interactions or adds a functional group that can be further modified. Such hydroxylation is currently considered irreversible, necessitating the degradation and re-synthesis of the entire protein to reset the modification. Here we present evidence that the cellular machinery can reverse FIH-mediated asparagine hydroxylation on intact proteins. These data suggest that asparagine hydroxylation is a flexible and dynamic post-translational modification akin to modifications involved in regulating signaling networks, such as phosphorylation, methylation and ubiquitylation.

### Keywords
Hydroxylation, Lc-ms/ms, Ptm, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


