### Accession
PXD031782

### Title
Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis of redox mediated posttranslational modifications (PTM) in the cartilage from young and old osteoarthritis (OA) mice with or without the senolytic treatment

### Description
Senolytic drugs are designed to selectively clear senescent cells (SnCs) that accumulate with injury or aging. In a mouse model of osteoarthritis (OA), senolysis yields a pro-regenerative response. However, recent research studies showed that the therapeutic benefit is reduced in aged mice. Increased oxidative stress (redox) mediates metabolic dysregulation and accumulation of posttranslational modifications (PTM) on proteins from the cartilage and is one of the major hallmarks of advanced age. This research investigated whether the senolytic treatment differentially affects oxidative load in the joints from young and aged animals. We employed label-free quantitative (LFQ) analysis of changes in the protein expression profiles and associated carbonylated PTMs in the extracted joint proteins. Our proteomic survey focused to a set of PTMs described as advanced glycation-end products (AGEs) or advanced lipooxidation-end products (ALEs), known to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases. AGEs and ALEs are the result of non-enzymatic reactions of protein with reducing sugars, or with oxidized sugar or lipid degradation products, which may alter and sometimes crosslink the positively charged amino acids lysine and arginine on proteins. Our proteomic dataset supported detection of several AGEs and ALEs, including the adducts 4-ONE (4-oxononenal), 4-ONE+Delta:H(-2)O(-1) (dehydrated 4-oxononenal Michael adduct), carboxyethyl, carboxymethyl, 3-deoxyglucosone derived dihydroxyimidazoline, G-H1 (glyoxal-derived hydroimidazolone), HNE (4-hydroxynonenal), several carbonylated adducts including proline to pyrrolidinone or pyrrolidone Other detected modifications of note include mono-oxidation and di-oxidation products, including tryptophan to kynurenine. We also detected lysine-epsilon-gly-gly (GlyGly), which marks ubiquitylated sites, indicating potential substrates of proteasome-dependent degradation.  The grand total PTM change was negative for treated aged OA mice but positive for treated young OA mice, regardless of whether summed across modifications or across proteins. In other words, senolytic treatment reduced oxidation associated PTMs more effectively in aged OA mice than in young OA mice. The LFQ proteomics analysis was complemented with new biophysical computational tools aimed to predict the stability of carbonylated proteins extracted from the joints. The biophysical model predicted divergent proteomic responses between young and aged animals.  Altogether, our results showed that senolysis reduces overall oxidative stress in the aged arthritic joints in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from cartilage from young and aged OA joints. Cartilage pieces (extracted from young and aged mice OA joints 4 wk after ACLT surgery with or without UBX0101 treatment) were subjected to protein extraction procedures using a modified method previously developed for analysis of articular cartilage (Scharf et al. Cell Chem. Bio 2013) and Supplementary figure 1).  Briefly, the cartilage pieces were equilibrated in 200 μl of sterile PBS for 15 min at 37 °C. The samples were further subjected to digestion with 0.1 % hyaluronidase (3 units per sample) in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C to remove surface hyaluronate, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 sec to remove the digested hyaluronate. The remaining pieces of cartilage were resuspended in 200 μl sterile PBS and treated with collagenase using 8 units of bacterial collagenase type II (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ, USA) overnight at 37 °C. Protease inhibitor cocktail was then added to the total protein solution from each cartilage sample.  At least two biologically independent replicate initial protein preparations were performed for each sample set: vehicle treatment (Veh) and senolytic (UBX0101) treatment.   Initial protein preparations were then subsequently processed with NaCl and guanidine hydrochloride extraction. Total protein solutions were subjected to 9 freeze/thaw cycles in alternating liquid nitrogen and 37 °C water baths. The sample solution conditions were adjusted to a salt buffer for protein extraction, 1M final NaCl in 100 mM Tris/acetate pH 8.0 and incubated for 18 hr at 4 °C on a shaker. After NaCl extraction, the samples were spun at 14,000 rpm for 30 min, the supernatant collected, and labeled E1 (extraction E1, corresponding to the NaCl extraction). The pellet from E1 extraction (consisting of proteins not soluble in 1M NaCl) was resuspended in 100 ul 4 M guanidine HCL, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 10 mM EDTA in 50 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.8 for 18 hr at 4 °C on a shaker. The insoluble guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) treated fractions (extraction E2) were further spun at 14,000 rpm for 30 min in the microcentrifuge and the supernatant was collected and labeled E2 (protein extracted with GdnHCl). The GdnHCl extraction procedure was repeated one additional time for the pellet and the second supernatant was combined with the first E2 supernatant representing the total E2 extracted proteins with GdnHCl.   SDS-PAGE analysis of cartilage proteins from young and aged OA joints   Protein preparations from both the NaCl soluble (E1) and GdnHCl soluble (E2) fractions were precipitated using 5 volumes of cold acetone (O/N, at −20 °C). The resulting pellets from acetone precipitation were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 min in a microcentrifuge, and gently washed 3 times with 50 % acetone. The final pellets were resuspended in 100 μl solubilization buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4 % CHAPS in 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Aliquots from the solubilized E1 and E2 extractions were used to determine the total protein concentration using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA). Solubilized proteins processed in this manner were subjected to two separate SDS-PAGE procedures.  In the first procedure, approximately 30 μg each of NaCl (E1) and GdnHCl (E2) extracted protein fractions from young and old OA joints from mice subjected to ACLT surgery, with or without UBX0101 treatment, were run on 1D SDS-PAGE on pre-casted 4 % – 20 % gradient gels (Biorad). The gels were stained using a silver-staining kit (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA). Each sample lane was divided into 12 equal bands then cut out with a razor. The resulting gel pieces were placed in subjected to in-gel digestion by a combination of LysC/trypsin/Glu-C enzymes in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, carried out at 37 °C overnight.  MS analysis of cartilage proteins from young and aged OA joints Peptides eluted from in-gel SDS-PAGE LysC/trypsin/Glu-C proteolytic digests were analyzed by nano liquid-chromatography electrospray ionization tandem-MS. For label-free quantitation (LFQ) analysis, technical replicates (2 or 3 x 25 μg) from each digested cartilage protein preparation was analyzed on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, in the data–dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS scans were obtained with a range of m/z 300 to 1600 and a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. HCD collision was performed on the 15 most significant peaks, and tandem mass spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00e+05 the maximum injection time of100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free relative peptide quantification (LFQ analysis)  Raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned with protein ID using PEAKS 8.0 (and higher versions) software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the mouse (Mus musculus) Swiss-Prot database (82, 628 entries). The following search parameters were applied for LFQ analysis:  trypsin, Lys-C and GluC restriction for enzymes and one allowed missed cleaved at one peptide end. The parent mass tolerance was set to 15-18 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS as a fixed modification.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications. Data were validated using the FDR method built in the PEAKS 7.0-8.0 and protein identifications were accepted if they could be assigned with a confidence score (-10logP)>15 for peptides and (-10logP)>15 for proteins; a minimum of 1 peptide per protein after data were filtered for less than 0.8% FDR for peptides and less than 1% FDR for proteins identifications (p<0.05). An independent validation of the MS/MS-based peptides and protein identification was performed with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.2, Proteome Software Inc.) using the compatible “.mzid” files of all cartilage samples exported from PEAKS 8.0 (and higher versions).  The Scaffold built in option “MuDPIT” was used to combine multiple files from biological and/or technical replicates of each cartilage sample group: vehicle treated (Veh) and senolytic treatment (UBX0101).  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be assigned at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  LFQ was performed using the PEAKS Quantitative “Q” module (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., PEAKS version 8.0 and higher).   The data were filtered, smoothed, and aligned in retention time, followed by feature and precursor ion quantification detection based on peak volume and isotopic clustering using the built-in algorithm. Relative protein abundance was assigned to representative proteins of each protein group, by unique name or parent accession number, using MS2 total unique peptide counts. To determine differences in abundance between two given conditions, Fisher’s exact test with used with a p<0.05 (-log10(p) = 1.30) threshold to classify significant change. To determine changes in PTMs, site-specific peptide spectral counts were summed on a per-protein basis. Sums from biologically independent replicates were combined. Then, percent of sites post-translationally modified was calculated from the proportion of modified spectral counts divided by the total spectral counts. Changes in PTM between experimental conditions were calculated as the difference in the PTM percent between conditions, either on a per-protein or a total per-modification basis.  Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using the PANTHER classification system web interface at http://geneontology.org/ or http://pantherdb.org/ using default statistical settings (only considering enriched hits FDR p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse model of osteoarthritis (oa); senolytic treatment; label-free quantitative (lfq) proteomic; analysis of redox ptms in the cartilage proteins

### Affiliations
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer H. Elisseeff PhD
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA


