### Accession
PXD005740

### Title
CALCIUM-DEPENDENT PROTEOLYSIS OF THE ARABIDOPSIS DAMP PRECURSOR PROPEP1 BY THE CYSTEINE PROTEASE METACASPASE4 REVEALS A CONSERVED MECHANISM FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE OF PEPTIDE SIGNALS DURING WOUND RESPONSES

### Description
In animals, one of the most immediate responses to tissue wounding comprises the release of peptide signals such as interleukins from their precursor proteins. Although the wound response has been intensively studied in plants as well, little is known about plant peptides with cytokine-like functions. Here we report that in Arabidopsis thaliana, wounding triggers the instantaneous activation of the METACASPASE4 cysteine protease and subsequent cleavage of the PROPEP1 precursor to release the mature peptide signal PEP1, which induces basal immunity against pathogens. Furthermore, confocal microscopy of targeted cell damage by laser wounding revealed that the inactive zymogen of MC4 and PROPEP1 reside in the cytosol until a constitutive increase in calcium concentration upon cell membrane integrity loss triggers MC4 activation and PROPEP1 cleavage. PROPEP1 cleavage and PEP1 release is restricted to only a few cells surrounding the damaged site. Our results highlight the similarities of the spatiotemporal dynamics and control mechanisms of the plant wound response as an example for convergent evolution with respect to the mammalian system, in which calpain releases IL1-α from its precursor.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings of the PROPEP1-YFP Col-0 line were grown on vertical ½ MS plates without sugar in two densely seeded rows (2 plates) for 12 days in 16 h light, 8 h dark conditions at 21 °C. Seeds had been stratified beforehand for 2 days at 4 °C. Roots were separated from the rosette with scissors and the tissue was immediately ground on liquid nitrogen. Root tissue was defrozen for 5 min at room temperature and proteins were extracted by sonication in 400 µl of urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 10 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA, cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche)).  The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20000g at 15 ºC for 15 min and transferred to new tubes. Samples were acidified with 0.5% TFA and again cleared by centrifugation. Native peptides were enriched by reversed-phase chromatography on a SampliQ C18 column (Agilent Technologies). Columns were pre-wetted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA and elution was performed with 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA after which the eluate was dried by centrifugal evaporation. Note that there was no use of trypsin or any other protease in order to preserve the structure of the endogenously generated peptides. Samples were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and subjected to ESI-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer  operated in the same manner as previously described in Stes et al., 2014.

### Data Protocol
From the MS/MS data, Mascot Generic Files (mgf) were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science). Peak lists were then searched using the Mascot search engine with the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Spectra were searched against the TAIR10 database concatenated with the sequence of PROPEP1-YFP. Variable modifications were set to pyro-glutamate formation of amino-terminal glutamine and methionine oxidation. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to ± 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1), and on fragment ions to 20 mmu. The instrument setting was on ESI-QUAD. Similarly to trypsin, metacaspase cleaves C-terminal to arginine and lysine, therefore, the enzyme was set to trypsin/P, allowing for 8 missed cleavages, and cleavage was also allowed when lysine or arginine is followed by proline. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld.

### Publication Abstract
Physical damage to cells leads to the release of immunomodulatory peptides to elicit a wound defense response in the surrounding tissue. In <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, the plant elicitor peptide 1 (Pep1) is processed from its protein precursor, PRECURSOR OF PEP1 (PROPEP1). We demonstrate that upon damage, both at the tissue and single-cell levels, the cysteine protease METACASPASE4 (MC4) is instantly and spatiotemporally activated by binding high levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and is necessary and sufficient for Pep1 maturation. Cytosol-localized PROPEP1 and MC4 react only after loss of plasma membrane integrity and prolonged extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> entry. Our results reveal that a robust mechanism consisting of conserved molecular components links the intracellular and Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent activation of a specific cysteine protease with the maturation of damage-induced wound defense signals.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Propep1, Peptidomics, Metacaspase

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium  Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium  Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


