### Accession
PXD008196

### Title
The acute host – pathogen interactions between Aspergillus fumigatus and Galleria mellonella

### Description
Larvae of the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella are an ideal in vivo model to quickly and easily assess the virulence of a range of human pathogens, to comprehensively analyse the host – pathogen interactome and to reproducibly evaluate the in vivo toxicity and efficacy of anti-microbial agents. G. mellonella larvae are easy to inoculate, generate results within 48 hours and are free from the ethical and legal restrictions which surround the use of  mammals for this type of testing.1,2 Microbial virulence and pathogenesis can be assessed by a variety of endpoints including survival, fluctuations in hemocyte density, oscillations in fungal burden and changes in hemolymph proteome. Insect hemocytes can be easily isolated and used in ex vivo cellular assays to determine phagocyte – pathogen interactions. Aspergillus fumigatus infection and dissimiation as well as G. mellonella cellular and humoral immune responses were analysed over 24 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun semi-quantitative proteomics was conducted on hemocyte-free hemolymph from larvae (n = 10) at 0, 6 and 24 hours post infection with A. fumigatus (1 × 106/ larvae). Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 spin filters (Medical Supply Company, Ireland) and 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella.24,22 The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the hemolymph proteomes of 0, 6 and 24 hours A. fumigatus treated larvae was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Galleria aspergillus virulence infection mini-model

### Affiliations
Medical Mycology Unit, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Unit, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare


