### Accession
PXD009636

### Title
Proteomics of prostate cancer patient derived xenografts

### Description
A set of 17 prostate cancer patient-derived xenografts (PDX, Lin et al 2014, Cancer research) was analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics to characterize the effects of castration in vivo, and the proteome differences between NEPC and prostate adenocarcinomas.

### Sample Protocol
25 to 40g of protein extracts were trypsin digested following the Filter-Aid Sample Preparation (FASP) methodology (Ostasiewicz et al. 2010, J. Proteome Res). The resulting peptides were fractionated by Strong Anion Exchange chromatography (SAX) into five fractions to reduce sample complexity and maximize depth of proteome coverage. Each fraction was then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific). Peptides were separated using a 4h gradient of water:acetonitrile, on a 30 cm C18 column. MS spectra acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode, after Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, at a resolution of 17,500 (Olsen et al. 2009, Mol. Cell. Proteomics).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment, version 1.3.7.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat Biotechnology)  with the integrated Andromeda searching engine and false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off for peptide identification of 0.1 (Cox et al, 2011, J. Proteome Res). Proteins were identified by searching MS/MS data against the human proteome sequences from UniProt (UniprotKB, 2012). The differences between the mean protein expression on each group, defined as LFQ intensity (Cox et al, 2014, Mol. Cell. Proteomics) were evaluated by Student´s t test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose:</b> Bone is the most predominant site of distant metastasis in prostate cancer, and patients have limited therapeutic options at this stage.<b>Experimental Design:</b> We performed a system-wide quantitative proteomic analysis of bone metastatic prostate tumors from 22 patients operated to relieve spinal cord compression. At the time of surgery, most patients had relapsed after androgen-deprivation therapy, while 5 were previously untreated. An extended cohort of prostate cancer bone metastases (<i>n</i> = 65) was used for immunohistochemical validation.<b>Results:</b> On average, 5,067 proteins were identified and quantified per tumor. Compared with primary tumors (<i>n</i> = 26), bone metastases were more heterogeneous and showed increased levels of proteins involved in cell-cycle progression, DNA damage response, RNA processing, and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation; and reduced levels of proteins were related to cell adhesion and carbohydrate metabolism. Within bone metastases, we identified two phenotypic subgroups: BM1, expressing higher levels of AR canonical targets, and mitochondrial and Golgi apparatus resident proteins; and BM2, with increased expression of proliferation and DNA repair-related proteins. The two subgroups, validated by the inverse correlation between MCM3 and prostate specific antigen immunoreactivity, were related to disease prognosis, suggesting that this molecular heterogeneity should be considered when developing personalized therapies.<b>Conclusions:</b> This work is the first system-wide quantitative characterization of the proteome of prostate cancer bone metastases and a valuable resource for understanding the etiology of prostate cancer progression. <i>Clin Cancer Res; 24(21); 5433-44. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; neuroendocrine; nepc; castration; crpc; pdx; lc-ms7ms

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology. University of Copenhagen. Denmark

### Submitter
Diego Iglesias-Gato

### Lab Head
Dr Diego Iglesias-Gato
Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology. University of Copenhagen. Denmark


