### Accession
PXD020608

### Title
Proteome of rice shoot apical meristem

### Description
DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that specifies the basic state of pluripotent stem cells and regulates the developmental transition from stem cells to various cell types. In flowering plants, the shoot apical meristem (SAM) contains a pluripotent stem cell population which generates the aerial part of plants including the germ cells. Under appropriate conditions, the SAM undergoes a developmental transition from a leaf-forming vegetative SAM to an inflorescence- and flower-forming reproductive SAM. While SAM characteristics are largely altered in this transition, the complete picture of DNA methylation remains elusive. Here, by analyzing whole-genome DNA methylation of isolated rice SAMs in the vegetative and reproductive stages, we found that methylation at CHH sites is kept high, particularly at transposable elements (TEs), in the vegetative SAM relative to the differentiated leaf, and increases in the reproductive SAM via the RNA-dependent DNA methylation pathway. We also found that half of the TEs that were highly methylated in gametes had already undergone CHH hypermethylation in the SAM. Our results indicate that changes in DNA methylation begin in the SAM long before germ cell differentiation to protect the genome from harmful TEs.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling We collected 10 shoot apical meristems from each of 10 different plants for each replicate of the analysis. We also sampled and mixed three leaves from each of three different plants for each replicate.  Protein extraction and digestion  We extracted proteins from the samples with Laemmli sample buffer and incubated them at 65°C for 15 min, and then subjected them to SDS–PAGE [acrylamide concentration 10.5% (w/v)]. After staining by Flamingo (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA), we sliced each lane of the gel into four parts of equal length. We washed the sliced pieces twice with HPLC-grade water with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile (Kanto Chemical, Tokyo, Japan), once with 100% acetonitrile, and then dried them in a vacuum concentrator. We treated the dried gel pieces with 2 μl of 0.5 μg μl−1 trypsin (sequence grade; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate47, followed by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. We recovered the digested peptides from the gel pieces by extracting twice with 20 μl of 5% (v/v) formic acid/50% (v/v) acetonitrile. The peptides were combined and dried in a vacuum concentrator. LC-MS/MS analysis We performed LC-MS/MS analyses with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL-HTC-PAL-Paradigm MS4 system. Peptides were digested with trypsin and then loaded on the column (75 μm internal diameter, 15 cm; L-Column, CERI, Auburn, CA, USA). At this step we used a Paradigm MS4 HPLC pump (Michrom BioResources) and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). We prepared two buffers, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid (buffer A) and 90% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid (buffer B). We applied a linear gradient from 5 to 45% by mixing buffers A and B, for 25 min, and after elution from the column we introduced the eluted peptides into an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The flow rate was 300 nl min–1 and the spray voltage 2.0 kV. We set the range of MS scaning as m/z 200–2,000, and the top three peaks were subjected to MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Conditions of database search We compared the spectra with the protein database OSMSU (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu) using the MASCOT server (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). We used the following parameters for the MASCOT search: set off the threshold at 0.05 in the ion score cut-off, peptide tolerance at 10 p.p.m., MS/MS tolerance at ± 0.5 Da, peptide charge of 2 + or 3 +, trypsin as enzyme allowing up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation on cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification. Calculation of normalized emPAI values We calculated the “normalized emPAI value” by dividing emPAI41 of each protein by the sum of emPAI values of all the proteins in each sample47. This normalization was applied to compare between different samples with different sums of emPAI values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shoot apical meristem, Flowering, Sam, Rice

### Affiliations
Kihara Institute for Biological Research, Yokohama City University

### Submitter
Hiroyuki Tsuji

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroyuki Tsuji
Kihara Institute for Biological Research, Yokohama City University


