### Accession
PXD012962

### Title
Divergent polypharmacology-driven cellular activity of structurally similar multi-kinase inhibitors through cumulative differential effects on individual targets: Tyrosine Phosphorylation

### Description
Despite recent successes of precision and immunotherapies there is a persisting need for novel targeted or multi-targeted approaches in complex diseases. Through a systems pharmacology approach including phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics and RNA-Seq, we elucidated the targets and mechanisms underlying the differential anticancer activity of two structurally related multi-kinase inhibitors, foretinib and cabozantinib, in lung cancer cells. Biochemical and cellular target validation using probe molecules and RNA interference revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving MEK1/2, FER and AURKB, which were each more potently inhibited by foretinib than cabozantinib. Based on this, we developed a synergistic combination of foretinib with barasertib, a more potent AURKB inhibitor, for MYC-amplified small cell lung cancer. This systems pharmacology approach showed that small structural changes of drugs can cumulatively, through multiple targets, result in pronounced anticancer activity differences and that detailed mechanistic understanding of polypharmacology can enable repurposing opportunities for cancers with unmet medical need.

### Sample Protocol
H1155 cells were treated with 1 µM of foretinib or cabozantinib for 3 hours; DMSO was used as control. Cells were harvested, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pellets from each treatment were combined. Phosphoproteomic samples were prepared following the PTMScan Kit Protocol (Cell Signaling). Peptide purification was performed using Sep-Pak® C18 columns (Waters). Eluates were collected in the same tube and then aliquoted for pY enrichment (20 mg per sample) or global phosphoproteomics (400 µg per sample). Samples were frozen at -80°C overnight and lyophilized for two days to ensure that there was no TFA left in the samples. Tyrosine phosphoproteomics was performed by immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine peptides using the Antibody-beads [PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit, Cell Signaling #8803] followed by a label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were queried using MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 against human entries in the UniProt database. The fragment tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05. The intensities of label-free phosphopeptides with PEP scores < 0.05 were manually validated.  For upload here, data were searched with Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cabozantinib, Lung cancer, Phosphotyrosine, Foretinib, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


