### Accession
PXD013337

### Title
Intestinal microbiota after RYGB

### Description
Objective: Roux-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery is a last treatment resort to induce substantial and sustained weight loss in severe obesity. The anatomical rearrangement affects the intestinal microbiota but so far, little information is available how it interferes with microbial functionality and microbial-host interaction independent from weight loss. Design: A RYGB rat model was utilized and compared to sham-operated controls which were kept at matched body weight as RYGB animals by food restriction. We assessed microbial taxonomy by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and functional activity by metaproteomics and metabolomics on microbiota samples collected separately from the ileum, the cecum as well as the colon and separately analysed the lumen and mucus associated microbiota. Results: Altered gut architecture in RYGB strongly affected the occurrence of Actinobacteria, especially Bifidobacteriaceae and Proteobacteria which were increased, whereas Firmicutes were decreased, although Streptococcaceae and Clostridium perfringens were observed at higher abundances. A decrease of conjugated as well as secondary bile acids was observed in the RYGB-gut lumen. In addition the arginine biosynthesis pathway in the microbiota was altered, indicated by the changes in abundance of upstream metabolites and enzymes, resulting in lower levels of arginine and higher levels of aspartate in the colon after RYGB. Conclusion: The anatomical rearrangement in RYGB affects microbiota composition and functionality by changes in amino acid and bile acid metabolism, independent of weight loss. The shift in microbiota taxonomic structure after RYGB may be mediated by the resulting change in composition of the bile acid pool in the gut lumen.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were sacrificed three months postoperatively. The gastrointestinal tract was rapidly removed and cut into separate segments. For microbiome sampling, the last 3 cm of the ileum, cecum and distal colon (3 cm) were cut longitudinal and opened. The lumen contents were removed and shock frozen in liquid nitrogen. In the RYGB rats, the contents of the last 2 cm of the biliopancreatic limb were also sampled. Ileum and colon mucus were sampled. Samples were stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
For the ileum and colon lumen content fractions, peptides were reconstituted in 25 µL 0.1% formic acid of which 7 µL for each fraction was injected for separation into a nano-HPLC system (UltiMate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were first trapped on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap ® 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher) and washed for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid with a 5 µL/min flow. Then peptides were eluted using a 114 min linear gradient from 2% B to 55% B (A: 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water) followed by gradient 2 min gradient to 90% B, with 2 min isocratic flow, then 1 min gradient to 2% B and finally an isocratic flow for 10 min at 2% B. During the entire analytical run after trapping the solvent rate was set to 300 nL/min and the eluting peptides were separated on a downstream analytical column (Acclaim PepMap ® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher) kept at 35°C before being ionized by an Advion Triversa Nanomate ion source and entering the mass spectrometer. Ionized peptides were measured in a data dependent manner using the cycle time of 3 s, with the parameters set on the Orbitrap fusion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Colon, Ileum, Caecum

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig


