### Accession
PXD002767

### Title
Time-course Investigation of Phytophthora infestans infection of potato leaf from three cultivars by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Potato Late blight is one the most important crop diseases worldwide. Even though potato has been studied for many years, the potato disease late blight still has a huge negative effect on the potato production. A total of three commercially available field potato cultivars of different resistance to late blight infection: Kuras (moderate), Sarpo Mira (highly resistant) and Bintje (very suseptable) under controlled green house growing conditions innoculated with a diversity of P. infestans populations. We used label-free quantitative proteomics to investigate the infection with P. infestans in a time-course study over 258 hours. Several key issues limits proteome analysis of potato leaf tissue4–6. Firstly, the immense complexity of the plant proteome which is further complicated by the presence of highly abundant proteins, such as ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO). Secondly, plant leaf and potato in particular contain abundant levels amounts of phenols and polyphenols which hinder or, unless precautions are taken, completely prevent a successful protein extraction.

### Sample Protocol
Potato plants of the three cultivars Kuras, Bintje, and Sarpo Mira were grown were divided into five groups of P. infestans inoculated plants and four groups of control plants. leaves with varying size were sampled and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Leaf proteins were extrected by extraction ijn (50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 10 mM potassium acetate, 5 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) followed bu protein concentration extimation and protein separation by reducing SDS PAGE. Proteome analysis was performed by GelMS using 4 gel slices and in situ digestion using trypsin. LC-MS UPLC was performed on a Dionex  UPLC (50cm column with precolmn) and QExactive MS.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data-files from potato leaf analyzed on the QExactive were searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 using two databases containing UniProtKB Potato reference proteome AUP000011115 (53104 sequences) and UniProtKB Phytophthora infestans T30-4 (17609 sequences). All standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl(C) as a static modification and deamidation (NQR), oxidation (M), and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation of all proteins was performed in MaxQuant based on integrated precursor intensities using experiments and fractions settings to combine the GelMS raw data. Time-course control samples were pooled from three biological replicates and analyzed in single analysis. Time-course PI infected samples were analyzed as biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Potato late blight is one the most important crop diseases worldwide. Even though potato has been studied for many years, the potato disease late blight still has a vast negative effect on the potato production [1], [2], [3]. Late blight is caused by the pathogen Phytophthora infestans (P. infestans), which initiates infection through leaves. However, the biological activities during different stages of infection are poorly described, and could enable novel or improved ways of defeating late blight infection [4]. Therefore, we investigated the interactions between P. infestans (mixed strain culture) and potato (Solanum tuberosum). Three commercially available field potato cultivars of different resistance to late blight infection; Kuras (moderate), Sarpo Mira (highly resistant) and Bintje (very susceptable) were grown under controlled green house conditions and inoculated with a diversity of P. infestans populations. We used label-free quantitative proteomics to investigate the infection with P. infestans in a time-course study over 258&#xa0;h. Several key issues limits proteome analysis of potato leaf tissue [5], [6], [7]. Firstly, the immense complexity of the plant proteome, which is further complicated by the presence of highly abundant proteins, such as ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO). Secondly, plant leaf and potato, in particular, contain abundant levels amounts of phenols and polyphenols, which hinder or completely prevent a successful protein extraction. Hitherto, protein profiling of potato leaf tissues have been limited to few proteome studies and only 1484 proteins have been extracted and comprehensively described [5], [8], [9]. We here present the detailed methods and raw data by optimized gel-enhanced label free quantitative approach. The methodology enabled us to detect and quantify between 3248 and 3529 unique proteins from each cultivar, and up to 758 P. infestans derived proteins. The complete dataset is available via ProteomeXchange, with the identifier PXD002767.

### Keywords
Potato, Proteomics, Phytophthora infestans, Late blight, Leaf

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 7E 9220 Aalborg  Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajersvej 7E 9220 Aalborg  Denmark


