### Accession
PXD015272

### Title
Fatty-acyl conjugated amino-hexyl agarose pulldown with HeLa SILAC whole cell extract

### Description
C10:0 and C14:0 fatty acids were conjugated onto agarose beads, and used for pull-down with stable isotope (light: K0R0, heavy: K8R10) labeled Hela whole cell extract. C2:0 conjugated beads were used as control. Both forward (C2:0-light, C10:0 or C14:0-heavy) and reverse (C2:0-heavy, C10:0 or C14:0-light) labeling and pull-down experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and cut into two fractions by molecular weight. Each section was processed by in-gel digest with trypsin. Peptides were identified using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer running high resolution MS1 followed by HCD fragmentation for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. The human proteome database was Uniprot data 2015-01-09.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins with acyl groups of various carbon chain-lengths regulates diverse biological processes ranging from chromatin dynamics to subcellular localization. While the YEATS domain has been found to be a prominent reader of acetylation and other short acyl modifications, whether additional acyl-lysine reader domains exist, particularly for longer carbon chains, is unclear. Here, we employed a quantitative proteomic approach using various modified peptide baits to identify reader proteins of various acyl modifications. We discovered that proteins harboring HEAT and ARM repeats bind to lysine myristoylated peptides. Recombinant HEAT and ARM repeats bind to myristoylated peptides independent of the peptide sequence or the position of the myristoyl group. Indeed, HEAT and ARM repeats bind directly to medium- and long-chain free fatty acids (MCFA and LCFA). Lipidomic experiments suggest that MCFAs and LCFAs interact with HEAT and ARM repeat proteins in mammalian cells. Finally, treatment of cells with exogenous MCFAs and inhibitors of MCFA-CoA synthases increase the transactivation activity of the ARM repeat protein &#x3b2;-catenin. Taken together, our results suggest an unappreciated role for fatty acids in the regulation of proteins harboring HEAT or ARM repeats.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

### Submitter
John Coan

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Chua
Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA


