### Accession
PXD043788

### Title
Alanine Scanning-PRISMA of GATAD1 peptide

### Description
To explore the role of individual amino acids in the binding of GATAD1 peptide (position 95-109) to 14-3-3 proteins, we conducted an alanine scanning experiment. Each amino acid surrounding the phosphorylation site within the peptide was systematically mutated to alanine, except for the original alanine residues, which were mutated to glycine. These mutant peptides were immobilized on a cellulose membrane and employed to capture proteins from Hek293T lysate through pulldown assays.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced using DTT and IAA. Followed by LysC and Typsin digestion overnight. Next day samples were acidified and cleaned up using the standard StageTip method

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectra were subjected to further analysis using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). With “match between run” option checked. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminal residues were set as variable and carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The data was analyzed in label-free quantification mode (LFQ). Peptide and protein FDR was set to 1%. The experiment names can be mapped by using the peptide list table.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
14-3-3, Gatad1, Alanine scanning, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC)
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Trendelina Rrustemi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC)


