### Accession
PXD006365

### Title
Quantitative global and phosphoproteomic analysis to define the cellular role of AMPK β1-Ser108 phosphorylation

### Description
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a metabolic stress-sensing enzyme responsible for maintaining cellular energy homeostasis. Activation of AMPK by salicylate and the thienopyridone A-769662 is critically dependent on phosphorylation of Ser108 in the β1 regulatory subunit. We identified the autophagy initiator Unc-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1) as a β1-Ser108 kinase. ULK1 phosphorylation was specific to the β1-isoform and sensitised AMPK to salicylate and A-769662. To investigate the cellular fate of β1-Ser108 phosphorylation, we performed a stable isotope dimethyl labelling-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis using lentivirus-transduced S108A and S108E mutants of β1 in β1/2-dKO iMEFs cells. Following 1 h phenformin (2 mM) treatment, β1-S108A and β1-S108E transduced iMEF lysates were compared to trace out the changes in proteome and phosphoprotome to decipher the possible cellular role of β1-Ser108 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis, β1-S108A and β1-S108E transduced iMEF lysates (n=3) were acetone (-20°C) precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea solution (in 50 mM TEAB). Protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 45 min at 37°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 25 mM TEAB and trypsin (1:60, w/w) digested overnight at 37°C. Digested tryptic peptides were solid phased extraction (SPE) cleaned up and freeze-dried overnight. Resuspended tryptic digests were used for stable-isotope dimethyl labelling; and β1-S108A and β1-S108E derived tryptic peptides were used for light and medium labelling, respectively. Labelled peptides were mixed (1:1) and an aliquot (15 µL) was taken out and run on LC-MS/MS for total proteome changes. Remaining mixed labelled peptides were SPE cleaned up and freeze-dried before used for TiO2 phosphopeptides enrichment. Enriched phosphopeptides were run for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were processed and analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) software with Mascot search algorithm against mouse SwissProt database. All identified peptides were above the identity threshold score, which represents a confidence level of p<0.05. The inbuilt quantitation node measured the relative abundance of the identified peptides (medium/light ratios) and corresponding protein group based on the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) intensities from the MS1 scans. Phosphopeptide probabilities were further calculated with the inbuilt ptmRS node. Results were filtered with high peptide confidence to reflect a maximum of 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a metabolic stress-sensing enzyme responsible for maintaining cellular energy homeostasis. Activation of AMPK by salicylate and the thienopyridone A-769662 is critically dependent on phosphorylation of Ser108 in the &#x3b2;1 regulatory subunit. Here, we show a possible role for Ser108 phosphorylation in cell cycle regulation and promotion of pro-survival pathways in response to energy stress. We identify the autophagy initiator Unc-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1) as a &#x3b2;1-Ser108 kinase in cells. Cellular &#x3b2;1-Ser108 phosphorylation by ULK1 was dependent on AMPK &#x3b2;-subunit myristoylation, metabolic stress associated with elevated AMP/ATP ratio, and the intrinsic energy sensing capacity of AMPK; features consistent with an AMP-induced myristoyl switch mechanism. We further demonstrate cellular AMPK signaling independent of activation loop Thr172 phosphorylation, providing potential insight into physiological roles for Ser108 phosphorylation. These findings uncover new mechanisms by which AMPK could potentially maintain cellular energy homeostasis independently of Thr172 phosphorylation.AMPK is involved in sensing of metabolic stress. The authors show that the autophagy initiator ULK1 phosphorylates &#x3b2;1-Ser108 on the regulatory &#x3b2;1-subunit, sensitizing AMPK to allosteric drugs, and activates signaling pathways that appear independent of Thr172 phosphorylation in the kinase activation loop.

### Keywords
Ampk β1-ser108, Ulk1, Autophagy

### Affiliations
ARC Future Fellow Head, Metabolic Signalling Laboratory Protein Chemistry and Metabolism St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research 9 Princes St, Fitzroy, Vic 3065, Australia
St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research (SVI)

### Submitter
Ashfaqul Hoque

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan S. Oakhill
ARC Future Fellow Head, Metabolic Signalling Laboratory Protein Chemistry and Metabolism St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research 9 Princes St, Fitzroy, Vic 3065, Australia


