### Accession
PXD007585

### Title
AP-MS analysis of murine and human norovirus VPg interactomes

### Description
The norovirus VPg protein is covalently linked to the viral genome in place of a 5' cap, and functions as a cap-substitute, capable of interacting with translation initiation factors. Following on from our previous study (Chung et. al. 2014, J. BIol. Chem.) we wished to determine the interactome of human norovirus VPg, and compare that of murine norovirus VPg. We had previously demonstrated that mutation of the penultimate C-terminal phenylalanine residue in murine norovirus VPg greatly reduced initiation factor binding (F123A). Insertion of the equivalent mutation into human norovirus (F137A) also reduced initiation factor binding. Affinity purification of wild-type of mutant human and murine norovirus VPg was accomplished using GFP-tagged VPg transfected into SILAC-labelled human HEK-293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human HEK-293T cells were SILAC labelled using SILAC medium (R0K0, R6K4, R10K8) for a minimum of 5 cell passages. Cells were transfected with either GFP-tagged wild-type or mutant norovirus VPg constructs or an empty GFP vector (pEGFP-C1, Clontech) as a control. The experiment was performed in triplicate, and SILAC labels were switched in one of the replicates. Cells were lysed at and samples affinity purified using GFP-trap beads according to the manufactorers protocol, with the sole addition of RNase cocktail (Ambion) to the lysis buffer. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS-PAGE reducing sample buffer. Samples were run into precast SDS-PAGE gels for 5 minutes, the entire sample cut from the gel as a single band, and then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit. The resulting peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitap Velos mass spectrometer (Human norovirus) or Orbitrap tribrid fusion mass spectrometer (Murine norovirus).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Maxquant v1.5.5.1 and rearched against the Uniprot human database (70,550 entries, downloaded September 19th 2016) plus a custom fasta file generated in-house containing the wild-type and mutant norovirus VPg sequences. Quantification was performed based on SILAC labelling (R0K0, R6K4, R10K8). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 4.5ppm and MS/MS tolerence was set at 0.5Da. Search criteria included carbaminomethylation of cysteine. The requantify option in maxquant was not enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge of the host factors required for norovirus replication has been hindered by the challenges associated with culturing human noroviruses. We have combined proteomic analysis of the viral translation and replication complexes with a CRISPR screen, to identify host factors required for norovirus infection. The core stress granule component G3BP1 was identified as a host factor essential for efficient human and murine norovirus infection, demonstrating a conserved function across the <i>Norovirus</i> genus. Furthermore, we show that G3BP1 functions in the novel paradigm of viral VPg-dependent translation initiation, contributing to the assembly of translation complexes on the VPg-linked viral positive sense RNA genome by facilitating ribosome recruitment. Our data uncovers a novel function for G3BP1 in the life cycle of positive sense RNA viruses and identifies the first host factor with pan-norovirus pro-viral activity.

### Keywords
Translation, Calicivirus, Norovirus, Hek293t, Silac, Vpg

### Affiliations
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Edward Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Goodfellow
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK


