### Accession
PXD027318

### Title
Senescence Biomarker Discovery by LC-MS-based Proteomics

### Description
Senescence is a permanent cell cycle arrest that occurs in response to cellular stress. Because senescent cells promote age-related disease, there has been considerable interest in defining the proteomic alterations in senescent cells. Because senescence differs greatly depending on cell type and senescence inducer, continued progress in the characterization of senescent cells is needed. Here, we analyzed primary human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs), a model system for aging, using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. By integrating data from replicative senescence, immortalization by telomerase reactivation, and drug-induced senescence, we identified a robust proteomic signature of HMEC senescence consisting of 77 upregulated and 36 downregulated proteins. This approach identified known biomarkers, such as downregulation of the nuclear lamina protein lamin-B1 (LMNB1), and novel upregulated proteins including the β-galactoside-binding protein galectin-7 (LGALS7). Gene ontology enrichment analysis demonstrated that senescent HMECs upregulated lysosomal proteins and downregulated RNA metabolic processes. We additionally integrated our proteomic signature of senescence with transcriptomic data from senescent HMECs to demonstrate that our proteomic signature can discriminate proliferating and senescent HMECs even at the transcriptional level. Taken together, our results demonstrate the power of proteomics to identify cell type-specific signatures of senescence and advance the understanding of senescence in primary HMECs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture dishes were placed on ice and washed with PBS. Cells were then scraped and pelleted by centrifugation. The cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication in 8 M urea (pH 7.5), 50 mM Tris, 1 mM activated sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 100 mM sodium phosphate. The above procedures were performed in 0-4˚C. Insoluble cell debris were filtered by 0.22 um syringe filter. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Pierce, PI23227). Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide, quenched with 10 mM DTT, and acidified to pH 2 with 5% trifluoracetic acid. Proteins were then digested to peptides using a 1:100 trypsin to lysate ratio by weight. Tryptic peptides were desalted by reverse phase C18 StageTips and eluted with 30% acetonitrile. The eluents were vacuumed dried, and 250 ng/injection was submitted to LC-MS. Samples were randomized and injected into an Easy 1200 nanoLC ultra high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with a Q Exactive quadruple orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated by a reverse-phase analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm X 25 cm). Flow rate was set to 300 nL/min at a gradient from 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 38% B in 110 min, followed by a 10-minute washing step to 85% B. The maximum pressure was set to 1,180 bar and column temperature was maintained at 50˚C. Peptides separated by the column were ionized at 2.4 kV in the positive ion mode. MS1 survey scans were acquired at the resolution of 70k from 350 to 1800 m/z, with maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. MS/MS fragmentation of the 14 most abundant ions were analyzed at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 65 ms, and normalized collision energy 26. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge +1, +7, and >+7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) against in-silico tryptic digested Uniprot all-reviewed Homo sapiens database (release Jun 2017, 42,140 entries) plus all recombinant protein sequences used in this study. The maximum missed cleavages was set to 2. Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da) and acetylation on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C, +57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm, and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using the Percolator Node validated by q-value. The relative abundance of parental peptides was calculated by integration of the area under the curve of the MS1 peaks using the Minora LFQ node. Peptide groups abundance values from Proteome Discoverer were normalized to the corresponding samples’ median values. After normalization, the missing values were imputed using the K-nearest neighbor algorithm (Webb-Robertson et al., 2015). The optimized number of neighbors was determined to be n = 10. The protein copy numbers were assessed using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011). Proteomics data analysis was performed in Microsoft Excel, R (version 3.4.2), and Perseus (version 1.6.2.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Senescence, Mammary epithelial cells, Proteomics, Aging

### Affiliations
Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Southern California, USA
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Alireza Delfarah

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Alexander Graham
Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Southern California, USA


