### Accession
PXD030548

### Title
Agonist-induced phosphorylation of orthologues of the orphan receptor GPR35 as an activation biomarker

### Description
Mass spectrometry, mutagenesis and labelling with [32P] orthophosphate identified that each of the five hydroxy-amino acids in the intracellular C-terminal tail of human GPR35a became phosphorylated in response to agonist occupancy of the receptor and that, apart from Ser294, each of these contributed to the effectiveness of interaction of the receptor with arrestin-3. Key to such interactions was Ser303. Despite there being a greater number of hydroxy-amino acids in the C-terminal tail of both mouse and rat GPR35 the serine corresponding to residue 303 in human GPR35a also played a dominant role in arrestin-3 interactions for both rodent orthologues. Fully phospho-site deficient mutants of human GPR35a and mouse GPR35 failed to interact effectively with arrestin-3 and the human phospho-deficient variant was not internalized from the surface of cells in response to agonist treatment. Even in cells stably expressing species orthologues of GPR35 a substantial proportion of the expressed protein(s) was, however, immature. Phospho-site specific antisera targeting the region encompassing Ser303 in human (Ser301 in mouse) GPR35 identified only the mature forms of GPR35 and provided effective biomarkers of the activation status of the receptors both in immunoblotting and immunocytochemical studies. Such antisera may be useful tools to evaluate target engagement in drug discovery and target validation programmes.

### Sample Protocol
GPR35 modified to containan an HA tag at it's C-terminus was overexpressed in HEK293.  Cells were treated with agonist and GPR35 was isolated by immunoaffinity chromatography using anti HA resin.  Samples were separated by SDS PAGE, bands representing GRP35 were extracted, digested with trypsin and resulting peptides analysed by LC/ms-ms using an LTQ Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.04) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1 Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. The UniprotHuman_2013_08 database (88378 entries) was searched.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
G protein-coupled receptor 35 (GPR35) is poorly characterized but nevertheless has been revealed to have diverse roles in areas including lower gut inflammation and pain. The development of novel reagents and tools will greatly enhance analysis of GPR35 functions in health and disease. Here, we used mass spectrometry, mutagenesis, and [<sup>32</sup>P] orthophosphate labeling to identify that all five hydroxy-amino acids in the C-terminal tail of human GPR35a became phosphorylated in response to agonist occupancy of the receptor and that, apart from Ser<sup>294</sup>, each of these contributed to interactions with arretin-3, which inhibits further G protein-coupled receptor signaling. We found that Ser<sup>303</sup> was key to such interactions; the serine corresponding to human GPR35a residue 303 also played a dominant role in arrestin-3 interactions for both mouse and rat GPR35. We also demonstrated that fully phospho-site-deficient mutants of human GPR35a and mouse GPR35 failed to interact effectively with arrestin-3, and the human phospho-deficient variant was not internalized from the surface of cells in response to agonist treatment. Even in cells stably expressing species orthologues of GPR35, a substantial proportion of the expressed protein(s) was determined to be immature. Finally, phospho-site-specific antisera targeting the region encompassing Ser<sup>303</sup> in human (Ser<sup>301</sup> in mouse) GPR35a identified only the mature forms of GPR35 and provided effective sensors of the activation status of the receptors both in immunoblotting and immunocytochemical studies. Such antisera may be useful tools to evaluate target engagement in drug discovery and target validation programs.

### Keywords
Gpcr

### Affiliations
The Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cellular and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Adrian Butcher

### Lab Head
Dr Graeme Milligan
The Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cellular and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom


