### Accession
PXD036036

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus Mediated Tolerance Induction in Human Monocytes is accompanied with Specific Alterations in Membrane Receptor Expression

### Description
Exposure of human monocytes to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or other pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs) induces a temporary insensitivity to subsequent LPS challenges, a cellular state called endotoxin tolerance (ET). The tolerant state of monocytes is accompanied by cell surface and other glycoprotein expression changes induced by the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). In this study, we aimed to characterize the cellular state of human monocytes stimulated with Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus and TLR2 ligands. We analyzed gene expression changes induced by S. aureus after 2 and 24 hours by amplicon sequencing (RNA-AmpliSeq) and compared the pro-inflammatory response after 2 hours of stimulation to the to the response in re-stimulation experiments after the first stimulus. In parallel, glycoprotein expression changes in human monocytes after 24 hours of S. aureus stimulation were analyzed by proteomics and compared to stimulation experiments with TLR2 ligands Malp-2 and Pam3Cys and TLR4 ligand LPS. The results demonstrate that monocytes stimulated with S. aureus and TLR ligands entered the tolerant cell state after activation. Compared to TLR agonist mediated activation and tolerization of monocytes, glycoprotein expression changes induced by S. aureus stimulation revealed significant differences in receptor expression profiles. We report a glycoprotein expression profile characteristic for PAMP and S. aureus tolerized human monocytes. Finally, we analyzed peripheral blood monocytes of patients with S. aureus bloodstream infection for inflammatory responses in vitro and for their glycoprotein expression profiles. RNA-AmpliSeq data from patient-derived monocytes demonstrated that the cells were pro-inflammatory responsive to S. aureus stimulation and expressed higher level of CD44 mRNA, while other markers of the tolerant cell state were not detected.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral monocytes were purified by MACS and flow-cytometry-based cell sorting. Unstimulated or stimulated cells were lysed in 1% SDS in PBS. 100 µl of monocyte lysate was treated with Benzonase nuclease for 1h at 37 °C and centrifuged at 24.000 x g for 20 min (20°C) to pellet insoluble material. The supernatant was subjected to buffer exchange using polyacrylamide spin desalting columns equilibrated with 100 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.5. Samples were oxidized with 10 mM sodium (meta)periodate for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Sodium periodate was removed by a second buffer exchange using polyacrylamide desalting spin columns equilibrated with PBS pH=7.5. Oxidized sugar groups were immobilized on 50 µl (bead volume) Ultralink Hydrazide Gel (Pierce) overnight at room temperature with aniline as catalyst. Next day, non-glycoproteins were removed by washing the resin three times with each of the following buffers: 1% SDS/PBS, 8M Urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH=8.0, 1 M NaCl in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH=8.0, 20% CH3CN / 10 mM Tris/HCl pH=8.0. After the second urea wash proteins were reduced by addition of 100 mM DTT in 8 M Urea Tris/HCl pH=8.0 (60 min, room temperature) and cysteine groups alkylated with 50 mM Iodacetamid in 8 M Urea / 100 mM Tris/HCl pH=8.0 (30 min, room temperature in the dark). After washing, the resin was equilibrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and resuspended in 30 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing grade trypsin and digested on-resin over night at 37°C. The next day, trypsin-released peptides were collected and dried in a SpeedVac. The resin was again extensively washed (as described above) and resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.5 U PNGaseF. After enzymatic release of N-glycopeptides (37°C, overnight) released deglycosylated peptides were collected and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 0.3% formic acid and peptide concentrations were measured using a NanoDrop spectrometer. 2.5 µg of tryptic peptides and 1 µg of deglycosylated peptides were analyzed in each LC-MS/MS run on an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Samples were loaded on a 2 cm C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Scientific) and separated using a 2.5 h (90 min for S.aureus experiments) non-linear gradient (2-80% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid, flow rate 300 nl/min) on a 50 cm C18 analytical column (75µm i.d., PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Full MS scans were acquired with resolution 120.000 (60.000 for S. aureus experiments) at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap analyzer (m/z range 400-1600 or 370-1570 for S. aureus experiments) using an AGC target of 500.000 or 50 ms. MS1 parent ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, 30% collision energy) and fragment ion spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode (AGC=10.000 or 35 ms, patient-derived samples: AGC=500% or 250 ms). The following conditions were used: spray voltage of 2.0 kV, heated capillary temperature of 275°C, S-lens RF level of 60%. Samples were run in triplicates, patient-derived samples in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against the human UniProt database (Version 05.2016) with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17) and Andromeda search engine. The parameters were set as follows: mass tolerances, 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions; enzyme: trypsin, two missed cleavages allowed; static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation (only data from formerly N-glyco-peptide fractions). FDR = 0.01 was set for PSM and protein level. Tryptic peptide fractions and formerly N-glycopeptides were calculated together as fractions of the same sample. Label free quantities (LFQ) intensities were calculated in MaxQuant with ratio counts set to 1. For statistical analysis, LFQ intensities were loaded into the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.2). After filtering, missing values were imputed using default parameters. P-values were adjusted according to Benjamini and Hochberg. Adjusted p-values below 0.05 and fold changes ≥ 1 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure of human monocytes to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or other pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs) induces a temporary insensitivity to subsequent LPS challenges, a cellular state called endotoxin tolerance (ET), associated with the pathogenesis of sepsis. In this study, we aimed to characterize the cellular state of human monocytes from healthy donors stimulated with <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> in comparison to TLR2-specific ligands. We analyzed <i>S. aureus</i> induced gene expression changes after 2 and 24 hours by amplicon sequencing (RNA-AmpliSeq) and compared the pro-inflammatory response after 2 hours with the response in re-stimulation experiments. In parallel, glycoprotein expression changes in human monocytes after 24 hours of <i>S. aureus</i> stimulation were analyzed by proteomics and compared to stimulation experiments with TLR2 ligands Malp-2 and Pam3Cys and TLR4 ligand LPS. Finally, we analyzed peripheral blood monocytes of patients with <i>S. aureus</i> bloodstream infection for their <i>ex vivo</i> inflammatory responses towards <i>S. aureus</i> stimulation and their glycoprotein expression profiles. Our results demonstrate that monocytes from healthy donors stimulated with <i>S. aureus</i> and TLR ligands of Gram-positive bacteria entered the tolerant cell state after activation similar to LPS treatment. In particular reduced gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF, IL1&#x3b2;) and chemokines (CCL20, CCL3, CCL4, CXCL2, CXCL3 and CXCL8) could be demonstrated. Glycoprotein expression changes in monocytes tolerized by the different TLR agonists were highly similar while <i>S. aureus</i>-stimulated monocytes shared some of the PAMP-induced changes but also exhibited a distinct expression profile. 11 glycoproteins (CD44, CD274, DSC2, ICAM1, LAMP3, LILRB1, PTGS2, SLC1A3, CR1, FGL2, and HP) were similarly up- or downregulated in all four comparisons in the tolerant cell state. Monocytes from patients with <i>S. aureus</i> bacteremia revealed preserved pro-inflammatory responsiveness to <i>S. aureus</i> stimulation ex vivo, expressed increased CD44 mRNA but no other glycoprotein of the tolerance signature was differentially expressed.

### Keywords
Pamp, Monocyte, Marker of tolerance, Hydrazide, Tolerance, Glycoproteins, N-glycosylation, Staphylococcus aureus, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Host Septomics - ZIK Septomics Jena University Hospital 07745 Jena Germany
Host Septomics - ZIK Septomics
Jena University Hosptial
Jena
Germany

### Submitter
Mario Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Hortense Slevogt
Host Septomics - ZIK Septomics Jena University Hospital 07745 Jena Germany


