### Accession
PXD042682

### Title
Proteomics and bioinformatics investigations to improve serological diagnosis of canine brucellosis

### Description
Brucella canis is pathogenic for dogs and humans. Serological diagnosis is a cost-effective approach for disease surveillance, but a major drawback of current serological tests is the cross-reactivity with other bacteria that results in false positive reactions, and development of indirect tests with improved sensitivity and specificity remain a priority. A western blotting assay was developed to define the serum antibody patterns associated to infection using a panel of positive and negative dog sera. B. canis positive sera recognized immunogenic bands ranging from 7 to 30 kDa that were then submitted to ESI–LC-MS/MS and analyzed by bioinformatics tools. A total of 398 B. canis proteins were identified. Bioinformatics tools identified 16 non cytoplasmic immunogenic proteins predicted as non-homologous with the most important Brucella cross-reactive bacteria  and 9  B. canis proteins non-homologous to B. ovis; among the latter, one resulted non-homologous to B. melitensis. The western blotting test developed was able to distinguish between infected and non-infected animals and may serve as confirmatory test for the serological diagnosis of B. canis. The mass spectrometry and in silico results lead to the identification of specific candidate antigens that pave the way for the development of more accurate indirect diagnostic tests

### Sample Protocol
B. canis RM6/66 (ATCC 23365) proteins (15 µg/well) were dissolved in SDS-PAGE denaturing buffer,loaded into NuPAGE® 4-12% Bis-Tris gels. Then, proteins were blotted on nitrocellulose membranes.Based on pattern profile identified by western blotting, two slices in the range 7-30 kDa were excised from the gel and the proteins were identified by nLC-MS/MS.Briefly, reduction with 10 mM DTT, alkylation with 55 mM IAA and trypsin digestion overnight at 37 oC were carried out.Five µl of peptides were injected on an UPLC EASY-nLC 1000 and separated on a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm i.d., length 25 cm), packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads. A gradient of eluents A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) was used to achieve separation, from 5% to 100% B (in 30 min, 250 nL/min flow rate). The nLC system was connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap QExactive-HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. Top 15 method was applied. Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) searching against B. canis, assuming a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; specified enzyme was trypsin; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus of proteins were set as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Only proteins with greater than 99.0% probability and containing at least 3 peptides (greater than 95% probability) were accepted. Furthermore, only proteins detected in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates were included in bioinformatics analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by mass spectrometry analyses were then submitted for bioinformatics analysis for protein identification and selection. As first step a combination of softwares was applied to identify cytosolic and non-cytosolic proteins. LipoP 1.0 Server was used for prediction of lipoprotein signal peptides; TMHMM Server version 2.0 was predictive of transmembrane helices and SignalP 4.1 Server was applied for signal peptides prediction. PSORTb version 3.0.2 and CELLO version 2.5 predicted subcellular localization. The data obtained from the above software analyses were combined to discard cytosolic proteins.  Non–cytosolic proteins were further analyzed to predict B-cell linear epitopes by BepiPred version 1.0 Server by setting a threshold equal or higher than 0.35 and a minimum length of 4 residues. NetSurfP version 1.1 server was used to predict the surface accessibility of an amino acid and protein secondary structure. The epitopes not exposed to the solvent were discarded. The proteins with B-cell solvent-exposed epitopes were further analyzed by Vaxign and VaxiJen tools for prediction of protective antigens. Only the proteins with adhesion score greater than 0.5 (Vaxign tool) and those with threshold greater than 0.4 (VaxiJen) were considered as candidate antigens.  As a final step, the potential antigenic proteins of B. canis resulting from the above bioinformatics analyses were screened by BLASTp to check for sequence similarity with other Brucella species and cross-reactive bacteria. Among the genus Brucella, B. melitensis, B. ovis, B. abortus and B. suis were considered. Cross-reactive bacteria included Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bordetella bronchiseptica, Actinobacillus equuli, Streptococcus spp., Staphyloccus spp., Moraxella type, Salmonella spp. and Campylobacter spp., the environmental bacterium Ochrobactrum anthropi and the plant pathogens or symbionts Rhizobium leguminosarum, Rhizobium/Agrobacterium group and Rhizobium tropici. The criteria used to identify non-homologous proteins were: identity and/or coverage lower than 95% for Brucella species and 35% for cross reactive bacteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brucella canis; western blotting; mass spectrometry; protein identification, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
 Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise "G. Caporale" 
Istituto zooprofilattico dell'abruzzo e del molise

### Submitter
Ivanka Krasteva

### Lab Head
Dr Mirella Luciani
Istituto zooprofilattico dell'abruzzo e del molise


