### Accession
PXD022242

### Title
Mass spectrometry guided by transcriptomics reveals multiple classes of predicted antimicrobial peptides in Amaranthus tricolor

### Description
Traditional medicinal plants are rich reservoirs of antimicrobial agents, including antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Herein, Amaranthus tricolor AMPs predicted in silico are identified via proteomics profiling. Bottom-up proteomics identified seven novel peptides spanning three AMP classes including lipid transfer proteins, snakins and defensins. Characterization via top-down peptidomic analysis of Atr-SN1, Atr-DEF1, and Atr-LTP1 revealed unexpected proteolytic processing and enumerated disulfide bonds. These results highlight the potential for integrating AMP prediction algorithms with complementary -omics approaches to accelerate characterization of biologically relevant AMP peptidoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Amaranthus tricolor seeds purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR) were planted in nutrient rich soil and grown under controlled temperature (63.5 - 68.5°F) and light cycle (14-hr light) conditions. Plants (~100) were grown to mature rosette stage (~8 weeks) and harvested in November 2018 with immediate flash freezing and stored at -80° C until subsequent extraction.  Briefly, plant material was extracted in an acetic acid solution, size exclusion steps were performed to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules (<1 kDa), and the crude extract was concentrated to a final volume of 1 mL/500 g starting tissue. Neutral and negatively charged molecules were removed using SCX chromatography collecting three five minute fractions across the chromatogram. SCX fractions were desalted on C18 SepPaks with a stepped elution (20 and 40% acetonitrile) to generate six final fractions. Fractions were dried via vacuum centrifugation for further analysis.Peptide fractions were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. For enzymatic digestion, a reduced and alkylated sample was incubated with sequencing grade trypsin overnight. All samples were desalted with C18 ZipTips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of tryptic digests was performed with Mascot v2.5.1 against an A. tricolor transcriptome and the CRAPome (www.thegpm.org/cRAP; 116 entries) using a decoy database, peptide/fragment mass tolerances 15 ppm/0.5 Da, trypsin specificity, three possible missed cleavages, and a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptides false discovery rates (FDR) were adjusted to ≤1% using the Mascot Percolator algorithm. De-isotoped peak lists for reduced/alkylated and intact fractions were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). Data was exported “peptide ion data”.

### Publication Abstract
Traditional medicinal plants are rich reservoirs of antimicrobial agents, including antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Advances in genomic sequencing, in silico AMP predictions, and mass spectrometry-based peptidomics facilitate increasingly high-throughput bioactive peptide discovery. Herein, <i>Amaranthus tricolor</i> aerial tissue was profiled via MS-based proteomics/peptidomics, identifying AMPs predicted in silico. Bottom-up proteomics identified seven novel peptides spanning three AMP classes including lipid transfer proteins, snakins, and a defensin. Characterization via top-down peptidomic analysis of Atr-SN1, Atr-DEF1, and Atr-LTP1 revealed unexpected proteolytic processing and enumerated disulfide bonds. Bioactivity screening of isolated Atr-LTP1 showed activity against the high-risk ESKAPE bacterial pathogens (<i>Enterococcus faecium</i>, <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>, <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i>, <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i>, and <i>Enterobacter cloacae</i>). These results highlight the potential for integrating AMP prediction algorithms with complementary -omics approaches to accelerate characterization of biologically relevant AMP peptidoforms.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial peptides, Peptidomics, Amaranthus tricolor, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hiil, USA
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hiil, USA


