### Accession
PXD013158

### Title
Pillar Array Columns for Peptide Separations

### Description
Reversed-phase chromatography is the most common technique for separation of tryptic peptides. In this manuscript, we describe the optimization of sample loading and separation parameters for a novel micro machined column and provide a detailed description on the performance and reproducibility of this separation system.

### Sample Protocol
Seven proteins of diverse molecular mass and isoelectric points were selected for creating the mixed test sample. Albumin from bovine milk (A2153), Alcohol Dehydrogen-ase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (07011), β-Casein from bovine milk (C6905), Lysozyme from chicken egg white (L6876), Myoglobin from equine skeletal muscle (M0630), Ribonuclease A from bovine pancreas (R6513), Ubiquitin from bovine erythrocytes (U6253) were pur-chased from Sigma Aldrich (Vienna, Austria). The gene names, numbers of building amino acids, molecular mass-es and isoelectric points of each protein are listed in Table S-1. A mixture containing each protein in equal mass was tryptically digested using the method described further below. Digested HeLa proteins (88329) were purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (Vienna, Austria).  Sample preparation methods  Tryptic digestion of proteins Tryptic digestion was performed based on a method de-scribed earlier27. Proteins were dissolved in 0.1% RapiGest® in 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5), reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C, and alkylated for 30 minutes in 15 mM IAA in the dark. Finally, porcine trypsin, sequencing grade (Promega, Vienna, Austria) was added in a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:17.5 (w/w). After sixteen hours of incuba-tion at 37°C, the solutions were acidified with FA (0.15% final concentration) and stored in protein low-bind vials (Eppendorf, Vienna, Austria) at -20°C until further usage. Solution of HeLa proteins The content of the purchased original vial was dissolved in 80 µl of aqueous solution of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and 0.01% HFBA. From this solution, 20 µl were further diluted using 30 µl of 0.1% aqueous TFA and 5 µl were injected, which is 500 ng of digested proteins extracted from HeLa cells.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Proteome Dis-coverer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) and the Sequest search engine. These results gave the primary data on the number of protein IDs to be compared between µPACTM and PepMap columns. Then the MS/MS based peptide and protein identification data were further vali-dated with Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) using additional X! Tandem search engine, and the resulting data was put into Supplementary Data (Scaffold result file). Mascot was set up to search the Homo_Cox_180412 in-house built database assuming the digestion enzyme tryp-sin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenat-ed subset of the human_coxiella-042018 in-house built database also assuming trypsin. Database search was performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deami-dation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation on methionine was specified as a variable modification.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be es-tablished at greater than 94.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be es-tablished at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Reversed-phase chromatography is the most common technique for separation of tryptic peptides. In this short communication, we describe the optimization of sample loading and separation parameters for a novel micromachined column and provide a detailed description on the performance and reproducibility of this separation system. Tryptic digest of a mixture of seven proteins with diverse mass and isoelectric point was used as a test sample. The methods developed and used are straight-forward; by using well-balanced, combined-step gradients an optimal distribution of peptides on the column could be achieved throughout the complete gradient window. The potential use of the column is exceptional due to the low back-pressure, better distribution of peptides over the separation window, enhanced stability and reproducibility of retention times, and the prolonged lifetime of columns compared to conventionally packed nano-HPLC column. The higher identification rates have been demonstrated through measurements of HeLa cell lysates under identical chromatographic conditions on the pillar array and packed-bed columns.

### Keywords
Separation, Pillar, Column

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria Tel: +43 1 40400 53750
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria Tel: +43 1 40400 53750


