### Accession
PXD032014

### Title
ATP-site inhibitors induce unique conformations of the Src-family kinase, Fgr

### Description
Src family kinases are often overexpressed and constitutively active in cancer cells, where they represent promising targets for therapeutic intervention. In myeloid hematopoietic cells, Hck, Lyn, and Fgr are associated with both chronic and acute forms of myeloid leukemia. All three of these kinases are expressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), where high-level expression correlates with poor survival. The pyrrolopyrimidine Src-family kinase inhibitor A-419259 (also known as RK-20449) has been shown to significantly inhibit patient-derived AML bone marrow cell growth in immunocompromised mice. Recent work has identified an N-phenylbenzamide kinase inhibitor, known as TL02-59, which potently inhibited Fgr kinase activity in vitro and reversed orthotopic engraftment of AML cells in the bone marrow and spleen of immunocompromised mice following oral administration. The inhibitory mechanism of this compound with Fgr or other Src-family members has not been reported. Both wild-type Fgr and a tail mutant (i.e., replacement of Tyr527 with Phe) were shown to produce equal numbers of transformed colonies when expressed in rodent fibroblasts, whereas wild-type Hck transforming activity was completely repressed. In both Hck and Fgr, however, the tail tyrosine residue was shown to be phosphorylated, and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX MS) of near-full-length Fgr was consistent with the closed conformation in solution, with the SH3 domain bound to the SH2-kinase linker and the tail bound to SH2. Here we present the first X-ray crystal structures of near-full-length Fgr bound to the ATP site inhibitors A-419259 and TL02-59. Structural changes induced by the inhibitors in the crystalline state were validated in solution using HDX MS, with A-419259 stabilizing the closed conformation and TL02-59 enhancing exposure of the SH3 domain to solvent.  These new structures help to explain the constitutive activity of wild-type Fgr in cells as well as its unique sensitivity to TL02-59, which is currently in development for AML and other maladies.

### Sample Protocol
Compound binding equilibration: Near-full-length Fgr (FgrYEEI) was diluted from stock concentration (61 μM) to 20 μM using equilibration buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.3, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM TCEP, H2O).  1 μL of diluted (20 μM) FgrYEEI was either added to 1 μL of equilibration buffer with 2 % DMSO or 1 μL of TL0259 or A419259 (500 μM) in equilibration buffer with 2 % DMSO; final molar ratio 1:25 protein:compound. Binding equilibration proceeded at 23 °C (room temperature) for 30 min and then placed on ice until labeling.  Deuterium labeling: Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution into D2O labeling buffer (36 μL, 20 mM Tris pD 8.3, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM TCEP, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, and 4 hours) at 23 °C (room temperature), the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 38 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (150 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.44, H2O) and analyzed immediately.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using a AffiPro pepsin column (AffiPro, AP-PC-001). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile, 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the Enzymate column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  The error of determining the average deuterium incorporation for each peptide was at or below ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate (as detailed in the Supplemental Datafile) HDMSE analyses  of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of FgrYEEI (His6-80-527, UniProt: P09769, numbered based on human c-Src, PDB 2SRC), no missed cleavages, phosphorylation as a variable PTM, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.25, at least 3 consecutive product ions (see Supplemental Datafile).  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation). The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These relative deuterium uptake values are shown in the Supplemental Datafile and were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps found in the Supplemental Datafile.  Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
The Src-family kinase Fgr is expressed primarily in myeloid hematopoietic cells and contributes to myeloid leukemia. Here, we present X-ray crystal structures of Fgr bound to the ATP-site inhibitors A-419259 and TL02-59, which show promise as anti-leukemic agents. A-419259 induces a closed Fgr conformation, with the SH3 and SH2 domains engaging the SH2-kinase linker and C-terminal tail, respectively. In the Fgr:A-419259 complex, the activation loop of one monomer inserts into the active site of the other, providing a snapshot of trans-autophosphorylation. By contrast, TL02-59 binding induced SH2 domain displacement from the C-terminal tail and SH3 domain release from the linker. Solution studies using HDX MS were consistent with the crystal structures, with A-419259 reducing and TL02-59 enhancing solvent exposure of the SH3 domain. These structures demonstrate that allosteric connections between the kinase and regulatory domains of Src-family kinases are regulated by the ligand bound to the active site.

### Keywords
Src-family kinase; acute myeloid leukemia; hdx ms; hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry;

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


