### Accession
PXD032372

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of tau and Aβ amyloid in detergent insoluble fractions from Alzheimer’s disease brains

### Description
The two hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are A-amyloid- (A) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles marked by phosphorylated tau. There is compelling evidence that aggregating A drives tau accumulation, a process that involves synaptic degeneration leading to cognitive impairment. Conversely there is a growing realization that non-fibrillar (oligomeric) forms of Aβ mediate toxicity in AD. Using quantitative proteomics, we find that AD brain sarkosyl-insoluble pellets are greatly enriched with A at almost equimolar levels to N-terminal truncated microtubule binding region (MTBR) isoforms of tau with multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs). The extracted R3-R4 tau peptides are 100-fold higher compared to N-terminus intact tau peptides. Substantial proportions of site-specific phosphorylation at T181 (~ 22 %) and T217 (~ 16 %) along with other PTMs in the proline rich region (PRR) and MTBR indicate a regional susceptibility of PTMs in aggregated tau. Immuno-electron microscopy reveals that co-purified A and tau co-localize to globular non-filamentous aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
1 % Sarkosyl solution was used to solubilize membrane associated proteins from 1g frontal cortex of 10 AD brains, followed by 1 hr centrifugation at 100,000g to separate detergent insoluble aggregated proteins. Complementary tryptic and Lys-N digestion of the sarkosyl pellet was performed. We used quantitative proteomics approach using stable isotope labelled peptides and proteins, respectively, to estimate the amount of A and MAPT in the sarkosyl insoluble pellet.

### Data Protocol
The raw data first analyzed in MaxQuant (2.0.3) using human proteome database downloaded in January 2019 from Uniprot (only reviewed entries and appended with in-house FASTA sequence database containing A sequences) using Andromeda search engine as previously described using trypsin as the enzyme, two missed cleavages, the default mass tolerances were used for MS1 and MS/MS level. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, +57.0215 Da) with variable modifications including acetylation (N-term/K, +42.420106 Da), and methionine oxidation (M, +15.9949 Da). False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels. Volcano plots were generated to visualize differential protein expression in AD versus control group. Student t-test – log10(p) values represent statistical significance in the y-axis, while the log2 fold change (difference) on the x-axis is the log2 ratio of normalized iBAQ intensities in a pairwise comparison. The heatmap color of the differentially expressed proteins in the insoluble pellet was based on the range of the minimum to maximum average of the log2 iBAQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Abeta, Tau

### Affiliations
Washington University at St Louis School of Medicine
Neuropathology and Neurodegeneration Laboratory

### Submitter
Soumya Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr Colin Masters
Neuropathology and Neurodegeneration Laboratory


