### Accession
PXD034787

### Title
Proteome Changes of Sheep Rumen Epithelium during Post-natal Development

### Description
a shotgun approach and bioinformatics analyses to investigate and compare proteomic profile of sheep rumen epithelium tissue on day 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 of age.

### Sample Protocol
Male Hu Sheep lamb were randomly selected and fed by ewe. From day 10 of age, pellet was used as supplement for lamb. The intergrade and nutrient composition were described in table 1. The lamb were sacrificed either at day 0, day15, day 30, day 45 or day 60 of age with 3 sheep in each age. Rumen epithelia were isolated and frozen in liquid ni-trogen. Experimental protocols for animal research were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at the Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences.  Rumen epithelium samples were ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with PASP lysis buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M Urea, pH 8.0), followed by 5 min of ul-trasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4 ℃. The super-natants were collected and quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime Institute of Bi-otechnology, Shanghai, China). 20 μg of the protein sample was loaded to 12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis for quality control and the supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56 ℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide (IAM) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20 ℃ for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the precipitation was collected. After washing with 1 mL cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5). trypsin and 100 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 ℃ for 4 h. Then trypsin and CaCl2 were added digested overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample, adjusted pH under 3, and cen-trifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) 3 times, then added elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were collected and lyophilized. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and B solution (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) were prepared. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL of solution A, centrifuged at 14000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃, and 1 μg of the supernatant was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (4.5 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by using Q ExactiveTM series mass spectrome-ter (Thermo Fisher, Germany) at Novogene Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.1 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320 ℃. Full scan range from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20 s. The raw data of MS detection was named as “.raw”.

### Data Protocol
The all resulting spectra were searched by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The corresponding proteins were matched with ovis aries database containing 63,772 en-tries. The search parameters are set as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ion was 10 ppm and mass tolerance for product ion was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl was specified as fixed modifications, Oxidation of methionine (M) was specified as dynamic modification, and acetylation was specified as N-Terminal modification. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. To improve the quality of analysis results, the software PD 2.2 further filtered the retrieval results: Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) with a credibility of more than 99% was identified PSMs. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique pep-tide. The identified PSMs and protein were retained and performed with FDR no more than 1.0%. Principal component analysis (PCA) and volcano plot, which combined fold-change analysis and t-tests, were performed. Proteins with a minimum fold change of 2 (ratio >2 or < 0.5, p<0.05) were considered to be regulated differently between groups. Gene Ontology (GO) and InterPro (IPR) functional analysis were conducted using the interproscan program against the non-redundant protein database (including Pfam, PRINTS, ProDom, SMART, ProSite, PANTHER), and the databases of COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) were used to analyze the protein family and pathway. DPEs were used for Volcanic map analysis, cluster heat map analysis and enrichment analysis of GO, IPR and KEGG. The probable protein-protein interactions were predicted using the STRING-db server(http://string.embl.de/).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> The development of the rumen epithelium is a critical physiological challenge for sheep. However, the molecular mechanism underlying postnatal rumen development in sheep remains rarely understood. <b>Results:</b> Here, we used a shotgun approach and bioinformatics analyses to investigate and compare proteomic profiles of sheep rumen epithelium tissue on day 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 of age. A total of 4,523 proteins were identified, in which we found 852, 342, 164, and 95 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between day 0 and day 15, between day 15 and day 30, between day 30 and day 45, between day 45 and day 60, respectively. Furthermore, subcellular localization analysis showed that the DEPs were majorly localized in mitochondrion between day 0 and day 15, after which nucleus proteins were the most DEPs. Finally, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses showed that DEPs significantly enriched in mitochondrion, ubiquitination, histone modifications, glutathione synthase activity, and wnt and nortch signaling pathways. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our data indicate that the biogenesis of mitochondrion in rumen epithelial cell is essential for the initiation of rumen epithelial development. Glutathione, wnt signaling pathway and nortch signaling pathway participated in rumen epithelial growth. Ubiquitination, post-translational modifications of histone might be key molecular functions in regulating rumen epithelial development.

### Keywords
Sheep; rumen epithelium; lc-ms; postnatal development

### Affiliations
zhejiang academy of agricultural sciences

### Submitter
kaizhi zheng

### Lab Head
Dr kaizhi zheng
zhejiang academy of agricultural sciences


