### Accession
PXD009781

### Title
Sex Estimation Using Sexually Dimorphic Amelogenin Protein Fragments in Human Enamel

### Description
Sex estimation of human remains from demineralized blocks of tooth enamel by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC- MS/MS) and proteomic analysis of sexually dimorphic amelogenin peptides. The detection of the Y-isoform of amelogenin is used to estimate male sex. The combined signal intensity of the sexually dimorphic peptides from each samples of known sex is used to establish a statistical framework for the estimation of the female sex probability.

### Sample Protocol
To demineralize the enamel (20-35 mg blocks), 200μL of 1.2M hydrochloric acid was added to each 2 mL sample vial with seven 2.8 mM ceramic beads (Omni-International Inc.), milled for 3 minutes at 7000 rpm in a MagnaLyzer (Roche Inc.), then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16000 g. To reduce soluble proteins, 6μL of 0.5M dithioerythritol (DTE) was added to each sample vial and incubated at 56°C for 60 minutes. After incubation, 2M ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample vial until the pH of the supernatant was 7.5-8.0. Alkylation was performed by adding 12μL of 0.5M iodoacetamide to the sample vials and incubated in the dark at 25°C for 60 minutes. The carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by adding 12μL of 0.5M DTE to the sample vials and incubated in room temperature for 5 minutes. After incubation, 0.01% ProteaseMAX (6μL of 0.5% w/v, Promega Inc.) was added to the sample vials along with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (1μL of 0.5μg/μL, Thermo Pierce Inc,). Each sample was incubated at room temperature for 20 hours at 300 rpm. After incubation, the sample vials were centrifuged for 5 minutes and 200μL of the supernatant transferred to 0.22μm centrifugal filters and centrifuged for 30 minutes. The filtrate was then transferred to clean Eppendorf® Protein LoBind tubes for ZipTip (Millipore Inc.) sample clean up to prepare for mass spectrometric analysis. Organic contaminants in aqueous stocks and solutions were removed by prior passage over solid phase extraction (SepPak, tC18, Waters Inc.). Digested peptides were desalted and concentrated using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore Inc.) with the eluted material lyophilized and resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Pierce™) and 1 µg of peptide, or 40% of the total sample if the sample was too diluted, was applied to mass spectrometry. The sample was applied to LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass spectrometer in conjunction with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source. The digested peptides were loaded a 100 micron x 25 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated using a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column.  Peptides were eluted using a 65 minute gradient with a flow rate of 300nl/min. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 300-1600, MS/MS spectra were acquired using an inclusion list of 28 ions that were subjected to HCD (High Energy Collisional Dissociation). When inclusion list ions were not found, MS/MS was done on other ions in the MS survey scan.  An isolation mass window of 1.6 m/z was used for precursor ion selection, and normalized collision energy of 27% used for fragmentation. A five second duration was used for the dynamic exclusion. Washes were applied between each sample. After 10 samples a blank run of BSA standards was applied to test for sample-to-sample contamination.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against the human proteome (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) that was modified to include peptide sequences from all splice variants associated with AMELX_HUMAN (Q99217-1, -2, -3) and AMELY_HUMAN (Q99218-1, -2) proteins using PEAKs (version 8.5), employing the default search settings with following exceptions: error tolerance, precursor mass, 15 ppm, Fragment ion, 0.5 Da., cleavage with trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages, and up to two non-specific cleavage. The algorithm assumed all cysteines were carbamidomethylated, and the peptide was partially modified by deamidation (NQ), oxidation (MHW), pyroglutamate conversion from glutamate and glutamine, and methionine dioxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sex estimation, Enamel, Teeth, Proteomics, Paleoproteomics, Amelogenin, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon J Parker
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA


