### Accession
PXD010537

### Title
Phospho and expression proteomics in chinese hamster ovary cells

### Description
We investigated CHO signaling events in a comparative expression and phospho proteomics approach of recombinant mAb producing XL99 cell line and according parental cells. First, on proteomic level differences between producer and parental cells were evaluated by label-free quantification of proteins at exponential growth. Next, a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic investigation was used to elucidate differential phosphorylation events following IGF treatment as well as differences between two producer cell lines and the parental cells.

### Sample Protocol
5 min following IGF treatment equal amounts of cells of “heavy” (hLys/hArg cultures) and “light” cultures (lLys/lArg cultures) were directly combined, washed, frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 °C. For 3∙107 cells 1 ml of lysis buffer (40 mM HEPES, 120 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 50 mM sodium fluoride, 0.3 % CHAPS, 1 mM PMSF, 0.25 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Missouri, USA)) was added and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Supernatant was received after 30 min centrifugation at 4 °C and 17.000 g and quantified by BCA. The following MS sample preparation workflow included acetone precipitation at -20 °C for 2.5 h and rehydration in 6 M urea in 100 mM tris buffer at 56 °C. Next reduction (7 mM DTT, 30 min, 56 °C) and alkylation of cysteines (20 mM IAA, 30 min, room temperature, dark) and a reaction stop induced by 14 mM DTT (15 min, room temperature, dark) was performed. Then a 1:10 dilution in 25 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.5) was conducted for optimized digestion conditions. 100 µg whole cell lysate was used for a 12 h LysC (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) and an overnight trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) digestion. To remove remaining urea a C18-purification with SepPak C18 vac 1cc (Waters, Massachusetts, US) was performed before executing a phosphopeptide enrichment via Titansphere™ Phos-TiO Kit (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufactures instructions. In brief, purified, dried peptides were dissolved in 100 µl loading buffer (80 % ACN, 0.5 % TFA, 0.2 M glycolic acid) and introduced on conditioned (buffer A) and equilibrated (buffer B) columns. Solution is then mixed with 100 µl buffer B and centrifuged, after two cycles of rinsing (buffer B, buffer A), phosphopeptides were eluted by adding and incubating with 20 µl 5 % ammonium hydroxide solution for 10 minutes for three times. Enriched phosphopeptides originating from 33 µg cell lysate were resolubilized in 7 µl of LC-MS grade water with 0.1 % TFA and 5 % acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were injected by microliter pick up on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC Dionex system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts) and seperated on 50 cm fused silica column packed with reversed phase material (C18). Peptides were than eluted by an effective gradient from 1-44 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 1 % TFA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min within 44 minutes. Coupled ESI-Orbitrap mass spectrometry measurements were carried out by a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts) in data-dependent top 10 mode. Precursor ions were acquired in a range of 375 – 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70.000 at 400 m/z and fragment ions from 200 – 2000 m/z at 17.500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Identification, LFQ-based protein quantification and SILAC-based quantification of H/L ratios of phosphopeptides was performed collectively in MaxQuant (1.5.8.3), while applying the “match between run” and “requantify” (only SILAC) mode. For SILAC, the multiplicity was set to two and the SILAC labels Arg10 and Lys8 were chosen. The parameters for label-free algorithm within MaxQuant were used as default (min. ratio count >2, fast LFQ, stabilize large ratios, require MS/MS for comparison and advanced site intensities were set to true), unlike default only unique peptides were used for peptide quantification. For database searches cricetulus griseus and mus musculus (UniProt, trembl 2016-12-21) database were used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set as followed: Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and/or tyrosine. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two and a FDR of 0.01 was selected for protein and peptide identification. Following filtering and statistics was performed in Perseus (1.6.0.7), including two main workflows for proteomic and phosphoproteomic investigations. The expression proteomic evaluation workflow covers filtering of “proteingroups.txt” for “only identified by site”, reverse, potential contaminant, minimum valid values > 1, peptides > 2 and included log2 transformation. Following annotation and categorical annotation into two groups (four biological replicates per cell line) statistical relevant hits (two-sample t-test, p-value > 0.02) were further filtered for t-test differences > 0.138 and < -0.152, equalling ratios of > ± 10 %. By combining categorical columns a fisher-exact test (p-value > 0.01) was performed based on significant and filtered protein hits. The phospho specific Perseus evaluation workflow included uploading of the “phospho (STY)Sites.txt” and filtering for reverse, potential contaminants and class I phosphosites (probability >75 %). By “expand site table” and filtering for a minimum of one valid value the number of securely identified and quantified phosphorylation sites was evaluated. Further on, the data was log2-transformed, annotated for gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and grouped for I) CHO, II) cell lines and III) further grouping (see Figure 5). Statistics were performed using one-sample t-test for evaluation of the IGF effects (I) and depending on the grouping an ANOVA or two-sample t-test for cell line comparison was conducted (II, III).

### Publication Abstract
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are commonly used for the production of monoclonal antibodies. Omics technologies have been used to elucidate cellular switch points which result in higher monoclonal antibody (mAb) productivity and process yields in CHO and other biopharmaceutical production cell lines such as human or mouse. Currently, investigations of the phosphoproteome in CHO cell lines are rare yet could provide further insights into cellular mechanisms related to target product expression. Therefore, we investigated CHO IGF-signaling events using a comparative expression and phosphoproteomic approach in recombinant mAb-producing XL99 cell lines and corresponding parental strain. Differences were found on the level of protein expression between producer and parental cells in the exponential growth phase, mainly in proteins related to the lysosome, oligosaccharide metabolic processes, stress response, and cellular homeostasis. Within a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based phosphoproteomic investigation of IGF signaling, expected general regulation of phosphorylation sites and cell line-specific responses were observed. Detected early phosphorylation events can be associated to observed effects of IGF on cellular growth, metabolism, and cell cycle distribution. Producer cell line-specific signaling exhibited differences to parental cells in intracellular trafficking and transcriptional processes, along with an overall lower amount of observable cross talk to other signaling pathways. By combining label-free and SILAC-based expression for phosphoproteomic analyses, cellular differences in the highly interactive levels of signaling and protein expression were detected, indicating alterations in metabolism and growth following treatment with an exogenous growth factor. The characterization of cell lines and effects of IGF addition resulted in identification of metabolic switch points. With this data, it will be possible to modulate pathways towards increased CHO process yield by targeted application of small-molecule inhibitors.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Lfq, Proteomics, Silac, Cho

### Affiliations
Cell culture technology, Technical faculty, Bielefeld University
Bielefeld University

### Submitter
Louise Schelletter

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Raimund Hoffrogge
Cell culture technology, Technical faculty, Bielefeld University


