### Accession
PXD015158

### Title
Integrator restraints paraspeckles assembly by promoting the 3’-end processing of the polyadenylated lncRNA NEAT1_1

### Description
Alternative 3’-end RNA processing provides an important source of transcriptome diversification, which impacts various biological processes and the etiology of diseases, including cancer. Here, we focused on a transcript isoform switch that leads to the readthrough expression of the long noncoding RNA NEAT1_2, at the expense of the shorter polyadenylated transcript NEAT1_1. Expression of NEAT1_2 is required for the formation of paraspeckles (PS), nuclear bodies that protect cancer cells from oncogene-induced replication stress and chemotherapy. Searching for proteins that interact with endogenous NEAT1 by RNA Affinity Purification coupled to mass spectrometry (RAP-MS), we identified factors involved in the 3’-end processing of polyadenylated (pA+) RNA as well as several components of the Integrator complex, known to process the 3’-ends of RNAs lacking polyadenylation sites. Unexpectedly, genetic perturbation experiments established that Integrator restraints NEAT1_2 expression, and thereby PS assembly, by promoting the 3’-end processing of pA+ NEAT1_1. Consistently, low expression levels of several Integrator subunits correlated with poorer prognosis of cancer patients exposed to chemotherapeutics. Our study identifies Integrator as a key regulator of PS biogenesis and highlights a previously unrecognized ability of the complex to process pA+ RNA. The data also establish a link between Integrator, cancer biology and chemosensitivity, which may be exploited therapeutically.

### Sample Protocol
We identified proteins directly bound to endogenous NEAT1 transcripts by RNA Affinity Purification coupled to mass spectrometry (RAP-MS). We purified NEAT1 and interacting proteins from MCF7 that were left untreated, treated with Nutlin-3a or treated with Hydroxy Urea. Briefly, 100 μg of Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (GE Healthcare) were coupled overnight at 4 °C to 800 pmol of biotinylated RAP probes against the 5’ portion of the NEAT1 transcript (N1_5’ - Biosearch Technologies) or RAP probes designed against the melanoma-specific LINC00698 (Ctrl - Biosearch Technologies). Samples for each probe and from each treatment were prepared in triplicate leading to 18 samples for MS analysis in total. MCF-7 breast cancer cells (1.5 × 107 cells per treatment – 5 full 15-cm ø plates for each treatment) were washed twice in PBS and UV crosslinked dry at 400 mj/cm2 with a CL-1000 Crosslinker (254 nm lamp). Nuclei were isolated using Nuclei EZ prep (see “cell fractionation” paragraph) and lysed in 3.5 mL of pull-down buffer: 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% Triton X-100 in DEPC water. Add before use a cocktail of protease inhibitors (Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail (100X) – 78442 - Thermo Fisher), 1 mM dithiothreitol and 60 U/mL of SUPERase• In™ RNase Inhibitor (AM2696, Life Technologies). Lysates were incubated for 3 h with the beads already pre-incubated with the RAP probes at 4 °C. Samples were washed 3 times in the same pull-down buffer and twice in DEPC water. (1) For mass spectrometry analysis proteins were eluted by on-beads digestion with 1µg of trypsin over night at 37°. Peptides were purified with OMIX tips (C18 resin) and dried to be stored till MS analysis.  The cleaned peptide mixtures were dried completely and re-suspended in 20 µL loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile, 2/98 (v/v)). 2 µL of the peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC−MS/MS on a Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a linear gradient at 300 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 120 min before ultimately reaching 99% solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against human proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of August 2016 containing 20,210 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini.  A minimum of one peptide in total was required for identification. We allowed for matching between runs using a 1 min match time window and a 20 min alignment time window. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (Cox et al. 2014). A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification.  Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. First, proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, the replicate samples were grouped and protein groups with less than 3 valid values in at least one group were removed. Missing values were then imputed with values from the lower part of the normal distribution representing the detection limit, leading to a list of 1063 reliably quantified proteins. An additional filter for proteins identified by at least 3 peptides was applied (n=995). Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05) to compare the N1_5’ with the Ctrl samples from each treatment condition. Significantly enriched proteins (p-value<0.05) with a N1_5’/Ctrl fold change >1.6 (arbitrary cut-off) were considered as highly confident NEAT1 interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
RNA 3' end processing provides a source of transcriptome diversification which affects various (patho)-physiological processes. A prime example is the transcript isoform switch that leads to the read-through expression of the long non-coding RNA <i>NEAT1_2</i>, at the expense of the shorter polyadenylated transcript <i>NEAT1_1</i>. <i>NEAT1_2</i> is required for assembly of paraspeckles (PS), nuclear bodies that protect cancer cells from oncogene-induced replication stress and chemotherapy. Searching for proteins that modulate this event, we identified factors involved in the 3' end processing of polyadenylated RNA and components of the Integrator complex. Perturbation experiments established that, by promoting the cleavage of <i>NEAT1_2</i>, Integrator forces <i>NEAT1_2</i> to <i>NEAT1_1</i> isoform switching and, thereby, restrains PS assembly. Consistently, low levels of Integrator subunits correlated with poorer prognosis of cancer patients exposed to chemotherapeutics. Our study establishes that Integrator regulates PS biogenesis and a link between Integrator, cancer biology, and chemosensitivity, which may be exploited therapeutically.

### Keywords
Paraspeckles, Integrator, Cancer, Neat1; alternative 3’-end rna processing

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Department of Oncology, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Christophe Marine
Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Department of Oncology, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium


