### Accession
PXD039717

### Title
Prohibitin cross-linked aided interactome in yeast

### Description
The mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) contains subunits of dual genetic origin, namely the nuclear and the mitochondrial genome. Mounting the different subunits into functional OXPHOS complexes is aided by dedicated chaperones termed assembly factors. How unfunctional or superfluous proteins are recognized during assembly and directed to degradation is currently not understood. Here, we reveal that protein quality control is an integral part of assembly, which is organized in dedicated hubs gathering mitochondrial translation, protein import, assembly, and protein turnover. Fate-decision of newly synthesized proteins is achieved by molecular triaging engaging the evolutionary conserved prohibitin/m-AAA protease supercomplex and assembly chaperones. The localization of these competing activities in vicinity to the mitoribosomal tunnel exit allows for a rapid decision whether newly synthesized proteins are fed into OXPHOS assembly or to degradation. 
In total, three projects are hosted in this repository. 
1) Phb1-Alfa DSG cross-linked immunoprecipitation 
2) Metabolic switch from Glycerol to Glucose followed by Phb1-ALFA DSG cross-linked  immunoprecipitation. 
3) Phb2-ALFA DSG cross-linked immunoprecipitation.

### Sample Protocol

Yeast strains and culture conditions
All strains used in this study were isogenic to W303 MATa {leu2-3.112 trp1-1 can1-100 ura3-1 ade2-1 his3-11,195} {phi+}.
Strains were grown at 30°C and 170 rpm either in synthetic complete (SC) medium or in YP full medium. SC media containing 1.7 g/l yeast nitrogen base, 5 g/l (NH4)2SO4, 20 mg/l adenine, 15 mg/l histidine, 30 mg/l leucin, 30 mg/l lysine, 15 mg/l tryptophan, 20 mg uracil, 20 g/l arginine, 30 mg/l isoleucine, 20 mg/l methionine, 50 mg/l phenylalanine, 20 mg/l threonine, 20mg/l tyrosine, 150 mg/l valine and 2% of either glucose, galactose or glycerol as carbon source. For YP media, 10 g/l yeast extract and 20 g/l peptone were mixed with carbon sources described above. For solid media, 2% agar was added. 
Overnight cultures were grown 16-20 h in respective media and used to inoculate main cultures to a OD600 of 0.01. Cultures were grown to mid-exponential phase (approx. OD600 of 1-1.5) and applied for experiments as described below.

Crosslinking Mass spec For crosslinking approaches using ALFA-tagged bait proteins 
Respective isolated mitochondria were resuspended in 1ml SH buffer 20 mM HEPES, 0.6 M sorbitol; pH = 7.4). Thereby, 0.6 mg of mitochondria were used for direct analysis of crosslinking products via immunoblotting, or 6 mg for subsequent purification and mass spectrometric analysis. Indicated crosslinkers were equilibrated to room temperature and dissolved in DMSO to give 20 mM stock solutions. 10 µl of the crosslinker were added to each sample (or DMSO as a control, respectively) and incubated for 30 min at 30°C, 600 rpm. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 µl of 1 M Tris/HCl, pH = 8 and 10 µl of 14.3 2-mercaptoethanol and incubated for further 10 min at 30°C, 600 rpm. Mitochondria were pelleted at 25.000 rcf for 10 min, 4°C. For direct immunoblot analysis, samples were resuspended in 120 µl of SDS sample buffer and 30 µl were applied for immunoblotting as described above. For purification of bait proteins and crosslinked peptides, mitochondria pelleted after crosslinking were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl, 300 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% DDM, 1 mM PMSF and 1x Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; pH = 7.4) and incubated for 10 min at 4°C tumbling on a spinning wheel. 1 ml of dilution buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl, 300 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% DMM, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; pH = 7.4) was added and samples were centrifuged at 16.000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to 40 µl of ALFA SelectorST beads (pre-equilibrated with dilution buffer) and binding was performed for 2h at 4°C tumbling on a spinning wheel. The samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 3000 rcf, 4°C and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed 3 times with 1ml washing buffer 1 (10 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1% SDS; pH = 7.4), 3 times with wash buffer 2 (10 mM Tirs/HCl, 6 M Urea; pH = 7.4) and once with elution buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; pH = 8.0). Beads were resuspended in 50 µl of elution buffer and 0.5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated at 37°C, shaking overnight. The beads were pelleted for 3 min at 3000 rcf, RT and the supernatant was harvested. Beads were washed 2 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and merged with previously collected supernatants. Finally, peptides were lyophilized and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Peptides were reconstituted in 60 µL of 0.1% formic acid and 20 µL were subjected to StageTip-based desalting using SDP RP material (Affinisep) and eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 2.5 % formic acid of which 3 µL were injected per run. 

Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  

LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted of an Easy-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An in-house packed column (inner diameter: 75 µm, length: 40 cm) was used for peptide separation. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1 % formic acid and B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied as follows: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 45 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65 % within 5 minutes and then to 95 % within 5 minutes. 95 % buffer B was kept for a further 5 min to wash the column. Prior to each sample, the column was washed using 5 µL buffer A and the sample was loaded using 8 µL buffer A.The RF Lens amplitude was set to 55%, the capillary temperature was 275°C and the polarity was set to positive. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) at a mass range of 350-1750 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 30ms. Fragmentation MS/MS spectra were acquired using a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), an isolation width of 1.4Th, an AGC target of 900% and a HCD relative collision energy of 30%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20s using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. FAIMS was enabled and the CV value was set to -50 and -70 measuring each sample twice exclusively for the data of PHB2 crosslinking experiments.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis MaxQuant 2.0.3.0 and the implemented Andromeda search engine were utilized to correlated acquired MS/MS to spectra to in-silico trypsin digestion proteins of the Baker’s yeast reference proteome from the Uniprot repository (downloaded November 2021, 6050 sequences, uploaded to PRIDE). Protein N-term acetylation and oxidation of methionine residues were defined as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. The mass tolerance for MS/MS spectra was set to 20ppm. The false discovery rate was controlled using the implemented decoy algorithm on the protein and peptide-spectrum match level to 0.01. The MaxLFQ as well as the match-between runs algorithm was enabled using default settings. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and significantly enriched proteins were identified by applying a two-sided t-test followed by controlling the FDR to 0.05 using a permutation-based approach Gene Ontology annotations were imported from the Uniprot repository. Mitochondrial localization was annotated from a high confidence mitochondrial proteome set. The Instant Clue software was utilized to inspect the proteomics data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phb1, Yeast, Dsg, Phb2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne Germany


