### Accession
PXD002633

### Title
Effect of Rosuvastatin on the Lipoprotein Proteome

### Description
Statins lower plasma cholesterol by as much as 50%, thus reducing future cardiovascular events. However, the physiological effects of statins are diverse and not all are related to LDL-C lowering. We performed a small clinical pilot study to assess the impact of statins on lipoprotein-associated proteins in healthy individuals (n=10) with normal LDL-C (<130 mg/dL), who were treated with rosuvastatin (20 mg/day) for 28 days. Proteomic analysis of size-exclusion chromatography isolated LDL, HDL-L (large) and HDL-S (small) fractions and spectral counting was used to compare relative protein detection before and after statin therapy. Significant protein changes were found in each lipoprotein pool and included both increases and decreases in several proteins involved in lipoprotein metabolism, complement regulation and acute phase response. The most dramatic effect of the rosuvastatin treatment was an increase in alpha-1-antirypsin (A1AT) spectral counts associated with HDL-L particles. Quantitative measurement by ELISA confirmed an average 5.7-fold increase in HDL-L associated A1AT. Molecular modeling predictions indicated that the hydrophobic reactive center loop of A1AT, the functional domain responsible for its protease inhibitor activity, is likely involved in its lipid binding and its association with HDL was found to protect A1AT against oxidative inactivation. Cell culture experiments, using J774 macrophages, demonstrated that the association of A1AT with HDL enhances its anti-protease activity, preventing elastase induced production of tumor necrosis factor alpha. In conclusion, we show that statins can significantly alter the protein composition of both LDL and HDL and our studies reveal a novel functional relationship between A1AT and HDL. The upregulation of A1AT on HDL enhances its anti-inflammatory functionality, which may contribute to the non-lipid lowering beneficial effects of statins.

### Sample Protocol
Lipoproteins were isolated by size exclusion chromatography and further purified using a phospholipid binding resin before preparation for shotgun proteomics analysis. Isolated lipoproteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were reduced and carbamidomethylated. Prior to MS analysis, samples were desalted using standard ZipTip protocol.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Velos instrument. Peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.3.0.339) and spectra searched against the SwissProt database (version 012214) using the Mascot search engine. Search criteria included: human taxonomy, allowed 2 missed cleavage sites; Fixed Modifications: carbabmidomethylation; Variable Modifications: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q). Scaffold software was used to validate peptide and protein identifications using a 1% FDR threshold for both peptide and protein and a minimum of 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Statins lower plasma cholesterol by as much as 50%, thus reducing future cardiovascular events. However, the physiological effects of statins are diverse and not all are related to low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) lowering. We performed a small clinical pilot study to assess the impact of statins on lipoprotein-associated proteins in healthy individuals (n = 10) with normal LDL-C (&lt;130 mg/dL), who were treated with rosuvastatin (20 mg/day) for 28 days. Proteomic analysis of size-exclusion chromatography isolated LDL, large high density lipoprotein (HDL-L), and small HDL (HDL-S) fractions and spectral counting was used to compare relative protein detection before and after statin therapy. Significant protein changes were found in each lipoprotein pool and included both increases and decreases in several proteins involved in lipoprotein metabolism, complement regulation and acute phase response. The most dramatic effect of the rosuvastatin treatment was an increase in &#x3b1;-1-antirypsin (A1AT) spectral counts associated with HDL-L particles. Quantitative measurement by ELISA confirmed an average 5.7-fold increase in HDL-L associated A1AT. Molecular modeling predictions indicated that the hydrophobic reactive center loop of A1AT, the functional domain responsible for its protease inhibitor activity, is likely involved in lipid binding and association with HDL was found to protect A1AT against oxidative inactivation. Cell culture experiments, using J774 macrophages, demonstrated that the association of A1AT with HDL enhances its antiprotease activity, preventing elastase induced production of tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1;. In conclusion, we show that statins can significantly alter the protein composition of both LDL and HDL and our studies reveal a novel functional relationship between A1AT and HDL. The up-regulation of A1AT on HDL enhances its anti-inflammatory functionality, which may contribute to the non-lipid lowering beneficial effects of statins.

### Keywords
Hdl, Ldl, Rosuvastatin, Lipoprotein, Statin

### Affiliations
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Lipoprotein Metabolism Section
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Scott Gordon

### Lab Head
Dr Scott M. Gordon
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Lipoprotein Metabolism Section


