### Accession
PXD034825

### Title
Proteomic analysis of a commensal Staphylococcus epidermidis strain in different pH conditions.

### Description
Proteomic analysis of a commensal Staphylococcus epidermidis strain in different pH conditions for describing the molecular players involved in the skin-to-blood adaptation of the bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus epidermidis</i> is one of the most common bacteria of the human skin microbiota. Despite its role as a commensal, <i>S. epidermidis</i> has emerged as an opportunistic pathogen, associated with 80% of medical devices related infections. Moreover, these bacteria are extremely difficult to treat due to their ability to form biofilms and accumulate resistance to almost all classes of antimicrobials. Thus new preventive and therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. However, the molecular mechanisms associated with <i>S. epidermidis</i> colonisation and disease are still poorly understood. A deeper understanding of the metabolic and cellular processes associated with response to environmental factors characteristic of SE ecological niches in health and disease might provide new clues on colonisation and disease processes. Here we studied the impact of pH conditions, mimicking the skin pH (5.5) and blood pH (7.4), in a <i>S. epidermidis</i> commensal strain by means of next-generation proteomics and <sup>1</sup>H NMR-based metabolomics. Moreover, we evaluated the metabolic changes occurring during a sudden pH change, simulating the skin barrier break produced by a catheter. We found that exposure of <i>S. epidermidis</i> to skin pH induced oxidative phosphorylation and biosynthesis of peptidoglycan, lipoteichoic acids and betaine. In contrast, at blood pH, the bacterial assimilation of monosaccharides and its oxidation by glycolysis and fermentation was promoted. Additionally, several proteins related to virulence and immune evasion, namely extracellular proteases and membrane iron transporters were more abundant at blood pH. In the situation of an abrupt skin-to-blood pH shift we observed the decrease in the osmolyte betaine and changes in the levels of several metabolites and proteins involved in cellular redoxl homeostasis. Our results suggest that at the skin pH <i>S. epidermidis</i> cells are metabolically more active and adhesion is promoted, while at blood pH, metabolism is tuned down and cells have a more virulent profile. pH increase during commensal-to-pathogen conversion appears to be a critical environmental signal to the remodelling of the <i>S. epidermidis</i> metabolism toward a more pathogenic state. Targeting <i>S. epidermidis</i> proteins induced by pH 7.4 and promoting the acidification of the medical device surface or surrounding environment might be new strategies to treat and prevent <i>S. epidermidis</i> infections.

### Keywords
Bacterium, Proteomics, Transition, Ph, Skin, Pathogen, Blood, Adaptation

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


