### Accession
PXD023371

### Title
Amino acid analog induces stress response in marine Synechococcus

### Description
In this study, we explored the use of BONCAT in Synechococcus sp. – a globally important cyanobacteria. We characterized the growth and microscopically quantified HPG uptake under a range of HPG concentrations in marine Synechococcus sp. Further, we examined changes in protein expression of Synechococcus sp. grown under normal and nitrate-stressed conditions relative to a non-HPG control.

### Sample Protocol
Synechococcus sp. cell pellets were lysed on ice with 100 microliters 0.05% SDS/0.5M TEAB lysis buffer by vortexing, syringe titration with a 23G needle (30x), and dounce homogenization (30x). Lysates were then clarified at 16,000 g for 5 min at 4°C and protein concentration measured by Bradford assay. Ten microgram lysates from each sample in 52 microliters lysis buffer were reduced with 3 mM TCEP for 1 hr at 50°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature, digested with 1:100 LysC for 2 hr at room temperature, and digested with 1:25 trypsin overnight at 37°C.  Digestions were stopped by acidifying with 3.25 microliters 100% formic acid and desalted on StageTips packed in-house with Empore C18 extraction material (3M cat. # 2215). Desalted peptides were lyophilized, resuspended in 10 microliters 100 mM TEAB, and peptide quantification performed with the Pierce colorimetric peptide quant assay (Thermo cat. #23275). 5 ug peptides per sample were brought to 10 microliters total in 100mM TEAB, then labelled with 100 microgram TMT-11 (Thermo) reagents each dissolved in 4 microliters anhydrous acetonitrile for 2 hr at room temperature. TMT reactions were quenched with 1 microliter 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes at room temperature, combined, lyophilized, and desalted on a C4 macrotrap cartridge (Optimize Technologies #10-04818-TM) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC. SDS was then removed with HiPPR detergent removal resin (Thermo #88305), and the peptides were resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.2% formic acid).  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Approximately 250 ng peptides were loaded onto an Aurora 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18 reversed phase column (Ion Opticks, Parkville, Victoria, Australia) and separated over 136 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min with the following gradient: 2–6% Solvent B (7.5 min), 6-25% B (90 min), 25-40% B (30 min), 40-100% B (1 min), and 100% B (15 min). Solvent B consisted of 80% ACN, 0.2% formic acid. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution with a scan range from 400-1500 m/z, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection rate of 50 ms in Profile mode. Features were filtered for monoisotopic peaks with a charge state of 2-5 and a minimum intensity of 5e3, with dynamic exclusion set to exclude features after 1 time for 60 seconds with a 10-ppm mass tolerance. CID fragmentation was performed with collision energy of 35%, activation time of 10 ms, and activation Q of 0.25 after quadrupole isolation of features using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, an AGC target of 1e4, and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. MS2 scans were then acquired in the ion trap at rapid scan rate in Centroid mode. SPS-MS3 analysis was then performed with a precursor selection range of 400-1600 m/z and precursor ion exclusion tolerance of -50 m/z to +5 m/z. Up to 10 notches were selected using an MS2 isolation window of 3 m/z for HCD fragmentation with a collision energy of 65%, which were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 50k resolution with a scan range of 100-500, a maximum injection time of 500 ms, and an AGC target of 50k in Centroid mode. The total cycle time was set at 3 second.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics) and Uniprot proteome UP000001961 Synechococcus sp. (strain CC9311), representing the full genome and expressing 2882 proteins in total. Byonic search parameters were as follows: fully Tryptic peptides with no more than 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, CID low energy fragmentation, and a maximum of 2 common modifications and 2 rare modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) and TMT (+229.1629) addition to lysine and peptide N-termini were static modifications, while Methionine oxidation (Dynamic - common 2) and Met -> Hpg (Dynamic – rare 2) were set as variable modifications. Byonic protein-level FDR was set to 1%. Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed). Reporter ion quantification from ms3 spectra was based on S/N ratios, used a co-isolation threshold of 25%, an average reporter S/N threshold of 10, and SPS mass matches set at 0%. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount of all identified peptides. Peptide and PSM FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed), with peptide confidence at least medium, lower confidence peptides excluded, and minimum peptide length set at 6. Protein FDR validator node FDR was set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed). Strict parsimony principle was set to true. Proteins with less than 2 quantification points in each replicate were filtered out. Statistical analysis of quantified proteins was performed using the LIMMA moderated t-test (Smyth, 2005). Significant proteins in each pairwise comparison were determined by having an adjusted p-value less than or equal to 0.05 and a log2 fold-change of at least 1. Heat maps with significant proteins were generated in R (R Core Team, 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing the cell-level metabolic trade-offs that phytoplankton exhibit in response to changing environmental conditions is important for predicting the impact of these changes on marine food web dynamics and biogeochemical cycling. The time-selective proteome-labeling approach, bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT), has potential to provide insight into differential allocation of resources at the cellular level, especially when coupled with proteomics. However, the application of this technique in marine phytoplankton remains limited. We demonstrate that the marine cyanobacteria <i>Synechococcus</i> sp. and two groups of eukaryotic algae take up the modified amino acid l-homopropargylglycine (HPG), suggesting that BONCAT can be used to detect translationally active phytoplankton. However, the impact of HPG addition on growth dynamics varied between groups of phytoplankton. In addition, proteomic analysis of <i>Synechococcus</i> cells grown with HPG revealed a physiological shift in nitrogen metabolism, general protein stress, and energy production, indicating a potential limitation for the use of BONCAT in understanding the cell-level response of <i>Synechococcus</i> sp. to environmental change. Variability in HPG sensitivity between algal groups and the impact of HPG on <i>Synechococcus</i> physiology indicates that particular considerations should be taken when applying this technique to other marine taxa or mixed marine microbial communities. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Phytoplankton form the base of the marine food web and substantially impact global energy and nutrient flow. Marine picocyanobacteria of the genus <i>Synechococcus</i> comprise a large portion of phytoplankton biomass in the ocean and therefore are important model organisms. The technical challenges of environmental proteomics in mixed microbial communities have limited our ability to detect the cell-level adaptations of phytoplankton communities to a changing environment. The proteome labeling technique, bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT), has potential to address some of these challenges by simplifying proteomic analyses. This study explores the ability of marine phytoplankton to take up the modified amino acid, l-homopropargylglycine (HPG), required for BONCAT, and investigates the proteomic response of <i>Synechococcus</i> to HPG. We not only demonstrate that cyanobacteria can take up HPG but also highlight the physiological impact of HPG on <i>Synechococcus</i>, which has implications for future applications of this technique in the marine environment.

### Keywords
Synechococcus, Ncaas, Phytoplankton, Boncat

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125


