### Accession
PXD010761

### Title
Erastin and ferrostatin induced protein expression change in HepG2 cells

### Description
Project description: HepG2 cells were treated with DMSO, erastin and ferrostatin, respectively. Protein was extracted and separated using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. MS analysis was performed and protein was identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.3 software using the SEQUEST® search engine.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were cultured in DMEM, and treated with DMSO, erastin or ferrostatin. Cells were centrifuged and digested using Western/IP lysis buffer, and the supernatant was extracted. SDS-PAGE electrophoresis was performed to separate different protein components. Then protein was reduced using iodoacetamide, blocked using cysteine and digested using trypsin. TMT was labeled for the sample and protein was analyzed using MS analysis. Finally, protein was identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.3 software using the SEQUEST® search engine.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.3 software using the SEQUEST® search engine, constrained with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Furthermore, the dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.995) and static modifications of TMT at any Nterminus (+229.163 Da) as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021) were allowed. Data were searched against a Swiss-Prot complete database for Homo sapiens at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The TMT10 plex quantification method within Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software was used to calculate the reporter ratios with mass tolerance 10 ppm without applying the isotopic correction factors. The protein ratio was expressed as a median value of the ratios for all quantifiable spectra of the peptides relevant to the specific protein. The screening criteria of reliable proteins were as follows: unique peptide ≥1, removal of invalid values and antilibrary data, and screening of differentially expressed protein based on the reliable proteins. The screening criteria of differential proteins were as follows: fold change is 1.2 and p < 0.05 (t-test on data obtained from three experiments). Several changes >1.2 or <0.83 were considered to be differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis is an outcome of metabolic disorders and closely linked to liver cancer. However, the mechanism underlying the fine regulation of ferroptosis in liver cancer remains unclear. Here, we have identified two categories of genes: ferroptosis up-regulated factors (FUF) and ferroptosis down-regulated factors (FDF), which stimulate and suppress ferroptosis by affecting the synthesis of GSH. Furthermore, FUF are controlled by one transcription factor HIC1, while FDF controlled by another transcription factor HNF4A. Occurrence of ferroptosis might depend on the histone acetyltransferase KAT2B. Upon stimulation of ferroptosis, dissociation of KAT2B prevents HNF4A from binding to the FDF promoter. This effect happens prior to the recruitment of KAT2B to the FUF promoter, which facilitates HIC1 binding to transcribe FUF. Clinically, HIC1 and HNF4A conversely correlate with tumor stage in liver cancer. Patients with lower HIC1 and higher HNF4A exhibit poorer prognostic outcomes. Disrupting the balance between HIC1 and HNF4A might be helpful in treating liver cancer.

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Erastin, Ferroptosis

### Affiliations
tongji university
Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China

### Submitter
zhang xiao

### Lab Head
Dr zhang xiao
Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China


