### Accession
PXD016133

### Title
Elucidating the diverse roles of acetyl-CoA in the cytosol and mitochondrion of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Acetyl-CoA is a key metabolite in all organisms, implicated in transcriptional regulation, post-translational modification as well as fuelling the TCA cycle and the synthesis and elongation of fatty acids. The obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii possesses two enzymes which produce acetyl-CoA in the cytosol and nucleus: the acetyl-CoA synthase (ACS) and the ATP-citrate lyase (ACL), while the branched chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) generates acetyl-CoA in the mitochondrion. Given the diverse functions of acetyl-CoA, we know little about the specific roles of distinct sub-cellular acetyl-CoA pools and how these impact overall parasite physiology. To assess the broad functions of nucleo-cytosolic as well as mitochondrial acetyl-CoA, we analysed the acetylome and total proteome of parasites lacking ACL/ACS or BCKDH.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly egressed parasites were lysed in 8M urea, 50mM HEPES. Extracted proteins were reduced using 20mM of dithiothreitol for 1h at 37°C before alkylation with 55mM of iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 4M. Proteins were digested with LysC (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 during 4h at 37°C. The samples were diluted again using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 1M. Proteins were then digested with Trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were purified by C18 reverse phase chromatography (Sep-Pak C18, Waters) before drying down. For the comparison of the total proteomes of the ΔACL/iΔACS mutant strain and its parental RH ΔKU80 strain, the samples were further fractionated by tip-based strong cation exchange (3M Empore). Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and eluted in 4 fractions (F1: 100 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F2: 175 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F3: 375 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F4: 80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonium hydroxide) before desalting using C18 reverse phase chromatography (Ultra-Micro SpinColumns, Harvard Apparatus). Technical triplicates were performed. For enrichment of acetylated peptides, acetylated peptides, dried peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 20mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8). Acetylated peptides were mixed with anti–acetyl-lysine antibody immobilized on agarose beads (ImmuneChem-ICP0388) and incubated overnight at 4°C. Following incubation, the beads were washed twice with IP buffer, once with washing buffer (IP buffer without NP-40) and twice with ice cold milliQ water. Elution was performed using 0.1% TFA. Enriched peptides were then dried down. Three technical replicates were prepared from each sample. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a PepMap 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (2 μm, Thermo Scientific). The nanoLC methods consisted of 120 or 240 min gradients at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for analysis of respectively enriched acetylated peptides, strong cation exchange fractions, and unfractionated total proteome. Spray voltage was set at 1.6 kV and heated capillary was adjusted to 250-270°C.  For acetylome analyses, survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, with AGC target set to 106 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms) and with lock mass option activated. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (nce = 30) with a resolution of 17,500, with AGC target set to 106 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms). Analytical triplicates were acquired for the comparison of acetylomes between ΔBCKDH mutant strain and its parental RH ΔKU80 strain.  For total proteome analyses, survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, with AGC target set to 106 ions (maximum filling time 200 ms) and with lock mass option activated. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (nce = 30) with a resolution of 17,500, with AGC target set to 105 ions (maximum filling time 50 ms). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). Analytical quadruplicates were acquired for comparison of total proteomes of ΔBCKDH mutant strain and its parental RH ΔKU80 strain.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). Spectra were searched against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 30 downloaded from ToxoDB, the Swiss-Prot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 2017-08-24 version), the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant, and the corresponding reverse databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two or three missed cleavages were allowed for respectively total proteome and acetylome analyses. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at their default values. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) for total proteome analyses and Acetyl (K, variable) was added for acetylome analyses. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at PSM and site levels for acetylome analyses and at 0.01 at PSM, protein and site levels for total proteome analyses. The match between runs option was selected. For total proteome analyses, label‐free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Acetylome, Acetyl-coa, Nanolc-ms/ms, Metabolism

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


