### Accession
PXD007989

### Title
CHARACTERIZATION OF RABBIT (Oryctolagus cuniculus) SPERM PROTEINS

### Description
A greater understanding of the proteins involved in reproduction can benefit animal production. New advances in proteomics are having a major impact on our understanding of how spermatozoa acquire their capacity for fertilization [1]. Sperm proteomics aims at the identification of the proteins that compose the sperm cell and the study of their function [2].  The sperm cell is one of the most highly differentiated cells and is composed of a head with a highly compacted chromatin structure and a large flagellum with midpiece that contains the required machinery for movement and therefore to deliver the paternal genetic and epigenetic content to the oocyte [3]. By being so highly differentiated, spermatozoa are advantageous cells to study proteomics of specific compartments such as the membrane, which basically is the area of major importance for its role in interacting with the surroundings and the oocyte [4]. The fusion of a sperm and an oocyte is a sophisticated process that must be preceded by suitable changes in the sperm's membrane composition [5]. Recent studies of spermatozoa from the proteomic point of view have allowed the identification of different proteins in spermatozoa that are responsible for the regulation of normal/defective sperm functions [6].  While several techniques are available in proteomics, LC-MS based analysis of complex protein/peptide mixtures has turned out to be a mainstream analytical technique for quantitative proteomics [7]. Using this method, detailed proteomic data are now available for human [8], macaque [9,10], mouse [11], rat [12], bull [13-15], stallion [16], fruit fly [17], Caenorhabditis elegans [18], carp [19], rainbow trout [20], mussel [21], ram [22], honeybee [23] and rooster [24] sperm membrane proteins.  Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) is an important mammalian species worldwide, being at the same time of commercial interest and a research model animal. European rabbit meat production is approximately 500 thousand tons, corresponding to a 30% share of world production [25]. Besides, rabbits account for the seventh highest number of animals slaughtered per year in the European Union-27, with 347,603 × 1000 head in 2014 [26]. In a previous work, we identified and quantified rabbit seminal plasma proteins between two different genotypes [27], concluding the clear effect of genotype in the abundance of certain seminal plasma proteins. However, it is unknown at present whether these differences also exist at sperm proteome level. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to characterise rabbit sperm membrane proteins through NanoLC-MS/MS analysis focusing on the influence of the genetic origin.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Semen collection, evaluation and sperm samples preparation  Semen samples were obtained by artificial vagina and collected into a sterile tube. One ejaculate was collected per male and week. Collections were performed on the same day of the week during two months. For each genotype, one pooled sample each week was selected to develop the experiment. A total of 6 pools (3 for each genetic line) were analysed. Routine diagnostic semen analyses were performed to assess the initial seminal quality. Only ejaculates exhibiting a white colour and possessing motility rate higher than 70% were used in the experiment. The volume (mL) of each ejaculate was measured in a graduated conical tube. A 20 µL aliquot was diluted 1:50 with 0.25% glutaraldehyde solution to calculate the concentration in a Thoma chamber and the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa or spermatozoa with normal apical ridge (NAR) by phase contrast at a magnification of 400X. The motility characteristics of sperm (percentage of total and progressively motile sperm, evaluated using a computer-assisted sperm analysis system) were determined as described by Viudes de Castro et al. [28]. Then, ejaculates from the same genotype were pooled each day as a single sample. Each sperm sample was centrifuged at 7,400 x g for 10 min at 22 ºC. The resulting pellets were washed twice by centrifugation at 900 x g for 10 min in PBS. Sperm proteins were extracted according to Casares-Crespo et al. [29] protocol with few modifications. Briefly, sperm pellets were resuspended in 1% SDS (w/v) in TCG (Tris-citrate-glucose supplemented with a 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated on ice 6 times for 5 s at 30% amplitude using an Ultrasonic Lab Homogenizer UP 100 H (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH). After sonication, the solution was kept in ice for 15 min and centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 x g at 4ºC. Protein lysates were stored at -80ºC until analysis. Before the proteomic analysis, total protein concentration was quantified in triplicate by the bicinchoninic acid method (BCA) using BSA as standard protein [30] and seminal samples were adjusted to 5 µg/µL in saline.   2.3 In-gel digestion  The proteomic analysis was performed in the proteomics facility of SCSIE University of Valencia that belongs to ProteoRed, PRB2-ISCIII, supported by grant PT13/0001. Thirty µg of total protein was loaded onto a 1-D SDS PAGE gel but not resolved. The entire sample was cut and analyzed as a single band. Samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere [31]. Six hundred ng of trypsin in 100 µL of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) solution was used for each sample. The digestion was stopped with trifluoroacetic acid (Fisher Scientific; 1% final concentration); a double extraction with acetonitrile (ACN) (Fisher Scientific) was done and all the peptide solutions were dried in a rotatory evaporator. The final mixture was resuspended with 30 µL of 2% ACN; 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  2.4 Nano LC-MS/MS analysis Three µL of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5mm long; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µL/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µm particles size C18-CL, 75µm diameter x 12cm long, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5% to 35% of solvent B in A for 60 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Eluted peptides were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired from 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Up to 25 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The system sensitivity was controlled with 2 fmol of 6 proteins mixture (LC Packings). Samples were injected in a random order.

### Data Protocol
The SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot v5.0 was used to search UniProt_mammals’ protein database (22/06/2017) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, taxonomy restricted, FDR calculation and the search effort set to through. For building the spectra library all the files combined were searched with the parameters previously used.  To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins are grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm. A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro Group is guided entirely by observed peptides only. Since the observed peptides are actually determined from experimentally acquired spectra, the grouping can be considered to be guided by usage of spectra. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data. Only peptide and protein identifications with ≥ 95% Confidence (unused Score ≥ 1.3) were validated. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least two identified peptides.  2.6 Label-free protein quantification using Chromatographic Areas  For quantification, the group file generated by Protein Pilot was used. The ions areas were extracted from the wiff files obtained from LC-MS/MS experiment by Peak View® v1.1. Only peptides assigned with confidence ≥ 95%, among those without modifications or shared by different proteins were extracted. A total of 6 samples were analysed and 488 proteins were quantified.   2.7 Bioinformatics analysis Gene names of the proteins were obtained from UniProt database by running a Retrieve/ID mapping tool of the protein accession numbers. Gene ontology terms for biological process, molecular function and cellular component were obtained using PANTHER v12.0 (http://www.pantherdb.org/ accessed on 16/08/2017) [33]. Gene names of all sperm proteins were used to search against the panther database with Homo sapiens as the organism to maximise classifications, and a PANTHER™ Go Slim analysis was performed for each category.

### Publication Abstract
The present study was conducted to characterise rabbit sperm proteins focusing on the influence of the genetic origin. Six samples were recovered during two months from five males from genotype A (New Zealand White origin) and five from genotype R (California origin). Sperm proteins were extracted and subjected to in-gel digestion nano LC-MS/MS and bioinformatics analysis. The resulting library included 487 identified proteins validated with &#x2265;95% Confidence (unused Score&#x202f;&#x2265;&#x202f;1.3). All the identified proteins belonged to Oryctolagus cuniculus taxonomy. These data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007989. Only 7 proteins were specifically implicated in reproductive processes according to Gene Ontology annotation. Regarding the comparison of the sperm proteins abundance between genotypes, forty proteins were differentially expressed. Among them, 25 proteins were over-expressed in genotype A, while 15 proteins were over-expressed in genotype R. In conclusion, this study characterizes for the first time rabbit sperm proteins and provides evidence that genotype is related to a specific abundance of spermatozoa proteins.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Rabbit, Proteome, Genotype

### Affiliations
Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), Polígono La Esperanza nº 100, 12400 Segorbe, Castellón, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr María Pilar Viudes-de-Castro
Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), Polígono La Esperanza nº 100, 12400 Segorbe, Castellón, Spain


