### Accession
PXD010922

### Title
Zebrafish 24hpf whole embryo MZezh2mutant

### Description
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors important to maintain cell identity during embryonic development. Ezh2, the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2, is responsible for placing the epigenetic repressive mark histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). In contrast to results in mouse models, zebrafish embryos mutant for both maternal and zygotic ezh2 (MZezh2) can form a normal body plan at 1 day post fertilization (dpf) but die at 2 dpf, exhibiting pleiotropic phenotypes. To elucidate the specificity of PcG-mediated repression during early zebrafish development, we conducted in depth analysis of the transcriptome, epigenome, and proteome of the MZezh2 mutant embryos at 1 dpf. We found that, despite modifications in the epigenetic landscape, transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed only minor changes in gene and protein expression levels.

### Sample Protocol
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors important to maintain cell identity during embryonic development. Ezh2, the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2, is responsible for placing the epigenetic repressive mark histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). In contrast to results in mouse models, zebrafish embryos mutant for both maternal and zygotic ezh2 (MZezh2) can form a normal body plan at 1 day post fertilization (dpf) but die at 2 dpf, exhibiting pleiotropic phenotypes. To elucidate the specificity of PcG-mediated repression during early zebrafish development, we conducted in depth analysis of the transcriptome, epigenome, and proteome of the MZezh2 mutant embryos at 1 dpf. We found that, despite modifications in the epigenetic landscape, transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed only minor changes in gene and protein expression levels. Protocol At 24 hpf, 50 embryos were collected, resuspended by gently pipetting in 500 µl deyolking buffer(1/2 Ginzburg Fish Ringer without Calcium: 55 mM NaCl, 1.8 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaHCO3, 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma), and incubated for 5 minutes in a Thermomixer at RT at 1100 rpm to disrupt the yolk. The samples were then centrifuged for 30 seconds at 400 g and the pellet was washed two times in 0.5 ml wash buffer (110 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM KCl, 2.7 mM CaCl2, 10mM Tris/Cl pH8.5, 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma) for 2 minutes in a Thermomixer at RT and 1100 rpm, followed by 30 second centrifugation at 30 seconds. Washed pellets were lysed in 100 µl RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% DOC, 20% glycerol, 1 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktails from Sigma) and sonicated for 2 cycles of 15s ON and 15s OFF on full power at 4°C on a Bioruptor (Diagenode). Samples were incubated for 1 hour on a rotating wheel at 4°C and centrifuged 10 minutes at 12000g and 4°C. Supernatant was flash frozen and stored at -80°C. After Bradford analysis, 100 µg protein lysate was used for FASP-SAX and experiment was performed in triplicate for each condition. In brief, after overnight trypsin digestion, peptides were eluted from a Centricon filter (MERCK Millipore, 30kDa cut off) in 50mM AmmoniumBiCarbonate solution. 140ul of Britton& Robinson (BR) buffer (containing 20mM CH3COOH, 20mM H3PO4, 20mM H3BO3, pH 11 and 10ul of 1M NaOH) was added to the digest. The peptides were then loaded on a pipet tip-based strong anion exchange (SAX) column equilibrated with BR buffer to pH 11. The FT was collected and the sax column was stepwise eluted using B&R buffer at different pH (11, 8, 5 and 2). The obtained peptide fractions (five in total) were then desalted and purified using STAGE-tips  The peptide samples were separated on an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) connected online to a Thermo scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The five fractions were separated using a 240min acetonitrile gradient (5-23%, 8-27%, 9-30%, 11-32% and 14-32% for FT, pH 11, 8, 5 and 2, respectively). MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded in a top speed modus with a run cycle of 3s. MS/MS spectra were recorded using Higher- energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation .

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the MAXQuant software version 1.6.0.1. For the  data analysis, default settings were used (Deamidation (NQ) was included as variable modification in the search) and match between runs and Ibaq were enabled. Data was searched against the Danio Rerio data base (uniprot June 2017). Differential expression of protein between conditions was assessed with DEP version 1.2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors that are important regulators of cell fate during embryonic development. Among them, Ezh2 is responsible for catalyzing the epigenetic repressive mark H3K27me3 and is essential for animal development. The ability of zebrafish embryos lacking both maternal and zygotic <i>ezh2</i> to form a normal body plan provides a unique model for comprehensively studying Ezh2 function during early development in vertebrates. By using a multi-omics approach, we found that Ezh2 is required for the deposition of H3K27me3 and is essential for proper recruitment of Polycomb group protein Rnf2. However, despite the complete absence of PcG-associated epigenetic mark and proteins, only minor changes in H3K4me3 deposition and gene and protein expression occur. These changes were mainly due to local dysregulation of transcription factors outside their normal expression boundaries. Altogether, our results in zebrafish show that Polycomb-mediated gene repression is important immediately after the body plan is formed to maintain spatially restricted expression profiles of transcription factors, and we highlight the differences that exist in the timing of PcG protein action between vertebrate species.

### Keywords
Embryo, 24hpf, Zebrafish, Ezh2

### Affiliations
Radboud University/ Radboud UMC, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
Radboud University/Radboud UMC, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Leonie Kamminga

### Lab Head
Dr Leonie Kamminga
Radboud University/Radboud UMC, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands


