### Accession
PXD005039

### Title
Stress-induced interactome of the O-GlcNAcase by SILAC-BioID-MS/MS

### Description
O-linked-β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) dynamically modifies and regulates thousands of nuclear, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial proteins. Cellular stress, including oxidative stress, results in increased O-GlcNAcylation on numerous proteins and this is thought to promote cell survival. The mechanisms by which the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and the O-GlcNAcase (OGA), the enzymes that add and remove O-GlcNAc respectively, are regulated leading to oxidative stress-induced changes in O-GlcNAcylation are not fully characterized. Here, we demonstrate that oxidative stress leads to elevated O-GlcNAc levels in U2OS cells, but has little impact on the activity of OGT. In contrast, the expression and activity of OGA are enhanced. We hypothesized that protein interactors of OGA may control the local activity or substrate targeting of this enzyme, resulting in stress-induced elevations of O-GlcNAc. We utilized the BioID proximity biotinylation technique in combination with Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino Acids in Cell culture (SILAC) to define the basal and oxidative stress-dependent interactomes of OGA. Our study revealed 90 OGA-interacting partners, many of which exhibit increased binding upon oxidative stress. The associations of OGA with fatty acid synthase (FAS), filamin-A, heat shock cognate 70 kDa protein, and OGT were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. The pool of OGA bound to FAS demonstrates a substantial (~85%) reduction in catalytic activity, suggesting that FAS is an inhibitor of OGA. Consistent with this observation, FAS overexpression augments stress-induced O-GlcNAcylation. Together, these data suggest that O-GlcNAcylation may be one downstream effector of FAS that fine-tunes the cell’s response to stress and injury.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the proteins bound by OGA in basal and oxidatively stressed cells, we performed two SILAC-based proteomic experiments using BioID. In all cases, the heavy (H) SILAC-labeled U2OS cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1, and the light (L) and medium (M) labeled U2OS cells were transfected with OGA-mBirA-HA (Experiment 1) or Myc-mBirA-OGA (Experiment 2). Following transient transfection, biotinylation was stimulated and the cells were treated with vehicle (medium SILAC label) or 2 h H2O2 (light SILAC label) prior to harvesting. SILAC-labeled proteins were extracted in denaturing TCL buffer and combined in equal amounts. Biotinylated proteins in the 1:1:1 extract mixture were enriched using NeutrAvidin-agarose, eluted with SDS (95°C), and precipitated twice with acetone to remove free SDS. Acetone protein pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) pH 7.8 and 1 μL of 1% Protease Max (Promega) and sonicated for 15 min. The sample was then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively, and digested with a Trypsin/LysC mixture (V5071; Promega). The resulting peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 50 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Subsequently, bRP micro-scale fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 capLC system with a multi-wavelength detector. Fractionation was performed at 5 μL/min on a 300 μm inner diameter (I.D.) fused silica column self-packed with Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 RP resin (3.5 μm, 130A; Milford, MA), and fractions were collected at 2 min intervals with a Probot (LC Packings) fraction collector (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). After loading for 12 min onto the column, a gradient from 0-30% (v/v) mobile phase A (10 mM TEAB) to B (90% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 10 mM TEAB) was performed over a 50 min time interval before ramping to 100% (v/v) B over 10 min, and then holding for an additional 10 min. Fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide fractions from bRP chromatography were injected onto a 2 cm desalting trap column packed with YMC C18 material (75 μm I.D., 5–15 μm, 120 A; Allentown, PA) at 5 μL/min for 6 min before being eluted onto an analytical column packed with Michrom Magic C18 (75 μm × 15 cm, 5 μm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) using a nanoAquity nanoLC system (Waters, MA) with a nanoflow solvent delivery of 300 nL/min. Each sample was separated on a 90 min gradient (5%–90% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formate) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized via emitter tip (10 μm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 2.2 kV electrospray voltage into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 15” method operating in FT-FT acquisition mode. Precursor ions were scanned between m/z (mass/charge) 350–1800 Da at 70,000 resolution with a target maximum of 3e6 ions. Fragment ions (MS/MS scans) were analyzed at 17,500 resolution with a target of 1e5 ions. Maximum injection times for the precursor and fragment ions were set to 100 and 250 milliseconds, respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2e4 counts. An isolation width and offset of 2.0 Da and 0.5 Da, respectively, were used to perform high-energy collision induced dissociation fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27. The polysiloxane background peak at 371.101230 m/z was used as a lock mass for each scan to maintain mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were determined using a 30 parts per million precursor ion tolerance, a 0.05 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Methylthio modification of cysteine residues was considered a static modification, while oxidation of methionine, biotinylation of lysine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. For the SILAC labeling, variable modifications included lysine (2H4 and 13C615N2) and arginine (13C6 and 13C615N4) (Light: no labels; Medium: Arg6, Lys4; Heavy: Arg10, Lys8). Spectra files (*.RAW) were searched through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot algorithm (V2.1, Matrix Sciences, United Kingdom) against the RefSeq2014 human database. The data were processed through the Xtract and MS2 processor nodes together with an unaltered search, and the combined searches were processed through Percolator node (Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA) for FDR estimation. Raw protein and peptide identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.05 (5% FDR) and a peptide rank of 1 within Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
The dynamic post-translational modification <i>O-</i>linked &#x3b2;-<i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine (<i>O</i>-GlcNAc) regulates thousands of nuclear, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial proteins. Cellular stress, including oxidative stress, results in increased <i>O-</i>GlcNAcylation of numerous proteins, and this increase is thought to promote cell survival. The mechanisms by which the <i>O-</i>GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and the <i>O-</i>GlcNAcase (OGA), the enzymes that add and remove <i>O-</i>GlcNAc, respectively, are regulated during oxidative stress to alter <i>O-</i>GlcNAcylation are not fully characterized. Here, we demonstrate that oxidative stress leads to elevated <i>O-</i>GlcNAc levels in U2OS cells but has little impact on the activity of OGT. In contrast, the expression and activity of OGA are enhanced. We hypothesized that this seeming paradox could be explained by proteins that bind to and control the local activity or substrate targeting of OGA, thereby resulting in the observed stress-induced elevations of <i>O-</i>GlcNAc. To identify potential protein partners, we utilized BioID proximity biotinylation in combination with <u>s</u>table <u>i</u>sotopic <u>l</u>abeling of <u>a</u>mino acids in <u>c</u>ell culture (SILAC). This analysis revealed 90 OGA-interacting partners, many of which exhibited increased binding to OGA upon stress. The associations of OGA with fatty acid synthase (FAS), filamin-A, heat shock cognate 70-kDa protein, and OGT were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. The pool of OGA bound to FAS demonstrated a substantial (&#x223c;85%) reduction in specific activity, suggesting that FAS inhibits OGA. Consistent with this observation, FAS overexpression augmented stress-induced <i>O-</i>GlcNAcylation. Although the mechanism by which FAS sequesters OGA remains unknown, these data suggest that FAS fine-tunes the cell's response to stress and injury by remodeling cellular <i>O-</i>GlcNAcylation.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Mgea5, Fasn, O-glcnac, Glycosylation, Silac

### Affiliations
The Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205-2185, USA, Telephone: (410) 955-7049; Fax: (410) 955-5759
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Jennifer Groves

### Lab Head
Dr Natasha Elizabeth Zachara
The Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205-2185, USA, Telephone: (410) 955-7049; Fax: (410) 955-5759


