### Accession
PXD015482

### Title
Lysine acetylation in human fecal microbiome

### Description
This study characterized the lysine acetylome in human gut microbiome samples. Briefly, the microbial peptides obtained from human mcirobiome cells were used for lysine acetylated peptide enrichment using anti-acetyl-lysine (Kac) antibody cocktail; the enriched Kac peptides were then identified and quantified using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The fresh stool sample was subjected to differential centrifugation and wash . The resulting microbial pellets were then subjected to protein extraction and protein lysates were then precipitated and washed three times by ice-cold acetone. The resulting proteins were then re-suspended in 6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for proteolytic digestion using trypsin and lys-C. The resulting digests were then subjected to desalting using C18 column. A small portion of the proteolytic peptides from each sample was used for metaproteomic analysis (directly load for MS analysis), and the remainder was used for Kac peptide enrichment followed by measurement with mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
The metaproteomic data processing, protein identification and quantification were performed using our previously established MetaPro-IQ approach and MetaLab software tool. The lysine acetylomic data processing were performed using an new approach established in the current study.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac), an abundant post-translational modification (PTM) in prokaryotes, regulates various microbial metabolic pathways. However, no studies have examined protein Kac at the microbiome level, and it remains unknown whether Kac level is altered in patient microbiomes. Herein, we use a peptide immuno-affinity enrichment strategy coupled with mass spectrometry to characterize protein Kac in the microbiome, which successfully identifies 35,200 Kac peptides from microbial or human proteins in gut microbiome samples. We demonstrate that Kac is widely distributed in gut microbial metabolic pathways, including anaerobic fermentation to generate short-chain fatty acids. Applying to the analyses of microbiomes of patients with Crohn's disease identifies 52 host and 136 microbial protein Kac sites that are differentially abundant in disease versus controls. This microbiome-wide acetylomic approach aids in advancing functional microbiome research.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Lysine acetylation, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


