### Accession
PXD002624

### Title
In vivo protein-protein interaction in C. elegans early embryos

### Description
We combine in vivo expressed GFP-tagged proteins with quantitative proteomics to identify protein-protein interactions of selected key proteins involved in early C. elegans embryogenesis. Co-affinity purification of interaction partners for eight bait proteins resulted in a pilot in vivo interaction map of proteins with a focus on early development.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos were freshly harvested in biological triplicate from young gravid hermaphrodites. Lysates were splitted by half into either the anti-GFP agarose beads or the blocked control beads. Samples were measured by LC-MS/MS and quantified using label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm of MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The LFQ abundance ratio was calculated for each protein between the GFP pull-downs and the controls. Significance of the enrichment was measured by two-sample Student’s t-test assuming equal variances. Specific interaction partners were then determined in a volcano plot where a combined threshold (hyperbolic curve) was set based on a modified t-statistic.

### Publication Abstract
Studying protein interactions in whole organisms is fundamental to understanding development. Here, we combine in vivo expressed GFP-tagged proteins with quantitative proteomics to identify protein-protein interactions of selected key proteins involved in early C. elegans embryogenesis. Co-affinity purification of interaction partners for eight bait proteins resulted in a pilot in vivo interaction map of proteins with a focus on early development. Our network reflects known biology and is highly enriched in functionally relevant interactions. To demonstrate the utility of the map, we looked for new regulators of P granule dynamics and found that GEI-12, a novel binding partner of the DYRK family kinase MBK-2, is a key regulator of P granule formation and germline maintenance. Our data corroborate a recently proposed model in which the phosphorylation state of GEI-12 controls P granule dynamics. In addition, we find that GEI-12 also induces granule formation in mammalian cells, suggesting a common regulatory mechanism in worms and humans. Our results show that in vivo interaction proteomics provides unique insights into animal development.

### Keywords
C. elegans

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine


