### Accession
PXD037867

### Title
MYT1L haploinsufficiency in human neurons and mice causes autism-associated phenotypes that can be reversed by genetic and pharmacologic intervention

### Description
MYT1L is an autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-associated transcription factor that is expressed in virtually all neurons throughout life. How MYT1L mutations cause neurological phenotypes and whether they can be targeted remains enigmatic. Here, we examine the effects of MYT1L deficiency in human neurons and mice. Mutant mice exhibit neurodevelopmental delays with thinner cortices, behavioural phenotypes, and gene expression changes that resemble those of ASD patients. MYT1L target genes, including WNT and NOTCH, are activated upon MYT1L depletion and their chemical inhibition can rescue delayed neurogenesis in vitro. MYT1L deficiency also causes upregulation of the main cardiac sodium channel, SCN5A, and neuronal hyperactivity, which could be restored by shRNA-mediated knockdown of SCN5A or MYT1L overexpression in postmitotic neurons. Acute application of the sodium channel blocker, lamotrigine, also rescued electrophysiologic defects in vitro and behaviour phenotypes in vivo. Hence, MYT1L mutation causes both developmental and postmitotic neurological defects. However, acute intervention can normalise resulting electrophysiological and behavioural phenotypes in adulthood.

### Sample Protocol
: For each immunoprecipitation, one hemisphere of P0 mice was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen tissue was lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer containing (in mM): 0.5% Tween-20, 50 Tris pH 7.5, 2 EDTA, 1 DTT, 1 PMSF, 5 NaF (all from Sigma), and complete protease inhibitor (Roche) for 15 min at 4 °C and processed for MYT1L immunoprecipitation as described previously29. Bound proteins were enzymatically digested and peptides were resolved using the Easy NanoLC1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 5μm, 100 Å, 100μm x 2cm) and an analytical column (nanoEase M/Z Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm) followed by mass spectrometric analysis (Fusion Orbitrap; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were introduced to the mass spectrometer via a Sharp Singularity Emitter 365 μm OD x 20 μm ID, length of 8 cm (Fossiliontech) and a nano-source spray voltage of 2 kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. Full scan MS1 spectra were acquired within the range (m/z) of 375-1500 in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 120000. The maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and automatic gain control target (AGC) to 1x106 ions. The most abundant ions within a 3 sec cycle time window were selected for fragmentation. Ions with unassigned charges and charges of 1 or >5 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 sec with a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm. For the MS2 scans the quadrupole was used with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. For peptide fragmentation higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used at 33%. MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap that was operated in the rapid ion scan rate with an AGC target of 1x104 ions or a maximum injection of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired as centroid data type.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Maxquant software 2 (version 1.6.17.0). The search was performed against the mouse Uniprot canonical database (downloaded 04/2019) containing only reviewed entries. Enzyme digestion in Maxquant settings was set to Trypsin allowing for maximum of up to 3 missed-cleavages. Protein N-term acetylation, methionine oxidation, deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Minimum unique peptides option was set to 1. Match between runs was enabled by setting the match time window at 0.4 min. Both intensity-based absolute quantification and label free quantification values were calculated. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Second peptide search for the identification of the chimeric MS2 spectra was enabled. All other Maxquant options were left to their default settings. Maxquant output tables were analysed with Microsoft Excel and R statistical software environment version 4.0.3

### Publication Abstract
MYT1L is an autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-associated transcription factor that is expressed in virtually all neurons throughout life. How MYT1L mutations cause neurological phenotypes and whether they can be targeted remains enigmatic. Here, we examine the effects of MYT1L deficiency in human neurons and mice. Mutant mice exhibit neurodevelopmental delays with thinner cortices, behavioural phenotypes, and gene expression changes that resemble those of ASD patients. MYT1L target genes, including WNT and NOTCH, are activated upon MYT1L depletion and their chemical inhibition can rescue delayed neurogenesis in vitro. MYT1L deficiency also causes upregulation of the main cardiac sodium channel, SCN5A, and neuronal hyperactivity, which could be restored by shRNA-mediated knockdown of SCN5A or MYT1L overexpression in postmitotic neurons. Acute application of the sodium channel blocker, lamotrigine, also rescued electrophysiological defects in vitro and behaviour phenotypes in vivo. Hence, MYT1L mutation causes both developmental and postmitotic neurological defects. However, acute intervention can normalise resulting electrophysiological and behavioural phenotypes in adulthood.

### Keywords
Autism, Human neurons, Myt1l

### Affiliations
Division head B230 Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer
Post-Doctoral Scientist

### Submitter
Dimitris Papageorgiou

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division head B230 Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer


