### Accession
PXD033425

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Mycobacterial Biofilm Matrix and Development of Biofilm-binding Synthetic Nanobodies

### Description
Tissue-penetrating nanobodies as drug-delivery vehicles have shown efficacy in treating hard-to-reach and -treat diseases. The present study reports nanobodies with application potential in the treatment of tuberculosis (TB), especially the antibiotic tolerant biofilms that form in TB granulomas. Using Mycobacterium marinum (Mmr) as a model pathogen, we identified the most abundant matrix proteins in cultured biofilms and granuloma biofilms from infected zebrafish, and used them as targets to produce synthetic nanobodies (sybodies). Surface-exposed proteins on Mmr biofilms were identified using a combination of in vitro cell surface biotinylation proteomics andex vivo proteomics on granulomas extracted from Mmr-infected adult zebrafish. We identified a total of 3080 and 41 mycobacterial biofilm matrix-associated proteins by in vitro and ex vivo proteomics, respectively. The molecular chaperones GroEL1 and GroEL2 were identified in both datasets, and fulfilled the criteria of  ideal nanobody targets. We created sybodies against GroEL1 and GroEL2, and showed that they bind the intact in vitro and ex vivo Mmr-biofilms. Taken together, the present study reports a proof-of-concept showing that biotinylation proteomics of biofilms complemented with ex vivo proteomics of granuloma biofilms is a valuable strategy to uncover optimal nanobody targets within the biofilm matrix. Nanobody-based strategies have great potential to provide new and much-needed solutions for more effective treatment of tuberculosis, as well asother chronic biofilm infections with increased antibiotic tolerance and high risk for emerging antibiotic resistance

### Sample Protocol
: Samples for in vitro surface biotinylation proteromics were processed using an on-bead digestion protocol. Streptavidin beads with captured biotin labeled proteins were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, then reduced using 10 mM DTT and alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide. Protein samples were digested using 1 µg trypsin (Promega), incubated overnight at 37 °C. Following digestion, samples were acidified and desalted using homemade C18 stage tips. Peptides were eluted from stage tips using 50% ACN/0.1% FA, dried to completion by speed vacuum, and resuspended in 0.1% FA. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoElute nanoflow ultrahigh pressure LC system coupled to a timsTOF fleX mass spectrometer. Samples for ex vivo proteomics of granulomas were processed as follows. Granulomas were suspended in 100 - 200 µL of 0.1% RapiGest (w/v) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5). The samples were incubated at 95 °C for 10 min to inactivate potential proteolytic enzymes. Next, acid-washed glass beads corresponding to 25 uL were added onto the granulomas and the samples were subjected to mechanistic beating with speed set at level 6 and three cycles (30 sec each) in a FastPrep-24TM. The homogenates were incubated for an additional 60 min at room temperature to enhance protein solubilization. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 45 min at 60 °C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 60 min at room temperature (RT) and quenched with 20 mM DTT. Next, the pH of the proteins in each sample was adjusted to pH~8.0 with 1M TEAB if necessary. Trypsin/Lys-C Mix was added to each sample at a 25:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w). Samples were gently mixed and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestions were stopped by adding trifluoroacetate (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.6 % (v/v), the peptides were purified using C18 microcolumns and dried. Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and submitted to an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-LC system coupled with a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive PlusTM) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files generated from both the in vitro and ex vivo proteomic approaches were searched with the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.1.0 for in vitro data, v.1.6.1.0 for ex vivo data) using the Uniprot mycobacterium marinum database (both datasets) and the Uniprot zebrafish (Danio rerio) database (ex vivo granuloma database only). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, whilst methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modifications. A first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerances of 10 ppm (in vitro data) or 4.5 ppm (ex vivo data) were used. Trypsin without the proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptide number was set to 1, and the FDR was set to 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Sybody, Biotinylation, Surface proteome, Proteomics, Synthetic nanobody, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, FI-33014, Tampere University, Finland
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Mataleena Parikka
Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, FI-33014, Tampere University, Finland


