### Accession
PXD002420

### Title
Shotgun metaproteomic profiling of biomimetic anaerobic digestion processes treating sewage sludge

### Description
Two parallel anaerobic digestion lines were designed to match a "bovid-like" digestive structure. Each of the lines consisted of two Continuous Stirred Tank Reactors placed in series and separated by an acidic treatment step. The first line was inoculated with industrial inocula whereas the second was seeded with cow digestive tract contents. After three month of continuous sewage sludge feeding, samples were recovered for shotgun metaproteomic and DNA-based analysis. Strikingly, protein inferred and 16S rDNA tags based taxonomic community profiles were not fully consistent. Principal Component analysis however revealed a similar clustering pattern of the samples, suggesting that reproducible methodological and/or biological factors underlie this observation. The performances of the two digestion lines did not differ significantly and the cow derived inocula did not establish in the reactors. A low throughput metagenomic dataset (3.4x106 reads, 1.1 Gb) was also generated for one of the samples. It allowed a substantial increase of the analysis depth (increase of the spectral identification rate). For the first time, a high level of proteins expressed by members of the "Candidatus Competibacter" group is reported in an anaerobic digester, a key microbial player in environmental bioprocess communities.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 0.4g pellets (wet) with a phenol extraction protocol adapted from Hanreich et al, 2012 (Canadian Journal of Microbiology). Briefly, the lysis was performed by bead beating followed by ultrasonication. After phenol extraction, proteins were precipitated with a cold solution of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. After several washes of the protein pellets with 0.1M ammonium acetate solution in methanol and acetone, the pellets were dried and suspended in R-UTSCHAPS buffer (Urea 7M, Thiourea 2M, 4% w/v CHAPS). Protein concentrations were determined using the Agilent High Sensitivity Protein 250 kit (Agilent Technologies). For each sample, 28.7 µg of proteins were fixed in a SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Mini Gels, Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that the migration was modified to 100 V, 5-10 min. This very short duration migration was intended to fix the whole protein sample in a small gel region to subsequently perform shotgun MS/MS analyses. The gel was stained with a classical procedure (SimplyBlue SafeStain, Life Technologies). The gel regions containing the proteins (as visualized by the staining) were cut into fragments of roughly 5 mm x 5 mm. For each gel fragment, reduction and alkylation and tryptic digestion were classically performed. For each sample, the different tryptic peptide liquid fractions obtained from a same gel track were pooled. 4 μl of the obtained tryptic peptide liquid mixtures were analyzed by shotgun liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive raw files were converted to mzXML files using ProteoWizard 3.0.3768. For the 5 metaproteomes (corresponding to samples “RU”, “CO”, “R4”, “R1”, "Sludge"), protein identification was performed with X!TandemPipeline 3.3.4 (PAPPSO platform, INRA, http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline) using X!Tandem software (X! tandem CYCLONE 2013.02.01.1). Different reference databases were used independantly. A two-step database search was performed using the archaeal and bacterial protein sequences of UniprotKB (SWISS-PROT + TrEMBL) downloaded on the 26th of May, 2015 (http://uniprot.org). It was followed by a new search on a more specific database to improve the identification (UniprotKB protein sequences corresponding to the main phyla, families, orders, etc identified during the first search, downloaded on the 27th of May, 2015). Another independent idenfication was performed against a database prepared from the shotgun metagenome of the sample "RU": coding regions were identified from the trimmed reads and the assembled contigs, and pooled together to create the reference database. In each case, an in-home main database of classical contaminants (trypsin, keratins, ... total of 58 proteins) was simultaneously employed. Moreover, a protein reverse decoy database was included to estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR). Parsing and filtering of the identification results were subsequently performed with X!tandem pipeline 3.3.4. A minimum of two different peptides with an e-value lower than 0.01 (Uniprot database) or 0.05 (metagenome database) and a protein e-value lower than 0.01 were required for validation.

### Publication Abstract
Two parallel anaerobic digestion lines were designed to match a "bovid-like" digestive structure. Each of the lines consisted of two continuous stirred tank reactors placed in series and separated by an acidic treatment step. The first line was inoculated with industrial inocula whereas the second was seeded with cow digestive tract contents. After 3 months of continuous sewage sludge feeding, samples were recovered for shotgun metaproteomic and DNA-based analysis. Strikingly, protein-inferred and 16S ribosomal DNA tags based taxonomic community profiles were not consistent. PCA however revealed a similar clustering pattern of the samples, suggesting that reproducible methodological and/or biological factors underlie this observation. The performances of the two digestion lines did not differ significantly and the cow-derived inocula did not establish in the reactors. A low throughput metagenomic dataset (3.4&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10(6) reads, 1.1 Gb) was also generated for one of the samples. It allowed a substantial increase of the analysis depth (11 vs. 4% of spectral identification rate for the combined samples). Surprisingly, a high proportion of proteins from members of the "Candidatus Competibacter" group, a key microbial player usually found in activated sludge plants, was retrieved in our anaerobic digester samples. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002420 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002420).

### Keywords
Two-stage system, Q-exactive, Animal mimicry, Cow digestive tracts, Anaerobic digestion, Candidatus competibacter

### Affiliations
Irstea
Hydrosystems and bioprocesses unit research (HBAN), Environmental Technologies Department, Irstea, France

### Submitter
Ariane Bize

### Lab Head
Dr Théodore Bouchez
Hydrosystems and bioprocesses unit research (HBAN), Environmental Technologies Department, Irstea, France


