### Accession
PXD012149

### Title
Succinylome analysis reveals the involvement of lysine succinylation in extreme resistance of Deinococcus radiodurans

### Description
Increasing evidences showing that succinylation of lysine residue mainly regulates enzymes involved in the carbon metabolism pathway, both in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Deinococcus radiodurans is one of the most radioresistant organisms on earth, which is famous for its robust resistance. A major goal in the current study of protein succinylation is to explore its function in D. radiodurans. We used high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for qualitative proteomics to perform a global succinylation analysis of D. radiodurans and identified 492 succinylation sites on 270 proteins. These identified proteins are involved in a variety of biological process and pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental design and statistical rationale The aim of this study was to explore the succinylome of Deincoccus radiodurans. Whole proteome of Deincoccus radiodurans wild type strain R1 was extracted, digested and enriched with anti-succinyllysine antibody, followed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. For detection of the mass shift of all identified peptides, the mass error is centered on 0 and concentrated in the range below 10 ppm, indicating that the quality error meets the requirements. Conforming to the rule of trypsin-digested peptides, most of the peptides are distributed between 8-20 amino acid residues, indicating that the sample preparation meets the quality standards.  Bacterial strains and growth conditions All trains and plasmids used in this study are listed in supplemental Table S1. D. radiodurans strains were cultured at 30°C on TGY medium (0.5% Bacto tryptone, 0.1% glucose, 0.3% Bacto yeast extract) and Escherichia coli strains were grown at 37°C on LB (1% Bacto tryptone, 0.5% Bacto yeast extract, 1% NaCl) medium with appropriate antibiotics. The D. radiodurans cells were collected at an OD600 of 1.0 by centrifugation at 8000 g and 4 °C for 7 min, then washed three times with sterile phosphate buffered saline.  Protein extraction The D. radiodurans sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication on ice. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit.  Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  Affinity enrichment To enrich succinylated modified peptides of D. radiodurans, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed anti-succinyllysine antibody beads (Lot number PTM-402, PTM Biolabs Inc., Chicago, IL) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant32 search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the protein database of D. radiodurans (strain R1) (containing 3085 sequences) from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation is set as a fixed modification, variable modification is the oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, succinylation of lysine. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.  Subcellular localization and motif analysis CELLO was used as a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization33. Soft motif-x was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default. When the number of peptides in a certain characteristic sequence form is greater than 20, and the statistical test P value is less than 0.000001, the characteristic sequence form considered to be a motif of the modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence shows that the succinylation of lysine residues mainly regulates enzymes involved in the carbon metabolism pathway, in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Deinococcus radiodurans is one of the most radioresistant organisms on earth and is famous for its robust resistance. A major goal in the current study of protein succinylation is to explore its function in D. radiodurans. High-resolution LC-MS/MS is used for qualitative proteomics to perform a global succinylation analysis of D. radiodurans and 492 succinylation sites in 270 proteins are identified. These proteins are involved in a variety of biological processes and pathways. It is found that the enzymes involved in nucleic acid binding/processing are enriched in D. radiodurans compared with their previously reported levels in other bacteria. The mutagenesis studies confirm that succinylation regulates the enzymatic activities of species-specific proteins PprI and DdrB, which belong to the radiation-desiccation response regulon. Together, these results provide insight into the role of lysine succinylation in the extreme resistance of D. radiodurans.

### Keywords
Succinylome; succinylation; dna repair; nucleic acid binding; posttranslational modification

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Chinese Ministry of Agriculture for Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Congli Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Ye Zhao
Key Laboratory of Chinese Ministry of Agriculture for Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, China


