### Accession
PXD010222

### Title
Chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry reveals the conformational landscape of the activation helix of PPARγ; a model for ligand-dependent antagonism

### Description
the project presents solution analysis of PPARγ H12 conformational mobility driven by pharmaceutically distinct compounds and sequence specific regulatory peptides by label-free quantitative cross-linking mass spectrometry. This study reveals a model of ligand-dependent antagonism of PPARγ by precisely characterizing H12 mobility as a function of ligand and peptide bound.

### Sample Protocol
Plink2 software was used to analyze and identify the XL-peptides(Yang et al., 2012). The parameters for pLink2 search were as follows: three missed cleavage sites for trypsin/chymotrypsin per chain; peptide length 4 – 100 amino acid; pLink2 search results were filtered by requiring precursor tolerance (±10 p.p.m.) and fragment tolerance (±15 p.p.m.) and FDR below 5% was required for all identified XL-MS peaks. The ion intensities and peak areas of the crosslinked peptides from different experimental conditions were manually calculated and compared.

### Data Protocol
Plink2 software was used to analyze and identify the XL-peptides(Yang et al., 2012). The parameters for pLink2 search were as follows: three missed cleavage sites for trypsin/chymotrypsin per chain; peptide length 4 – 100 amino acid; pLink2 search results were filtered by requiring precursor tolerance (±10 p.p.m.) and fragment tolerance (±15 p.p.m.) and FDR below 5% was required for all identified XL-MS peaks. The ion intensities and peak areas of the crosslinked peptides from different experimental conditions were manually calculated and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are pharmacological targets for the treatment of metabolic disorders. Previously, we demonstrated the anti-diabetic effects of SR1664, a PPAR&#x3b3; modulator lacking classical transcriptional agonism, despite its poor pharmacokinetic properties. Here, we report identification of the antagonist SR11023 as a potent insulin sensitizer with significant plasma exposure following oral administration. To determine&#xa0;the structural mechanism of ligand-dependent antagonism of PPAR&#x3b3;, we employed an integrated approach combining solution-phase biophysical techniques to monitor activation helix (helix 12) conformational dynamics. While informative on receptor dynamics, hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance data provide limited information regarding the specific orientations of structural elements. In contrast, label-free quantitative crosslinking mass spectrometry revealed that binding of SR11023 to PPAR&#x3b3; enhances interaction with co-repressor motifs by pushing H12 away from the agonist active conformation toward the H2-H3 loop region (i.e., the omega loop), revealing the molecular mechanism for active antagonism of PPAR&#x3b3;.

### Keywords
Xl-ms

### Affiliations
Scripps FL
The scripps research institute, jupiter, Florida

### Submitter
Jie Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Pat Griffin
The scripps research institute, jupiter, Florida


