### Accession
PXD010929

### Title
espL deletion mutant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
The ESX-1, type VII, secretion system represents the major virulence determinant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the most successful intracellular pathogens. Here, by combining genetic and high-throughput approaches, we show that EspL, a protein of 115 amino acids, is essential for mediating ESX-1-dependent virulence and for stabilization of EspE, EspF and EspH protein levels. Indeed, an espL knock-out mutant was unable to replicate intracellularly, secrete ESX-1 substrates or stimulate innate cytokine production. Moreover, proteomic studies detected greatly reduced amounts of EspE, EspF and EspH in the espL mutant as compared to the wild type strain, suggesting a role for EspL as a chaperone. The latter conclusion was further supported by discovering that EspL interacts with EspD, which was previously demonstrated to stabilize the ESX-1 substrates and effector proteins, EspA and EspC. Moreover, loss of EspL also leads to downregulation in M. tuberculosis of WhiB6, a redox-sensitive transcriptional activator of ESX-1 genes. Overall, our data highlight the importance of a so-far overlooked, though conserved, component of the ESX-1 secretion system and begin to delineate the role played by EspE, EspF and EspH in virulence and host-pathogen interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (1) with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Acidified peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (2) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).   1- Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis.Nat Methods. 2009 May;6 (5):359-62. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1322. Epub 2009 Apr 19.  2- Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nature Protocols 2, - 1896 - 1906 (2007) Published online: 2 August 2007.doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (3) against the TubercuListR27 database (http://tuberculist.epfl.ch/). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Label Free Quantification (MaxLFQ) was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings (4). Perseus (5) was used to highlight differentially quantified proteins. Reverse proteins, contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Biological replicates were grouped together and protein groups containing a minimum of two LFQ values in at least one group were conserved. Empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution. Significant hits were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t test p-values with ratio information (6). Significance curves in the volcano plot corresponding to a SO value of (indicate your selected cutoff) and 0.05 FDR were determined by a permutation-based method. Further graphical displays were generated using homemade programs written in R (7).   3- Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372 (2008).  4- Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17.  5- Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. Jun 27. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3901  6- Nina C. Hubner, Alexander W. Bird, Jürgen Cox, Bianca Splettstoesser, Peter Bandilla, Ina Poser, Anthony Hyman, and Matthias Mann. (2010) Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.  JCB vol. 189 no. 4 739-754  7- R Core Team (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/.

### Publication Abstract
The ESX-1, type VII, secretion system represents the major virulence determinant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the most successful intracellular pathogens. Here, by combining genetic and high-throughput approaches, we show that EspL, a protein of 115 amino acids, is essential for mediating ESX-1-dependent virulence and for stabilization of EspE, EspF and EspH protein levels. Indeed, an espL knock-out mutant was unable to replicate intracellularly, secrete ESX-1 substrates or stimulate innate cytokine production. Moreover, proteomic studies detected greatly reduced amounts of EspE, EspF and EspH in the espL mutant as compared to the wild type strain, suggesting a role for EspL as a chaperone. The latter conclusion was further supported by discovering that EspL interacts with EspD, which was previously demonstrated to stabilize the ESX-1 substrates and effector proteins, EspA and EspC. Loss of EspL also leads to downregulation in M. tuberculosis of WhiB6, a redox-sensitive transcriptional activator of ESX-1 genes. Overall, our data highlight the importance of a so-far overlooked, though conserved, component of the ESX-1 secretion system and begin to delineate the role played by EspE, EspF and EspH in virulence and host-pathogen interaction.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Tuberculosis, Virulence, Espl

### Affiliations
EPFL
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Andrej Benjak

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart Thomas Cole
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland


