### Accession
PXD001904

### Title
Digital mapping of immunopeptidomes: SWATH-MS

### Description
We present a novel mass spectrometry-based high-throughput workflow and an open-source computational and data resource to reproducibly identify and quantify HLA-associated peptides. Collectively, the resources support the generation of HLA allele-specific peptide assay libraries consisting of consensus fragment ion spectra, and the analysis of quantitative digital maps of HLA peptidomes generated by SWATH mass spectrometry (MS) from a range a biological sources. This study represents the first community-based effort to develop a robust platform for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of the entire repertoire of peptides presented by HLA molecules, an essential step towards the design of efficient immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously. In brief, snap-frozen cell pellets were lysed in 10 mM CHAPS/PBS (AppliChem, St Louis, MO, USA/Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 1x protease inhibitor (Complete; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). HLA molecules were single-step purified using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32, which were covalently linked to CNBr-activated sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). HLA–peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). Elution fractions E1–E8 were pooled and free HLA peptides were isolated by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Amicon; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). HLA peptides were extracted and desalted from the filtrate using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore). Extracted peptides were eluted in 35 μl of 80% acetonitrile (Merck)/0.2% trifluoroacetic acid, centrifuged to complete dryness and resuspended in 25 μl of 1% acetonitrile/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were stored at − 20 °C until analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The iPortal workflow was used for data analyses. The OpenSWATH analysis workflow (OpenSWATHWorkflow) (http://www.openswath.org) was implemented in the iPortal workflow. The parameters were selected analogously to the ones described before: min_rsq: 0.95, min_coverage: 0.6, min_upper_edge_dist: 1, mz_extraction_window: 0.05, rt_extraction_window: 600, extra_rt_extraction_window: 100. pyprophet (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyprophet) was run on the OpenSwathWorkflow output adjusted to contain the previously described scores (xx_swath_prelim_score, bseries_score, elution_model_fit_score, intensity_score, isotope_correlation_score, isotope_overlap_score, library_corr, library_rmsd, log_sn_score, massdev_score, massdev_score_weighted, norm_rt_score, xcorr_coelution, xcorr_coelution_weighted, xcorr_shape, xcorr_shape_weighted. yseries_score).

### Publication Abstract
We present a novel mass spectrometry-based high-throughput workflow and an open-source computational and data resource to reproducibly identify and quantify HLA-associated peptides. Collectively, the resources support the generation of HLA allele-specific peptide assay libraries consisting of consensus fragment ion spectra, and the analysis of quantitative digital maps of HLA peptidomes generated from a range of biological sources by SWATH mass spectrometry (MS). This study represents the first community-based effort to develop a robust platform for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of the entire repertoire of peptides presented by HLA molecules, an essential step towards the design of efficient immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Hla, Dia, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


