### Accession
PXD017224

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of SFTSV infected THP-1 cells

### Description
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is an emerging tick-borne virus causing a high fatality of 12-50% in infected patients. In-depth understanding of the SFTSV induced pathogenesis mechanism is critical for developing effective anti-SFTS therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis  THP-1 cells were infected with SFTSV at an MOI of 1 or mock infected. At 24, 48, 72 hours p.i., cells were harvested and total proteins were extracted. Extracted proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetomide, and digested with trypsin. The digested peptides were desalted with a SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters). For iTRAQ labeling, 100 μg of peptides from SFTSV- or mock-infected cells was labeled with different iTRAQ reagents (SCIEX) according to manufacturer's instructions, and then were mixed at the ratio of 1 and desalted. The mixed peptides were fractionated using strong cation exchange. Fractionated peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a quadrupole-time of flight LC/MS/MS mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, SCIEX) equipped with a nanospray source. For MS/MS analysis, each scan cycle consisted of one full-scan mass spectrum followed by 20 MS/MS events. Mass spectra were extracted by Peakview v2.0 (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were submitted to ProteinPilot v5.0.1 (SCIEX) to perform protein identification and quantification. Search parameters were as follows: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl Cys; Variable modification: none; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as lower than 1% at the protein level, and only peptides with confidence score > 95% were used.  Protein ratio in each replicate was calculated from the weighted average ratios of its peptides. The protein ratio values used for bioinformatics analysis were the weighted averages of the six replicates (three independent biological replicates and two technical replicates in each independent biological replicate), while the p value for protein ratio was calculated and further corrected with multiple Bonferroni correction. The Gaussian distribution of protein ratios was analyzed, and value deviating from the mean of the normally distributed data by 1.96 standard deviations was considered as cutoff value. Only proteins with 1) ratios > up-regulated or < down-regulated cutoff values; 2) corrected p value for protein ratio < 0.05 was considered as be differentially regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) virus (SFTSV) is an emerging tick-borne virus that carries a high fatality rate of 12%-50%. In-depth understanding of the SFTSV-induced pathogenesis mechanism is critical for developing effective anti-SFTS therapeutics. Here, we report transcriptomic analysis of blood samples from SFTS patients. We observe a strong correlation between inflammatory responses and disease progression and fatal outcome. Quantitative proteomic analysis of SFTSV infection confirms the induction of inflammation and further reveals virus-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Mechanistically, SFTSV infection triggers BCL2 antagonist/killer 1 (BAK) upregulation and BAK/BCL2-associated X (BAX) activation, leading to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) oxidization and subsequent cytosolic release. The cytosolic mtDNA binds and triggers NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Notably, the BAK expression level correlates with SFTS disease progression and fatal outcome. These findings provide insights into the clinical features and&#xa0;molecular underpinnings of severe SFTS, which may aid in patient care and therapeutic design, and may also be conserved during infection by other highly pathogenic viruses.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Thp-1 cells, Sftsv

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China
IOV

### Submitter
Leike Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Leike Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China


