### Accession
PXD034138

### Title
Generation of an Escherichia coli strain growing on methanol as sole energy and carbon source via the ribulose monophosphate cycle

### Description
The increasing demand for non-food competitive carbon sources such as methanol for biotechnology has brought methanol-utilizing bacteria, so-called methylotrophs, to focus. The product spectrum of natural methylotrophs and their genetic accessibility is limited and as an alternative approach, the introduction of methylotrophic metabolism into a biotechnologically well-established organism, such as Escherichia coli, represents a promising concept. By performing long-term evolution over 600 days, we obtained an E. coli strain that is able to grow on methanol as its sole carbon source at rates comparable to natural methylotrophic organisms. We confirmed that the strain forms its entire biomass from methanol. Furthermore, we sequenced the genome of the evolved strain and compared it to the genome of its ancestor. Intriguingly, we found several hundreds of mutations targeting genes of various functions, such as catalysis and regulation. Like the comparison of the genome before and after evolution, the investigation of the proteome would be of high interest. Proteomics would reveal the consequences of the regulatory mutations found in the genome and provide an overall picture of the adaptations by the cell enabling it to grow on methanol. The increasing demand for non-food competitive carbon sources such as methanol for biotechnology has brought methanol-utilizing bacteria, so-called methylotrophs, to focus. The product spectrum of natural methylotrophs and their genetic accessibility is limited and as an alternative approach, the introduction of methylotrophic metabolism into a biotechnologically well-established organism, such as Escherichia coli, represents a promising concept. By performing long-term evolution over 600 days, we obtained an E. coli strain that is able to grow on methanol as its sole carbon source at rates comparable to natural methylotrophic organisms. We confirmed that the strain forms its entire biomass from methanol. Furthermore, we sequenced the genome of the evolved strain and compared it to the genome of its ancestor. Intriguingly, we found several hundreds of mutations targeting genes of various functions, such as catalysis and regulation. Like the comparison of the genome before and after evolution, the investigation of the proteome would be of high interest. Proteomics would reveal the consequences of the regulatory mutations found in the genome and provide an overall picture of the adaptations by the cell enabling it to grow on methanol.

### Sample Protocol
In total, five biological independent replicates were generated for MS-based proteomics analysis. The cell pellets were dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) and lysed by indirect sonication (settings: 3 x 1 min, 100% amplitude, 0.8 cycle time) in a VialTweeter (HIFU, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Larger particles and insoluble parts were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The protein concentration of the lysate was determined using the Pierce BCA assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) and incubation for 30 min at 37°C and 300 rpm shaking. Cysteine residues were alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Prior to digestion the urea concentration was reduced below 2 M by diluting all samples 1 to 5 with freshly prepared 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For digestion, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega AG, Dübendorf, Switzerland) was added at a 1:50 (µg trypsin to µg protein) ratio. Digestion was carried out in a tabletop shaker over night at 37°C under constant shaking at 300 rpm. After digestion, the trypsin was inactivated using heat incubation in a tabletop shaker at 95°C for 5 min and sub sequential acidification to an approximate final concentration of 1% formic acid. The peptide samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min to remove insoluble parts and the supernatant was taken and desalted using Sep-Pak Vak C18 reversed phase columns (Waters Corporation, Baden-Dättswil, Switzerland) and dried under vacuum. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were re-solubilized in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5-1 µg µL-1. Mass spectrometry analyses was performed on an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a digital PicoView source (New Objective, Littleton, USA) and coupled to an M-Class ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters GmbH, Wilmslow, UK). A two channel solvent system was used with 0.1 % FA (v/v) in water for channel A and 0.1% FA (v/v), 99.9% ACN (v/v) for channel B. At a concentration of 0.5 µg µL-1 for each sample 2 µL were loaded on an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 trap column (100 A, 5 µm; 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 column (100 A, 1.8 µm; 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters).  Peptide samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 with an initial of 5% B for 3 min. The gradient was as followed: from 5% to 22% B in 112 min, from 22% to 32% B in 8 min, from 32% to 95% B in 5 min and from 95% to 5% B in 10 min. The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-2000 m/z and a resolution of 120k with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 500,000. Fragment ion spectra (MS/MS) were acquired in the Ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Only precursor ions with charge states +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5000 were selected for fragmentation, and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with an AGC target value of 10,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s, and the exclusion window was set to 10 ppm. Measurements were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10124 and 445.12003. Sample acquisition was performed in randomized order.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.4.2) was used to process the acquired raw MS data. Prior to the automatic alignment, 3-5 vectors were manually seeded to aid the alignment. As alignment reference a 1:1 pool of all samples was used. After normalization, from each peptide ion a maximum of the top five tandem mass spectra were exported. The mascot generic file (* .mgf) was searched using the Mascot server (Matrix Science, v.2.7.0.1) against a decoyed and reversed protein sequence database containing the 4449 annotated proteins of the methylotrophic E.coli (see methods) concatenated with the yeast proteome (UP000002311: [https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311]) and 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants. The Mascot search parameters were as followed: Precursor ion and fragment ion tolerance were set to ± 10 ppm and ± 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsin was selected as protease (two missed cleavages) and ions with charge state 2+, 3+ am were 4+ were selected for identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, carbamylation of the N-terminus and lysine were set as variable modifications. The mascot search was imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software, v.5.1.0) using 5% peptide and 10% protein false discovery rate (FDR) and the resulting scaffold spectrum report were imported into Progenesis QI. For label-free protein quantification the Hi-3 approach was selected and only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantification. Statistical testing was performed directly in Progenesis with a one-way ANOVA and the resulting P-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benajmini-Hochberg procedure (termed q-values). General cutoffs for significantly regulated proteins were q-values < 0.05 and Log2 fold-changes (FC) > 1.5 or < -1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, E.coli, Synthetic methylotrophy

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lucas Hemmerle

### Lab Head
Dr Julia A. Vorholt
Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


