### Accession
PXD041070

### Title
A bacterial autotransporter impairs innate immune responses by targeting the transcription factor TFE3

### Description
Type I interferons (IFNs) are consequential cytokines in antibacterial defense. Whether and how bacterial pathogens inhibit innate immune receptor-driven type I IFN expression remains mostly unknown.  By screening a library of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) mutants, we uncovered EhaF, an uncharacterized protein, as an inhibitor of innate immune responses including IFNs. Further analyses identified EhaF as a secreted autotransporter—a type of bacterial secretion system with no known innate immune-modulatory function—that translocates into host cell cytosol and inhibit IFN response to EHEC. Mechanistically, EhaF interacts with and inhibits the MiT/TFE family transcription factor TFE3 resulting in impaired TANK phosphorylation and consequently, reduced IRF3 activation and type I IFN expression. Notably, EhaF-mediated innate immune suppression promotes EHEC colonization and pathogenesis in vivo. Overall, this study has uncovered a previously unknown autotransporter-based bacterial strategy that targets a specific transcription factor to subvert innate host defense.

### Sample Protocol
BMDMs were infected with IPTG-treated BL21/pEmpty or BL21/pEhaF-FLAG. Cells lysates were prepared 1.5 h after infection and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG beads or Isotype control antibody. Immunoprecipitated samples were submitted on-bead for liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis at the UConn Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility. Briefly, samples were washed and digested after modification of cysteine sidechains with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes.  Recovered peptides were desalted, dried, and resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O).  Total injection amounts were normalized across all samples. Samples were subjected to mass analysis using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled to a high-resolution Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified by label-free quantification using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) and its embedded Andromeda search engine. The raw data were searched against both the complete UniProt E. coli BL21-DE3 reference proteome (identifier UP000002032) appended with the sequence of the bait protein Z0390, and the MaxQuant contaminants database as well. All results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein levels using the target-decoy approach; all other parameters were kept at default values. MaxQuant output files were imported into Scaffold (v5.1.2, Proteome Software, Inc.) for all subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Type I interferons (IFNs) are consequential cytokines in antibacterial defense. Whether and how bacterial pathogens inhibit innate immune receptor-driven type I IFN expression remains mostly unknown. By screening a library of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) mutants, we uncovered EhaF, an uncharacterized protein, as an inhibitor of innate immune responses including IFNs. Further analyses identified EhaF as a secreted autotransporter-a type of bacterial secretion system with no known innate immune-modulatory function-that translocates into host cell cytosol and inhibit IFN response to EHEC. Mechanistically, EhaF interacts with and inhibits the MiT/TFE family transcription factor TFE3 resulting in impaired TANK phosphorylation and consequently, reduced IRF3 activation and type I IFN expression. Notably, EhaF-mediated innate immune suppression promotes EHEC colonization and pathogenesis in vivo. Overall, this study has uncovered a previously unknown autotransporter-based bacterial strategy that targets a specific transcription factor to subvert innate host defense.

### Keywords
Immune response, Escherichia coli, Tfe3, Transcription factor, Autotransporter

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut


