### Accession
PXD041472

### Title
Identification of proteins bound with RPA194 at rDNA loci post radiation in breast cancer cells

### Description
Following radiation damage, cells resume ribosome biogenesis for survival. We combined chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with mass spectrometry to identify key binding partners of RPA194 (the major subunit of RNA polI) at the rDNA loci in response to irradiation.

### Sample Protocol
SUM1315 HA-GLI1 expressing cells were exposed to 4Gy irradiation and processed at 2 hours or 4 hours post irradiation, controls were collected at 4 hours, then processed for ChIP. Briefly, at time of collection, cells were crosslinked using 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes. Crosslinked cells were washed twice and processed for nuclei isolation and chromatin digestion with micrococcal nuclease followed by sonication. 100µl of protein G beads were washed in 1ml of 1X PBS+ 5mg/ml BSA for a total of 4 washes. 3µg of anti-RPA194 (Santa Cruz) or 3µg of isotype was added to beads. The mixture was mixed by rotating the tube overnight at 4°C. Antibody coupled beads were washed 4 times in 1X PBS containing 5mg/ml BSA, and incubated with 10μg of crosslinked chromatin overnight at 4°C. Following incubation with chromatin, beads were washed and processed for analysis via LCMS upon processing the beads as follows: Samples were eluted in 1X final LDS sample buffer at 96° C for 10min. The eluate was collected on a magnetic stand, reduced, and denatured further at 70°C for 10min. The sample was resolved using 10% Bis-tris gel and stained overnight with Colloidal Coomassie. Each sample lane was digested with trypsin overnight in 6 fractions prior to LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Scaffold 5 with the following parameters: for more stringent analysis, protein threshold was set to 99%, minimum peptides 2, and peptide threshold 80%. To reveal more hits, less stringent analysis was done with 80% protein threshold and peptide minimum set to 1. Proteins bound to isotypes controls were excluded from analysis, and Quantitative Value (Normalized Total Spectra) was used to determine fold change >1.5 in protein abundance at the rDNA with RPA194. Normalized total spectra were used to calculate fold change between IR and NIR groups, which contained no peptides in isotype controls.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperactivated ribosome biosynthesis is attributed to a need for elevated protein synthesis that accommodates cell growth and division, and is characterized by nucleomorphometric alterations and increased nucleolar counts. Ribosome biogenesis is challenged when DNA-damaging treatments such as radiotherapy are utilized. Tumor cells that survive radiotherapy form the basis of recurrence, tumor progression, and metastasis. In order to survive and become metabolically revitalized, tumor cells need to reactivate RNA Polymerase I (RNA Pol I) to synthesize ribosomal RNA, an integral component of ribosomes. In this study, we showed that following radiation therapy, tumor cells from breast cancer patients demonstrate activation of a ribosome biosynthesis signature concurrent with enrichment of a signature of Hedgehog (Hh) activity. We hypothesized that GLI1 activates RNA Pol I in response to irradiation and licenses the emergence of a radioresistant tumor population. Our work establishes a novel role for GLI1 in orchestrating RNA Pol I activity in irradiated breast cancer cells. Furthermore, we present evidence that in these irradiated tumor cells, Treacle ribosome biogenesis factor 1 (TCOF1), a nucleolar protein that is important in ribosome biogenesis, facilitates nucleolar translocation of GLI1. Inhibiting Hh activity and RNA Pol I activity disabled the outgrowth of breast cancer cells in the lungs. As such, ribosome biosynthesis and Hh activity present as actionable signaling mechanisms to enhance the effectiveness of radiotherapy.

### Keywords
Rdna, Chip-ms, Radiation, Ir, Breast cancer, Rpa194

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center

### Submitter
Brandon Metge

### Lab Head
Dr Lalita Samant
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center


