### Accession
PXD005447

### Title
Proteome data on soil microbial community

### Description
Soil microbial community is a complex blackbox that requires a multi-conceptual approach (Hultman et al., 2015; Bastida et al., 2016). Most methods focus on evaluating total microbial community and fail to determine its active fraction (Blagodatskaya & Kuzyakov 2013). This issue has ecological consequences since the behavior of the active community is more important (or even essential) and can be different to that of the total community. The sensitivity of the active microbial community can be considered as a biological mechanism that regulates the functional responses of soil against direct (i.e. forest management) and indirect (i.e. climate change) human-induced alterations. Indeed, it has been highglihted that the diversity of the active community (analyzed by metaproteomics) is more connected to soil functionality than the that of the total community (analyzed by 16S rRNA gene and ITS sequencing) (Bastida et al., 2016). Recently, the increasing application of soil metaproteomics is providing unprecedented, in-depth characterisation of the composition and functionality of active microbial communities and overall, allowing deeper insights into terrestrial microbial ecology (Chourey et al., 2012; Bastida et al., 2015, 2016; Keiblinger et al., 2016).  Here, we predict the responsiveness of the soil microbial community to forest management in a climate change scenario. Particularly, we aim: i) to evaluate the impacts of 6-years of induced drought on the diversity, biomass and activity of the microbial community in a semiarid forest ecocosystem; and ii) to discriminate if forest management (thinning) influences the resistance of the microbial community against induced drought. Furthermore, we aim to ascertain if the functional diversity of each phylum is a trait that can be used to predict changes in microbial abundance and ecosystem functioning.

### Sample Protocol
Study site, experimental design and soil sampling In August 1994 a great forest fire affected 14000 ha in Yeste (2º20’W, 38º22’S, Albacete Province, in the Southeast of Spain). Mature forests of Pinus halepensis and Pinus pinaster were burnt. The understorey consisted of bushes of Quercus coccifera, Rosmarinus officinalis, Juniperus oxycedrus, Rhamnus lycioides, Thymus sp. and Cistus sp. The soil textural class was clay loam, with pH values of 8.6. N, P, K values were 0.45%, 3.6 and 200.1 mg L-1.  With the purpose to evaluate the effects of drought and thinning on soil properties, a factorial design with two levels of rainfall (natural rainfall versus rainfall reduction or induced drought), two levels of forest management (thinning present/absent) and two sampling times (summer 2015 and autumn 2015) was developed. In July 2009, twelve plots (10 m x 15 m) were set up in the naturally burnt area, six of them thinned and six unthinned. Thinned and unthinned plots were occupied by high P. halepensis post-fire natural regeneration (7000 saplings ha-1). Thinning operations were carried out in 1999 and reached 1600 samplings ha-1. Each group of six plots, as described before, was split into two groups: three plots received natural rainfall and three plots occupied by PVC gutters received reduced precipitation to simulate drought-induced conditions. PVC gutters were suspended at about 50 cm above the soil surface and occupied about 25% of the plot surface, intercepting the corresponding rainfall. In total, 12 plots were set up (2 thinned/unthinned x 2 natural rainfall/induced drought x 3 replicate plots).  Soil sampling was performed in summer and autumn 2015 – 6 years after treatment initiation – in order to contrast different seasons. Six soil samples were taken at the depth of 0-15 cm after removing litter within each plot and mixed to obtain a composite sample per plot. Samples were sieved (2 mm) and kept at 4ºC for chemical analysis and -20ºC for molecular analyses. The abbreviations used for treatments are as follows: CU (unthhined control soil); DU (unthinned soil submitted to drought); CT (thinned control soil); DT (thinned soil submitted to drought). Furthermore, the small letters “s” and “a” following each abbreviation indicate summer and autumn samples, respectively. As a basis plant characterization in 2015, the survival of trees was around 25000, 15000, 2600 and 1600 trees ha-1 in CU, DU, CT and DT, respectively. The diameter at 1.30 m soil height was 25, 25, 83 and 93 in CU, DU, CT and DT, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Multifunctionality represents the provision of multiple ecosystem processes and services (Bradford et al., 2014; Delgado-Baquerizo et al., 2016). To obtain a quantitative ecosystem multifunctionality index for each site, individual functions were subject to the Z-score transformation (Delgado-Baquerizo et al., 2016). The standardized rates of ecosystem functions were then averaged to obtain a multifunctionality index (Wagg et al., 2014; Delgado-Baquerizo et al., 2016; Lefcheck et al., 2015). The multifunctionality index was composed by the six enzyme activities mentioned above and is related to the cycling of organic matter in terrestrial ecosystems. The Shannon-Wiener index of diversity was calculated for: i) bacterial diversity based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing (Hbac_gen); ii) fungal diversity based on ITS sequencing (Hfung_gen); and iii) diversity of the active bacterial community based on the taxonomic analysis of proteins (Hbac_prot); iii) diversity of the active fungal community based on the taxonomic analysis of proteins (Hfung_prot); and v) the diversity of proteins retrieved from COG list based on NSAF values (functional diversity, Hfunc). Furthermore, for each phylum, the Shannon-Wiener diversity index of COG proteins (within-phylum functional diversity) and the relative abundance of ribosomal proteins were calculated. The normality and homogeneity of variables were tested by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Levene tests, respectively and data were log-transformed when necessary. Variables were subject to a three-way ANOVA. The three factors included in this experimental design were: i) Drought, which contained two levels: natural rainfall conditions and induced drought; ii) Forest management that contained also two levels: thinning and control; and iii) season: summer and autumn. Differences at P<0.05 were regarded as statistically significant through the manuscript.  The structure of the microbial community (both by genomics and proteomics) was analyzed by the principal component analysis with the relative abundances at the phylum level. PERMANOVA was applied for testing the influence of analyzed factors on the structure of microbial communities. PC1 and PC2 were correlated to the ecosystem multifunctionality index as a proxy for the evaluation of the relationships between the structure and the functionality of the microbial community. Microbial abundance and diversity indicators were correlated to soil moisture. The statistical analyses were performed using IBM-SPSS Statistics (v22.0). The figures were produced using R software v.3.1.3.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change will affect semiarid ecosystems through severe droughts that increase the competition for resources in plant and microbial communities. In these habitats, adaptations to climate change may consist of thinning-that reduces competition for resources through a decrease in tree density and the promotion of plant survival. We deciphered the functional and phylogenetic responses of the microbial community to 6 years of drought induced by rainfall exclusion and how forest management affects its resistance to drought, in a semiarid forest ecosystem dominated by Pinus halepensis Mill. A multiOMIC approach was applied to reveal novel, community-based strategies in the face of climate change. The diversity and the composition of the total and active soil microbiome were evaluated by 16S rRNA gene (bacteria) and ITS (fungal) sequencing, and by metaproteomics. The microbial biomass was analyzed by phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs), and the microbially mediated ecosystem multifunctionality was studied by the integration of soil enzyme activities related to the cycles of C, N, and P. The microbial biomass and ecosystem multifunctionality decreased in drought-plots, as a consequence of the lower soil moisture and poorer plant development, but this decrease was more notable in unthinned plots. The structure and diversity of the total bacterial community was unaffected by drought at phylum and order level, but did so at genus level, and was influenced by seasonality. However, the total fungal community and the active microbial community were more sensitive to drought and were related to ecosystem multifunctionality. Thinning in plots without drought increased the active diversity while the total diversity was not affected. Thinning promoted the resistance of ecosystem multifunctionality to drought through changes in the active microbial community. The integration of total and active microbiome analyses avoids misinterpretations of the links between the soil microbial community and climate change.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Soil, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Head of Department of Molecular Systems Biology                 Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ    Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 1211 Martin.vonbergen@ufz.de, http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40881
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Head of Department of Molecular Systems Biology                 Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ    Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 1211 Martin.vonbergen@ufz.de, http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40881


