### Accession
PXD023479

### Title
Nuclear SIRT3 counteracts human stem cell senescence

### Description
Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) is an NAD+-dependent deacetylase involved in various physiological and pathological processes. However, the role of SIRT3 in regulating human stem cell senescence remains largely unknown. Here, we observed the downregulated expression of SIRT3 in senescent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). SIRT3 deficiency accelerated cellular senescence in hMSCs, along with compromised nuclear integrity, loss of heterochromatin and increased DNA damage. These aging-associated nuclear defects were attenuated by the reintroduction of SIRT3. Mechanistic studies demonstrated the interaction of SIRT3 with nuclear envelope proteins and heterochromatin-associated proteins. Further findings revealed that SIRT3 deficiency led to the loss of lamina-associated domains (LADs) from the nuclear lamina, increased chromatin accessibility and aberrant transcription of repetitive sequences. Meanwhile, the overexpression of nuclear-localized SIRT3 rescued the senescence phenotypes. Taken together, our study reveals a novel role of nuclear SIRT3 in stabilizing heterochromatin and counteracting hMSC senescence, which may provide new clinical therapeutic targets to ameliorate aging-related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, HEK293T cells transfected with plasmids expressing SIRT3-FLAG or Luc-FLAG were lysed in CHAPS lysis buffer (120 mM NaCl, 0.3% CHAPS (Sigma, C900480), 1 mM EDTA, 40 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) at 4℃ for 2 hr with rotation, and then centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4℃ for 30 min to collect the supernatants. The supernatants were mixed with anti-FLAG Affinity Gel (Sigma, A2220) and rotated at 4℃ overnight. The resulting immunocomplexes were washed with CHAPS buffer for three times, incubated with FLAG peptide at 4℃ for 2 hr with rotation to competitively elute SIRT3-FLAG/SIRT3-interacting protein complexes from anti-FLAG Affinity Gel, and then centrifuged at 3,000 g at 4℃ for 5 min. Finally, the resultant supernatants were boiled in 1 × SDS-loading buffer for 10 min and processed for western blot analysis.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, eluted proteins from the co-IP assay were separated using 12% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie blue. Protein bands stained by Coomassie blue were cut from the SDS-PAGE gel, subjected to decoloration and dehydration, and then digested with sequencing-grade Trypsin (Worthington). Peptides were extracted from the resulting gel pieces, dried, and then dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. Subsequently, the dissolved peptides were separated with a C18 reverse phase column and then eluted for mass spectrometry analysis using a nanoLC-Q EXACTIVE Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant (Version 1.3) and Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4). False discovery rate (FDR) was analyzed with Percolator and set to 1% as the threshold of the peptide confidence parameter.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) is an NAD+-dependent deacetylase linked to a broad range of physiological and pathological processes, including aging and aging-related diseases. However, the role of SIRT3 in regulating human stem cell homeostasis remains unclear. Here we found that SIRT3 expression was downregulated in senescent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). CRISPR/Cas9-mediated depletion of SIRT3 led to compromised nuclear integrity, loss of heterochromatin and accelerated senescence in hMSCs. Further analysis indicated that SIRT3 interacted with nuclear envelope proteins and heterochromatin-associated proteins. SIRT3 deficiency resulted in the detachment of genomic lamina-associated domains (LADs) from the nuclear lamina, increased chromatin accessibility and aberrant repetitive sequence transcription. The re-introduction of SIRT3 rescued the disorganized heterochromatin and the senescence phenotypes. Taken together, our study reveals a novel role for SIRT3 in stabilizing heterochromatin and counteracting hMSC senescence, providing new potential therapeutic targets to ameliorate aging-related diseases.

### Keywords
Sirt3;stem cell;aging;lad

### Affiliations
institute of zoology ,CAS
17812007228

### Submitter
ji zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Qianzhao Ji
institute of zoology ,CAS


