### Accession
PXD012372

### Title
 LC-MS/MS analysis of immunoprecipitation samples of Tetrahymena Mediator complex associated proteins

### Description
In the germline nucleus of Tetrahymena and other ciliates there occurs a peculiar burst of transcriptional activity during sexual reproduction. A major part of the genome is transcribed into noncoding RNA (ncRNA). This ncRNA serves to spot transposable elements (TEs) and other unwanted DNA sequences and marks them for elimination from the soma of the progeny. ncRNA transcription is remarkable for its extent, its occurrence in a nucleus that bears heterochromatic marks and is incapable of transcribing mRNAs and for its concomitance with meiotic DNA recombination. Here we report two novel factors (Emit1 and Emit2) that promote the micronuclear localization of the transcription Mediator complex to allow this unconventional transcriptional program to occur. Another factor (Rib1) may enhance the transcription activity to TE-rich pericentromeric and telomeric regions. The purpose of the LC-MS/MS analysis of Emit1, Emit2 and Rib1 immunoprecipitation samples is to identify their potential interacting partner proteins.

### Sample Protocol
 Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed similar to the protocol in (Tian et al. 2017). Briefly, IP from conjugation cells was performed with both partners expressing C-terminal HA tagged proteins (Emit1, Emit2 and Rib1). Cells were grown to OD540nm ≈ 0.7 in 200 ml of growth medium, washed with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), and starved in the same buffer. 3 ~ 3.5 hours after mixing, the paring rate and the progression of conjugation were examined. IP was performed only if over 80% of cells were conjugating and their MICs were elongating. Conjugation cells were lysed in a Dounce Homogenizer with 10ml lysis buffer (30mM Tris-Base, 20mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, pH8.1, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1mM PMSF, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor). Lysed cells were then spin for 50 min at 4 degrees at 25,000 rpm in an ultra-centrifuge. After that, supernatant were filtered with a PVDF 0.45um filter. In order to enrich HA-tagged proteins, 200μl of EZview Red Anti-HA Affinity Gel (Sigma) were used for each sample. Beads were first equilibrated in wash buffer (30mM Tris-Base, 20mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, pH8.1, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, cOmplete protease inhibitor) and then mixed with the precleared cell lysate, and incubated for 2 hr at 4 degrees with slow rotating. After that, beads were washed 3 times with 1 ml wash buffer and once with T0 buffer (30mM Tris-Base, 20mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, pH8.1, 1mM PMSF, cOmplete protease inhibitor). After the last wash, 400μl of HA peptide (250μg/ml in wash buffer) was added to the beads and incubate at 25 degrees for 20min to elute HA-tagged proteins and their associated proteins. After elution, proteins in eluents were precipitated with TCA and then loaded into a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. After the loading dye run into the gel for ~ 3 cm, gel electrophoresis was stopped and the gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 dye. After destaining, gel pieces with stained proteins were cut and soaked in ultra-pure water for the downstream in-gel tryptic digestion. Gel bands were excised and after reduction and alkylation of thiols using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide the proteins were digested with trypsin as described by Shevchenko et al.(2007) with slight modifications. After digestion the peptide solutions were desalted on custom-made C18 stagetips (Rappsilber et al., (2007)). Tryptic digests were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl min−1 over 120 minutes. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the data-dependent mode survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380–1,650 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2.0 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 or > +6 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software package 1.5.2.8/1.5.5.1 (http://www.maxquant.org/)   (ref: Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008)) searching against a tetrahymena database (www.ciliate.org, version 2014 supplmented with sequences from www.jcvi.org build 2014; the FASTA files used are uploaded with the raw data) and a custom contamination database, with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications — all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at a protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
To preserve genome integrity, eukaryotic cells use small RNA-directed mechanisms to repress transposable elements (TEs). Paradoxically, in order to silence TEs, precursors of the small RNAs must be transcribed from TEs. However, it is still poorly understood how these precursors are transcribed from TEs under silenced conditions. In the otherwise transcriptionally silent germline micronucleus (MIC) of Tetrahymena, a burst of non-coding RNA (ncRNA) transcription occurs during meiosis. The transcripts are processed into small RNAs that serve to identify TE-related sequences for elimination. The Mediator complex (Med) has an evolutionarily conserved role for transcription by bridging gene-specific transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. Here, we report that three Med-associated factors, Emit1, Emit2, and Rib1, are required for the biogenesis of small ncRNAs. Med localizes to the MIC only during meiosis, and both Med localization and MIC ncRNA transcription require Emit1 and Emit2. In the MIC, Med occupies TE-rich pericentromeric and telomeric regions in a Rib1-dependent manner. Rib1 is dispensable for ncRNA transcription but is required for the accumulation of double-stranded ncRNAs. Nuclear and sub-nuclear localization of the three Med-associated proteins is interdependent. Hence, Emit1 and Emit2 act coordinately to import Med into the MIC, and Rib1 recruits Med to specific chromosomal locations to quantitatively or qualitatively promote the biogenesis of functional ncRNA. Our results underscore that the transcription machinery can be regulated by a set of specialized Med-associated proteins to temporally transcribe TE-related sequences from a silent genome for small RNA biogenesis and genome defense.

### Keywords
Emit2, Rib1, Emit1, Tetrahymena thermophila, Mediator complex

### Affiliations
Department of Chromosome Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Austria
Max F. Perutz Laboratories

### Submitter
Miao Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Loidl
Department of Chromosome Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Austria


