### Accession
PXD024258

### Title
iTARGEX analysis of yeast deletome reveals novel regulators of transcriptional buffering in S phase and protein turnover

### Description
Integrating omics data with quantification of biological traits provides unparalleled opportunities for discovery of genetic regulators by in silico inference. However, current approaches to analyze genetic-perturbation screens are limited by their reliance on annotation libraries for prioritization of hits and subsequent targeted experimentation. Here, we present iTARGEX (identification of Trait-Associated Regulatory Genes via mixture regression using EXpectation maximization), an association framework with no requirement of a priori knowledge of gene function. After creating this tool, we used it to test associations between gene expression profiles and two biological traits in single-gene-deleted budding yeast mutants, including transcription homeostasis during S phase and global protein turnover. For each trait, we discovered novel regulators without prior functional annotations. The functional effects of the novel candidates were then validated experimentally, providing solid evidence for their roles in the respective traits. Hence, we conclude that iTARGEX can reliably identify novel factors involved in given biological traits. As such, it is capable of converting genome-wide observations into causal gene function predictions. Further application of iTARGEX in other contexts is expected to facilitate the discovery of new regulators and provide observations for novel mechanistic hypotheses regarding different biological traits and phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast growth conditions for protein turnover  S. cerevisiae strains were grown in synthetic medium containing 6.7 g/l yeast nitrogen base, 2 g/l dropout mix (US Biological) containing all amino acids except lysine and 2% glucose. For heavy pre-labeling, heavy [13C6/15N2] L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Labs) was added to a final concentration of 30 mg/l. Cells were precultured in 5 ml medium containing heavy lysine overnight at 30°C; the procedure was repeated twice.     Pulse SILAC   Briefly, after pre-culture or nSILAC labeling, cells were cultured in biological duplicates up to optical density 600 = 0.4. After three washes at 4°C with cold SILAC medium without lysine, cells were transferred to SILAC medium containing light lysine and harvested at 0, 60, and 180 min. For each timepoint, ~3 OD units of cells were harvested by centrifugation. Cell lysates were prepared, digested, and fractionated as described in Christiano et al. (2014). Eluted peptides from the column were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer located in the MS facility of Academia Sinica.

### Data Protocol
Determination of Protein Half-Lives. Protein half-lives were determined mainly following a procedure described previously (Schwanha ̈usser et al., 2011), with slight modifications. For S. cerevisiae, which was fully labeled, a minimum of two time points was required to calculate decay rates (Kdeg). For S. pombe, a minimum of three time points was required. A script written in R language extracted the raw (H/L) ratios (r) and as described in (Schwanha ̈ usser et al., 2011), ln(r+1) were linearly fitted to get access to apparent degradation Kdeg rates. Then, Kdeg rates were further corrected for protein dilution due to cell growth rate (Kdil) using 2.5 and 4 hr as cells doubling time for S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, respectively, in the conditions of our experiments. Goodness-of-fit of linear re- gressions (R2) were calculated and protein with R2 R 0.9 were kept for half-life calculation. For subsequent comparison of half-lives between S. cerevisiae and S. pombe or S. cerevisiae wild-type and S. cerevisiae hrd1D, data sets were further filtered for degradation rates whose coefficient of variation of the slope analyzed by leave-one-out cross-validation (Schwanha ̈ usser et al., 2011) was less than 10%.

### Publication Abstract
Integrating omics data with quantification of biological traits provides unparalleled opportunities for discovery of genetic regulators by in silico inference. However, current approaches to analyze genetic-perturbation screens are limited by their reliance on annotation libraries for prioritization of hits and subsequent targeted experimentation. Here, we present iTARGEX (identification of Trait-Associated Regulatory Genes via mixture regression using EXpectation maximization), an association framework with no requirement of a priori knowledge of gene function. After creating this tool, we used it to test associations between gene expression profiles and two biological traits in single-gene deletion budding yeast mutants, including transcription homeostasis during S phase and global protein turnover. For each trait, we discovered novel regulators without prior functional annotations. The functional effects of the novel candidates were then validated experimentally, providing solid evidence for their roles in the respective traits. Hence, we conclude that iTARGEX can reliably identify novel factors involved in given biological traits. As such, it is capable of converting genome-wide observations into causal gene function predictions. Further application of iTARGEX in other contexts is expected to facilitate the discovery of new regulators and provide observations for novel mechanistic hypotheses regarding different biological traits and phenotypes.

### Keywords
Itargex, Protein turnover, Transcriptional buffering

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica.
Institution of Cellular and Organismic Biology Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Cheng-Fu Kao

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng-Fu Kao
Institution of Cellular and Organismic Biology Academia Sinica


