### Accession
PXD007538

### Title
Protein data in PHH after VPA-treatment

### Description
LC-MS/MS protein data of Primary Human Hepatocytes (PHH) exposed to Valproic Acid (VPA) for 3 days daily and 3 days daily exposure followed by 3 days washout.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation: PHH were collected in 125 µL 1000U/mL collagenase KREBS buffer per well. 3 wells were combined for each sample (1.05*10^6 cells in 375 µL 1000U/mL collagenase KREBS buffer).  In short, medium was discarded and cells were washed twice using PBS at room temperature. Thereafter, 125 µL pre-heated 1000U/mL collagenase KREBS buffer per well was added and incubated for 10 minutes at 37 °C. Add 1 mL of 1*PBS to each well, and thereafter the solution was resuspended and transferred into a 15 mL pointed Greiner tube. Repeat the previous step once. Tubes were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 65g at room temperature. Pellets were washed using 10mL 1*PBS and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 65g at room temperature. This last step was repeated for all tubes and pellets were snap-frozen. Sample preparation Extracted proteins were diluted 1:10 in SDS buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris / HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT – dithiothreitol) boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 10 mins setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 65%. Protein concentration was then estimated using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland). For each sample, 30 µg of proteins were taken and used for on-filter digestion using an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Briefly, proteins were diluted in 200 µl of UT buffer (Urea 8M in 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2), loaded on Ultracel 30000 MWCO centrifugal unit (Amicon Ultra, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and centrifuged at 14000g. SDS buffer was exchanged by one centrifugation round of 200 µl UT buffer. Alkylation of reduced proteins was carried by 5 min incubation with 100 µl iodoacetamide 0.05M in UT buffer, followed by three 100 µl washing steps with UT and three 100 µl washing steps with NaCl 0.5M. Finally, proteins were on-filter digested using 120 µl of 0.05 Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) containing trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in ratio 1:50 (w/w). Digestion was performed overnight in a wet chamber at room temperature. After elution, the solution containing peptides was acidified to a final 0.1% TFA, 3% acetonitirile concentration. Peptides were desalted using Finisterre SPE C18 columns (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain), dried and re-solubilized in 15 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 4μL of peptides were loaded on a self-made column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 2 to 35% B in 80 min, 47% B in 4 min and 98% B in 4 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1700 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3000000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 using normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 8300 were selected for MS/MS (2% underfill ratio). Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free protein quantification (Protein analysis): The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Spectra were searched against a forward Swiss Prot-human database, concatenated to a reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants (NCBI taxonomy ID9606, release date 2015-09-15). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Precursor and fragment tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively for the initial search. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. The re-quantify option was selected. For protein abundance the intensity (Intensity) as expressed in the protein groups file was used, corresponding to the sum of the precursor intensities of all identified peptides for the respective protein group. Only quantifiable proteins (defined as protein groups showing two or more razor peptides) were considered for subsequent analyses. Protein expression data were transformed (hyperbolic arcsine transformation) and missing values (zeros) were imputed using the missForest R-package (missForest: Nonparametric Missing Value Imputation using Random Forest, R package version 1.4) (Stekhoven 2013). The protein intensities were normalized by scaling the median protein intensity in each sample to the same values.  For the two-group analysis the statistical testing was performed using t-test on transformed protein intensities (hyperbolic arcsine transformation). Proteins were called significantly differentially expressed if linear fold-change exceeded 1.5-fold and the p-value from the t-test was below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
We performed a multiple 'omics study by integrating data on epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic perturbations associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in primary human hepatocytes caused by the liver toxicant valproic acid (VPA), to deeper understand downstream events following epigenetic alterations in the mitochondrial genome. Furthermore, we investigated persistence of cross-omics changes after terminating drug treatment. Upon transient methylation changes of mitochondrial genes during VPA-treatment, increasing complexities of gene-interaction networks across time were demonstrated, which normalized during washout. Furthermore, co-expression between genes and their corresponding proteins increased across time. Additionally, in relation to persistently decreased ATP production, we observed decreased expression of mitochondrial complex I and III-V genes. Persistent transcripts and proteins were related to citric acid cycle and &#x3b2;-oxidation. In particular, we identified a potential novel mitochondrial-nuclear signaling axis, MT-CO2-FN1-MYC-CPT1. In summary, this cross-omics study revealed dynamic responses of the mitochondrial epigenome to an impulse toxicant challenge resulting in persistent mitochondrial dysfunctioning. Moreover, this approach allowed for discriminating between the toxic effect of VPA and adaptation.

### Keywords
Human, Liver

### Affiliations
Maastricht University
Department of Toxicogenomics. Maastricht University

### Submitter
Jarno Wolters

### Lab Head
Dr Jarno Wolters
Department of Toxicogenomics. Maastricht University


