### Accession
PXD038277

### Title
In-depth specificity profiling of Pro-Pro endopeptidases (PPEPs) using combinatorial synthetic peptide libraries

### Description
Proteases comprise the class of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of peptide bonds, thereby playing a pivotal role in many aspects of life. The amino acids surrounding the scissile bond determine the susceptibility towards protease-mediated hydrolysis. A detailed understanding of the cleavage specificity of a protease can lead to the identification of its endogenous substrates, while it is also essential for the design of inhibitors. We developed a new method which combines the high diversity of a combinatorial synthetic peptide library with the sensitivity and detection power of mass spectrometry to determine protease cleavage specificity. We applied this method to study a group of bacterial metalloproteases that have the unique specificity to cleave between two prolines, i.e.  Pro-Pro endopeptidases (PPEPs). We not only confirmed the prime-side specificity of PPEP-1 and PPEP-2, but also revealed some new unexpected peptide substrates. Moreover, we have characterized a new PPEP (PPEP-3) which has a prime-side specificity that is very different from that of the other two PPEPs. Importantly, the approach that we present in this study is generic and can be extended to investigate the specificity of other proteases.

### Sample Protocol
Pre-cleaned (sub)libraries (approx. 10 nmol) were incubated with a PPEP (200 ng) for 3 h at 37 °C in PBS. A non-treated control was included. After incubation, the samples were loaded onto a column containing 100 µl of Pierce High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose beads (Thermo, column was washed four times with 150 µl PBS prior to use), in order to remove the biotinylated peptides. The flow-through and 4 additional washes with 125 µL were collected. The resulting product peptides were desalted using reversed-phase solid phase extraction cartridges (Oasis HLB 1cc 30mg, Waters) and eluted with 400 µl 30% acetonitrile (v/v) in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were dried by vacuum concentration and stored at -20 °C until further use. Product peptides were analyzed by on‐line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Ultimate3000nano gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a cartridge precolumn (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap, 5 µm, 100 A, and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm, 120 A (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The gradient was run from 2% to 36% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 52 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼10 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 30 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 350-1600, at standard AGC target @maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z=445.12003 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 10 s, and with a precursor range of 10 ppm. Charge states 1-5 were included.  For MS2 the first mass was set to 110 Da, and the MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 at an AGC target of 100% @maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
We generated a database containing all 6859 peptides from the P3=Val sublibrary, i.e. Ahx-EVXPPXXGGLEEF. The Ahx in all peptide sequences was replaced by a Ile (they have an identical mass). Raw data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Electron), and submitted to the in-house created P3=Val sublibrary database using Mascot v. 2.2.7 (www.matrixscience.com) for peptide identification, using the Fixed Value PSM Validator. Mascot searches were with 5 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and no enzyme specificity was selected. Biotin on protein N-terminus was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases comprise the class of enzymes that catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds, thereby playing a pivotal role in many aspects of life. The amino acids surrounding the scissile bond determine the susceptibility toward protease-mediated hydrolysis. A detailed understanding of the cleavage specificity of a protease can lead to the identification of its endogenous substrates, while it is also essential for the design of inhibitors. Although many methods for protease activity and specificity profiling exist, none of these combine the advantages of combinatorial synthetic libraries, i.e., high diversity, equimolar concentration, custom design regarding peptide length, and randomization, with the sensitivity and detection power of mass spectrometry. Here, we developed such a method and applied it to study a group of bacterial metalloproteases that have the unique specificity to cleave between two prolines, i.e., Pro-Pro endopeptidases (PPEPs). We not only confirmed the prime-side specificity of PPEP-1 and PPEP-2, but also revealed some new unexpected peptide substrates. Moreover, we have characterized a new PPEP (PPEP-3) that has a prime-side specificity that is very different from that of the other two PPEPs. Importantly, the approach that we present in this study is generic and can be extended to investigate the specificity of other proteases.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry (ms), High-performance liquid chromatography (hplc), Substrate specificity, Synthetic peptide libraries, Metalloprotease, Pro-pro endopeptidase, Ppep, Fret peptides, Specificity profiling

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands


