### Accession
PXD012514

### Title
A new identified suppressor of Cdc7p/SepH kinase, PomA, regulates fungal asexual reproduction via affecting phosphorylation of MAPK-HogA

### Description
The septation initiation network (SIN), composed of a conserved SepH (Cdc7p) kinase cascade, plays an essential role in fungal cytokinesis/septation and conidiation for asexual reproduction, while the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway depends on successive signaling cascade phosphorylation to sense and respond to stress and environmental factors. In this study, a SepH suppressor–PomA in the filamentous fungus A. nidulans was identified as a negative regulator of septation and conidiation such that the pomA mutant was able to cure defects of sepH in septation and conidiation and overexpression of pomA remarkably suppressed septation. Under the normal cultural condition, SepH positively regulates the phosphorylation of MAPK-HogA, while PomA reversely affects this process and the phosphorylated HogA in MAPK could be a downstream product of the activated SIN. However, under the osmostress condition, the induced phosphorylated HogA is capable of bypassing the requirement of SepH to fulfill septation and conidiation. Findings demonstrate that crosstalk exists between the SIN and MAPK pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative phosphoproteomics, fresh conidia were inoculated into liquid minimal medium PDRUU and incubated for 18 h at 42 °C and shaken at 220 rpm. The harvested mycelia were then dried and extracted to obtain total proteins. The quantitative phosphoproteomics experiment was performed at Hangzhou PTM Biolabs Co., Ltd. as a commercial service. In brief, lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM DTT, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was used and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) and then labeled with a TMT kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Next, the labeled tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). After fractioning, the enrichment of phosphorylation was carried out based on biomaterial IMAC microspheres (for proteomics of total proteins, this step was skipped). Next, peptide mixtures were first incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension and vortexed in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid) and centrifuged to collect pellets with enriched phosphopeptides in the IMAC microspheres. The IMAC microspheres were then washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to sequentially remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. Elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was used to collect the supernatant containing phosphopeptides. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.).

### Data Protocol
Proteins with more than a 1.2-fold increase or decrease in phosphorylation were analyzed for GO terms and KEGG pathway analysis using the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and the KEGG database, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The septation initiation network (SIN), composed of a conserved SepH (Cdc7p) kinase cascade, plays an essential role in fungal cytokinesis/septation and conidiation for asexual reproduction, while the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway depends on successive signaling cascade phosphorylation to sense and respond to stress and environmental factors. In this study, a SepH suppressor-PomA in the filamentous fungus A. nidulans is identified as a negative regulator of septation and conidiation such that the pomA mutant is able to cure defects of sepH1 in septation and conidiation and overexpression of pomA remarkably suppresses septation. Under the normal cultural condition, SepH positively regulates the phosphorylation of MAPK-HogA, while PomA reversely affects this process. In the absence of PbsB (MAPKK, a putative upstream member of HogA), PomA and SepH are unable to affect the phosphorylation level of HogA. Under the osmostress condition, the induced phosphorylated HogA is capable of bypassing the requirement of SepH, a key player for early events during cytokinesis but not for MobA/SidB, the last one in the core SIN protein kinase cascade, indicating the osmotic stimuli-induced septation is capable of bypassing requirement of SepH but unable to bypass the whole SIN requirement. Findings demonstrate that crosstalk exists between the SIN and MAPK pathways. PomA and SepH indirectly regulate HogA phosphorylation through affecting HogA-P upstream kinases.

### Keywords
Aspergillus nidulans, Poma, The septation initiation network (sin), The mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk)

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210023, China
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Lu
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210023, China


