### Accession
PXD045877

### Title
The Greater Celandine: Identification and characterization of a novel antimicrobial peptide sequence from Chelidonium majus

### Description
A highly abundant, cysteine-rich peptide, deemed CM-AMP1, is characterized through multiple mass spectrometric approaches. Complimentary CID and EAD fragmentation types are used to gain full sequence coverage of the full-length peptide. CM-AMP1 shares little sequence similarity to any proteins in publicly available databases, highlighting the novelty of its cysteine landscape and core motif. The presence of three disulfide bonds in the native peptide confers proteolytic stability, and antimicrobial activity is greatly decreased upon alkylation of the cysteine residues. Synthetic variants of CM-AMP1 are used to confirm activity of the full-length sequence and the core motif. To assess the biological impact, E. coli was grown in a sub-lethal concentration of CM-AMP1 and quantitative proteomics was used to identify proteins produced by the bacteria under stress, ultimately suggesting a membrane lytic antimicrobial mechanism of action. This study integrates multiple analytical methods for molecular and biological characterization of a unique antimicrobial peptide identified from C. majus.

### Sample Protocol
Across two extractions, a total of 378.7 g of plant aerial tissue (180.1 g and 198.6 g, respectively) was extracted in acetic acid. Size exclusion steps were included to remove large proteins (>30,000 kDa) and small molecules (<500 Da). Neutral and negatively charged molecules were removed through a crude strong cation exchange fractionation, in which the flow-through was discarded. The SCX retained peak(s) were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, 500 mg), and subjected to an additional round of fractionation via RPLC. Fractions across the gradient were collected every minute, dried down via vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 60-120 µL of LCMS grade water.   For E. coli samples, Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1% (v/v)TritonX-100, pH 8.0) and shaken for 20 m at 37 °C. Following lysis, protein was precipitated in 5x cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol. Samples were incubated at−20°C for 30 min, and proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 20 000 RCF. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 and quantified with a CB-X assay (Biosciences) against BSA standards. Proteins (100μg) were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, 25°C) and alkylated (30 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min, 25°C, dark). Reduced and alkylated proteins were precipitated with 10x cold acetone and collected via centrifugation (20 000 RCF, 10 m). Precipitated protein was resuspended in 2 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8. Reduced and alkylated proteins were enzymatically digested with Trypsin gold (1:25 enzyme/protein; Promega) for 16 h, shaking at 850 rpm at 25°C. Samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH < 3, desalted using 50 mg C18 Sep-Paks (Waters), and dried in a CentriVap (Labconco).

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequencing was performed using de novo analysis. For E. coli proteomics samples, raw data files were imported into Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0) for peak alignment and quantification. Spectra were searched in Mascot (Matrix Science, v.2.5.0) against the E. coli K12 reference proteome (UniProt, accessed 9/16/2023) using a precursor / fragment tolerance of 15 ppm / 0.1 Da, trypsin specificity, two possible missed cleavages, fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation. Significant peptide identifications above the homology threshold were adjusted using the embedded Mascot percolator algorithm and uploaded to Progenesis for peak matching before exporting protein measurements. A students t-test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction was used to determine proteins that were significantly changing between conditions (q-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Celandine, Natural products, Proteomics, Antimicrobial response, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
UNC - Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
UNC - Chapel Hill


