### Accession
PXD010634

### Title
Profiling N-myristoyltransferase activity and inhibition in breast cancer cells (MD-MB-231) using Sortase-A labelling

### Description
We report a novel application for Sortase A (SrtA), labeling N-terminal Gly proteins across the proteome at endogenous levels. We combined SrtA labeling of whole-cell lysates with a potent and selective NMT inhibitor, delivering a method capable of quantifying changes in cellular NMT activity in multiple substrates at the whole proteome level. This method shows good overlap in substrates with a previously reported YnMyr metabolic tagging strategy (PXD002687), and a similar capability to measure cellular NMT activity. The SrtA-based approach described here is complementary to YnMyr metabolic tagging, since the increase in signal for newly synthesized proteins exposing an N-terminal glycine mirrors the loss of signal seen with YnMyr. Importantly, this new method overcomes the limitations imposed by metabolic tagging. Since SrtA labeling is performed post-lysis this labeling strategy provides a readout of the cell status in the absence of any external perturbation and is applicable to virtually any type of biological sample, giving clear advantages over other in-cell labeling strategies. We anticipate that this method will enable the exploration of new avenues for NMT as a therapeutic target by providing a method for de novo identification of substrates most responsive to NMT inhibition, and a multifuctional target engagement biomarker assay suited to both animal models and patient biopsies. Besides shotgun proteomics, we coupled this robust NMT activity assay to a variety of other detection techniques, including gel-based analyses, and ELISA. This submission concerns myristoylated proteomes of human origin.

### Sample Protocol
MD-MB-231 cells were exposed to NMT inhibitor IMP-1088 or DMSO (vehicle) in the presence or absence of YnMyr (clickable protein myristoylation probe used to metabolically tag intracellular proteins via activation by cellular acyl-CoA synthase followed by transfer by N-myristoyl transferases). The cells were harvested. Proteins derived from cells not subjected to the YnMyr treatment were reacted with a biotinylated depsipeptide via SrtA-catalyzed ligation reaction, and affinity enriched. Proteins metabolically tagged with YnMyr were reacted with a capture reagent via copper-catalyzed alkyne azide cycloaddition, and affinity-enriched. The enriched proteomes were analyzed through on-bead proteolytic digestion, LC-MS/MS-based analysis, and software-aided peptide sequencing and protein identification. Alternatively, SrtA-labeled proteins were proteolytically digested, protein N-terminal peptides affinity-enriched, prior to LC-MS/MS-based analysis and software-aided peptide sequencing.

### Data Protocol
For protein-level affinity enriched samples, raw files were uploaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) and searched against the curated Swissprot human proteome (Uniprot, December 2017, 42326 entries) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N terminus as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, the following peptide bond cleavages were allowed: arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid (a general setting referred to as Trypsin/P). Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and sites. Other parameters were used as preset in the software. “Match between runs” option (time window 0.7 min) was allowed and “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins), and for TMT quantification (MS2 mode) the minimal ratio count = 2 was selected. For peptide-level affinity enriched samples, the search was performed in MaxQuant against the database modified using R so that the first two “MX” residues of every protein sequence were replaced by “MALPETX”. This allowed for the automated assignment of ions resulted from HCD-induced fragmentation of the peptidic element of the N-terminal modification. A biotin modification at the N-terminus of any protein (formula: H14O2C10N2S; exact mass:  226.0776 Da) was set as a variable modification to act as an internal control that would reinforce the validity of the identification by combination of the two independently found elements of Biotin-ALPET. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. For in silico digests of the reference proteome Trypsin/P was selected, allowing up to two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and sites. The minimum scores for unmodified and modified peptides were set to 0 and 25, respectively. Identification of second peptides was allowed. Other parameters were used as preset in the software.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N</i>-myristoylation is the covalent addition of a 14-carbon saturated fatty acid (myristate) to the N-terminal glycine of specific protein substrates by <i>N</i>-myristoyltransferase (NMT) and plays an important role in protein regulation by controlling localization, stability, and interactions. We developed a novel method for whole-proteome profiling of free N-terminal glycines through labeling with <i>S. Aureus</i> sortase A (SrtA) and used it for assessment of target engagement by an NMT inhibitor. Analysis of the SrtA-labeling pattern with an engineered biotinylated depsipeptide SrtA substrate (Biotin-ALPET-Haa, Haa = 2-hydroxyacetamide) enabled whole proteome identification and quantification of <i>de novo</i> generated N-terminal Gly proteins in response to NMT inhibition by nanoLC-MS/MS proteomics, and was confirmed for specific substrates across multiple cell lines by gel-based analyses and ELISA. To achieve optimal signal over background noise we introduce a novel and generally applicable improvement to the biotin/avidin affinity enrichment step by chemically dimethylating commercial NeutrAvidin resin and combining this with two-step LysC on-bead/trypsin off-bead digestion, effectively eliminating avidin-derived tryptic peptides and enhancing identification of enriched peptides. We also report SrtA substrate specificity in whole-cell lysates for the first time, confirming SrtA promiscuity beyond its recognized preference for N-terminal glycine, and its usefulness as a tool for unbiased labeling of N-terminal glycine-containing proteins. Our new methodology is complementary to metabolic tagging strategies, providing the first approach for whole proteome gain-of signal readout for NMT inhibition in complex samples which are not amenable to metabolic tagging.

### Keywords
Sortase a; srta; n-myristoylation; nmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Institute of Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London


