### Accession
PXD013186

### Title
The lactococcal phage p2 protein ORF47 impedes Lactococcus lactis MG1363 resistance to phage infection

### Description
The lactococcal phage p2 is a model for studying the Skunavirus genus, the most prevalent group of phages in cheese factories worldwide. It infects L. lactis MG1363, a model strain for the study of Gram-positive bacteria. The structural proteins of phage p2 have been thoroughly described. However, most of its non-structural proteins are still uncharacterized. Here, we developed an integrative approach, making use of structural biology, genomics, physiology, and proteomics to provide insights into the function of ORF47, the most conserved non-structural protein of unknown function among the Skunavirus genus. We found this small phage protein to have a major impact on the bacterial proteome and to be important to prevent bacterial resistance to phage infection.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial growth conditions L. lactis MG1363 and its derivatives were grown at 30C in M17 broth (Oxoid, Ontario, Canada) supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) glucose monohydrate (GM17). For solid media, agar (1.0% w/v) was added to GM17 broth. L. lactis MG1363 were transformed by electroporation using a glycine-based protocol (Holo H, Nes IF. 1989. Appl Environ Microbiol 55:3119–3123). To maintain cloning plasmid vectors, chloramphenicol and/or erythromycin were added to a final concentration of 5 g/ml each (Cm5 or Em5).  Phage propagation and titration Phage p2 (GenBank NC_009004.1) was obtained from the Félix d’Hérelle Reference Center for Bacterial Viruses (www.phage.ulaval.ca). For phage infection, growth media were supplemented with 10 mM CaCl2 (GM17+Ca). Phages were amplified from frozen glycerol stocks as previously described (Lemay M-L, Otto A, Maaß S, Plate K, Becher D, Moineau S. 2019. Mol Cell Proteomics). Precise titers were determined by double layer plaque assays (Kropinski AM, Mazzocco A, Waddell TE, Lingohr E, Johnson RP. 2009. Methods Mol Biol 501:69–76) with plates containing a bottom layer of solid GM17+Ca and a top layer of GM17+Ca supplemented with 0.75% (w/v) agar. For approximate titers, serial phage dilutions were spotted onto a lawn of the appropriate bacterial strain and plaques were counted at the lowest dilution at which they were visible. The efficiency of plaquing (EOP) was calculated by dividing the phage titer obtained on the resistant strain by the phage titer obtained on the sensitive strain. To check if a phage resistance phenotype was due to a deficiency in adsorption, phage adsorption assays were performed. For phage growth curves, infected L. lactis MG1363 cultures were followed for 50 minutes post-infection with a starting MOI of 0.05, as previously described (Moineau S, Durmaz E, Pandian S, Klaenhammer TR. 1993. Appl Environ Microbiol 59:208–212). Growth curves were made in biological and technical triplicates. The burst size was calculated by dividing the average titer after the exponential phase by the average titer before the release of new phages. The latent period was determined by the time it took the phage to reach the middle of the exponential phase. To obtain concentrated and purified samples of phage p2∆47 for time-course infection, one liter of a second amplification lysate was purified on a discontinuous cesium chloride gradient (Sambrook J, W Russell D. 2001. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 3rd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Lab Press, Cold Spring Harb, NY.).  Proteomic analysis  Briefly, time-course infections of L. lactis MG1363 by phage p2∆47 were done in biological triplicates. Sample T0 (negative control) was collected just prior to adding the purified phage p2∆47 at a MOI of 5. Samples T10, T20 and T40 were collected 10, 20 and 40 minutes post-infection, respectively. Proteins were extracted and separated by 1D SDS-PAGE (12% polyacrylamide) for in-gel tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) using an EASY-nLC II system and measured on an Orbitrap Velos instrument.

### Data Protocol
For GeLC-MS/MS, relative protein quantification was achieved using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1) and the Andromeda plug-in. Proteins were accepted if at least two unique peptides could be identified in at least two of the three biological replicates (filtered in Perseus, version 1.6.0.2.) (Supplementary Table S6). Statistical analysis (ANOVA) was performed using TM4 by applying p-values of 0.01 (Supplementary Table S7).

### Publication Abstract
The lactococcal virulent phage p2 is a model for studying the <i>Skunavirus</i> genus, the most prevalent group of phages causing milk fermentation failures in cheese factories worldwide. This siphophage infects <i>Lactococcus lactis</i> MG1363, a model strain used to study Gram-positive lactic acid bacteria. The structural proteins of phage p2 have been thoroughly described, while most of its non-structural proteins remain uncharacterized. Here, we developed an integrative approach, making use of structural biology, genomics, physiology, and proteomics to provide insights into the function of ORF47, the most conserved non-structural protein of unknown function among the <i>Skunavirus</i> genus. This small phage protein, which is composed of three &#x3b1;-helices, was found to have a major impact on the bacterial proteome during phage infection and to significantly reduce the emergence of bacteriophage-insensitive mutants.

### Keywords
Lactococcus lactis, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, Label-free quantification, Phage infection

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald Germany
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Doete Becher
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald Germany


