### Accession
PXD025418

### Title
proteomic analysis of the xylem development stage in Populus tomentosa

### Description
In order to further determine whether genes related to xylem development have changed at the protein level, we conducted proteomic analysis of stem xylem at different stages.

### Sample Protocol
The cortex and phloem were peeled off the stems of Populus tomentosa in 1 month-old, 2 month-old, and 3 month-old, and the xylem were collected for proteomic analyses.

### Data Protocol
The sample was lysed with SDT (4%(w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 0.1M DTT) to extract protein, and then BCA method was used for protein quantification. Take appropriate amount of protein from each sample and use Filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) method for trypsin digestion, use C18 Cartridge to desalt the peptides, freeze-dry the peptides and add 40 μL 0.1% formic acid solution to reconstitute, and the peptides are quantified (OD280). Each sample was separated using the HPLC liquid system Easy-nLC with nanoliter flow rate. Buffer solution A solution is 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, B solution is 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (acetonitrile is 84%). The chromatographic column is equilibrated with 95% A liquid, and the sample is loaded from the autosampler to the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18), and passes through the analytical column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10 cm, ID 75 μm, 3 μm, C18-A2) separation, the flow rate is 300 nL/min. After chromatographic separation, the samples were analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Xylem development plays an important role in the wood formation of plants. In this study, we found that xylem development was a rapid thickening process characterized by initially rapid increases in the number of tracheary elements and fiber cells and the thickness of the secondary walls that later plateaued. Transcriptome analysis showed that the xylan and lignin biosynthetic pathways, which are involved in the early rapid thickening of the xylem, were mainly upregulated in the second month. The expression of a total of 124 transcription factors (TFs), including 28 NAC TFs and 31 MYB TFs, peaked in 2- and 3-month-old plants compared with 1-month-old plants. Based on previous studies and the key <i>cis</i>-acting elements secondary wall NAC-binding elements, secondary wall MYB-responsive elements, W-box and TGTG[T/G/C], 10 TFs related to xylem development, 50 TFs with unknown function, 98 cell wall biosynthetic genes, and 47 programmed cell death (PCD) genes were used to construct a four-layer transcriptional regulatory network (TRN) with poplar NAC domain TFs to characterize the transcriptional regulation of cell wall biosynthesis and PCD in <i>Populus tomentosa</i>. The proteome revealed that post-transcriptional modification may be widely involved in lignification development. Overall, our results revealed that xylem development is a rapid thickening process in <i>P. tomentosa</i>, and expression patterns varied temporally from cell division to cell death.

### Keywords
Xylem development;proteome;populus

### Affiliations
College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University
College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, Chinalege of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China

### Submitter
chong zhang

### Lab Head
Dr lu hai
College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, Chinalege of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China


