### Accession
PXD029380

### Title
Proteome analysis of microvessels from CAA and AD patients

### Description
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is an age-related condition and a major cause of intracerebral hemorrhage and cognitive decline that shows close links with Alzheimer's disease (AD). CAA is characterized by the aggregation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and formation of Aβ deposits in the brain vasculature resulting in a disruption of the angioarchitecture. Capillaries are a critical site of Aβ pathology in CAA type 1 and become dysfunctional during disease progression. Here, applying an advanced protocol for the isolation of parenchymal microvessels from post-mortem brain tissue combined with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), we determined the proteomes of CAA type 1 cases (n = 12) including a patient with hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis-Dutch type (HCHWA-D), and of AD cases without microvascular amyloid pathology (n = 13) in comparison to neurologically healthy controls (n = 12).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction of isolated microvessels was performed in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT. Samples were processed by Precellys tissue homogenizer (5 × 30 s, 10,000 rpm, 30 s pause), heated for 3 min at 95 °C and subsequently sonicated (5 × 30 s, amplitude 100%, duty cycle 50%) with intermediate cooling using the VialTweeter sonicator (Hielscher). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min, supernatants collected, and protein concentration determined using the colorimetric 660-nm assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A protein amount of 30 µg vessel lysate was subjected to proteolytic digestion by a modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (Hughes, 2019; PMID: 30852816). Resulting peptides were desalted, dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. A micro-flow LC-MS/MS system composed of a modified Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for all proteomic measurements in this study, as described in detail by Bian et al. (PMID: 31919466). Peptides (4.0 µg) were separated on a 15 mm long C18 column with an inner diameter (ID) of 1 mm (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A binary 60-min gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 3% DMSO was applied as follows using a flow rate of 50 µL/min: 0 min, 0.5% B; 0.2 min, 2% B; 52.7 min, 24% B; 60.2 min, 35% B; 60.5 min, 90% B; 62.7 min, 0.5% B. Sample loading and column wash was performed at an increased flow rate of 100 uL/min. A column was heated to 55°C. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, scan range from 360 to 1400 m/z, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 3E6. The Top 20 precursors were subjected to higher-energy c-trap dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28%. A resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 1E5, isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a maximum injection time of 22 ms was applied. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed with the Maxquant software (Cox, 2014; PMID: 24942700) version 1.6.17.0 and searched against a reviewed canonical FASTA database of Homo sapiens (UniProt, download: June 26th 2021, 20395 entries). To recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm, the option first search was used. Main search was performed for peptides and peptide fragments within a mass tolerance of 4.5 and 20 ppm respectively. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to less than 1% for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is an age-related condition and a major cause of intracerebral hemorrhage and cognitive decline that shows close links with Alzheimer's disease (AD). CAA is characterized by the aggregation of amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) peptides and formation of A&#x3b2; deposits in the brain vasculature resulting in a disruption of the angioarchitecture. Capillaries are a critical site of A&#x3b2; pathology in CAA type 1 and become dysfunctional during disease progression. Here, applying an advanced protocol for the isolation of parenchymal microvessels from post-mortem brain tissue combined with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), we determined the proteomes of CAA type 1 cases (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12) including a patient with hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis-Dutch type (HCHWA-D), and of AD cases without microvascular amyloid pathology (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;13) in comparison to neurologically healthy controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12). ELISA measurements revealed microvascular A&#x3b2;<sub>1-40</sub> levels to be exclusively enriched in CAA samples (mean:&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;3000-fold compared to controls). The proteomic profile of CAA type 1 was characterized by massive enrichment of multiple predominantly secreted proteins and showed significant overlap with the recently reported brain microvascular proteome of patients with cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a hereditary cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) characterized by the aggregation of the Notch3 extracellular domain. We found this overlap to be largely attributable to the accumulation of high-temperature requirement protein A1 (HTRA1), a serine protease with an established role in the brain vasculature, and several of its substrates. Notably, this signature was not present in AD cases. We further show that HTRA1 co-localizes with A&#x3b2; deposits in brain capillaries from CAA type 1 patients indicating a pathologic recruitment process. Together, these findings suggest a central role of HTRA1-dependent protein homeostasis in the CAA microvasculature and a molecular connection between multiple types of brain microvascular disease.

### Keywords
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, Proteostasis, Proteomics, Htra1, Cadasil, Cerebral small vessel disease

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Zellner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


