### Accession
PXD020903

### Title
Alteration of protein expression and spliceosome pathway activity during Barrett’s carcinogenesis.

### Description
Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a common and aggressive type of cancer and Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a known precursor lesion and the strongest risk factor for EAC. Prediction of risk is currently based on histologic examination which is challenged by problems such as inter-observer variability due to high heterogeneity of the dysplastic tissue. Molecular markers might offer an additional way to understand carcinogenesis and improve diagnosis and eventually treatment. .

### Sample Protocol
By endoscopic mucosa resection (EMR), 23 specimens were taken from patient with normal BE (n = 10) and high-grade dysplasia (HGD)/EAC (n = 13) from which volumes of about 4.8 nL epithelial and stromal tissue were collected by laser-capture micro-dissection. Samples were analysed by bottom-up proteomics analysis, using liquid-chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry. Proteins were identified and quantified by label-free quantitation, differential expressed proteins were determined, and gene-set enrichment was used to find associated pathways.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) were carried out, separated for epithelial and stromal samples, by the quantitative proteomics software package MaxQuant. Following parameters and settings were applied for the Andromeda database search: human (Homo Sapiens) subset of the uniprot swissprot database (20,194 entries; version: 12. November 2015); carbamidomethylation (+57.021 u) of cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 u) and oxidation (+ 15.995 u) of methionine, lysine, and proline as variable modification; tryptic cleavage allowing two miscleavages; and default orbitrap specfic instrumental parameters. For the label-free quantification the parameter multiplicity was set to 1, label-free quantification set to LFQ, and calculation of iBAQ values activated; otherwise the default settings were used. Next, we combined results of all samples by cell-type, applied filtering of identification (local protein false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%, local peptide FDR < 0.1%, minimum 2 peptide / protein identified) and conducted protein grouping using the software package Scaffold. Protein-sample table containing iBAQ values and spectrum reports were exported and used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Barrett’s esophagus, Laser capture micro-dissection, Dysplastia, Epithelial cells, Mass spectrometry, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology
ErasmusMC,  Dept. of Neurology,  Laboratory Clinical & Cancer Proteomics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
ErasmusMC,  Dept. of Neurology,  Laboratory Clinical & Cancer Proteomics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


