### Accession
PXD031324

### Title
FGF21 modulates mitochondrial stress response in cardiomyocytes only under mild mitochondrial dysfunction

### Description
Mitochondrial integrated stress response emerged as a major adaptive pathway to respiratory chain deficiency, but tissue-specifics of its regulation or how it adapts to different levels of mitochondrial dysfunction are largely unknown. Here we report that diverse levels of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy activate mitoISR, including high production of FGF21, a cytokine with both paracrine and endocrine function, shown to be induced by respiratory chain dysfunction. Remarkably, although being fully dispensable for the cell-autonomous and systemic responses to severe mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, in the conditions of mild-to-moderate cardiac OXPHOS dysfunction, FGF21 regulates a portion of the mitoISR. In the absence of FGF21, a large part of the metabolic adaptation to mitochondrial dysfunction (one-carbon metabolism, transsulfuration and serine and proline biosynthesis) is strongly blunted, independent of the primary mitoISR activator ATF4. Collectively, our work highlights the complexity of mitochondrial stress responses by revealing the importance of the tissue-specificity and dose-dependency of the mitoISR.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissue was used for label-free quantification of the proteome. First of all, the tissues were disrupted using liquid nitrogen and dissolved in 8M Urea buffer, with the addition of a 1x proteinase inhibitor. After incubation (30min, 4°C, on a rotating wheel) lysates were cleared (15min, 4°C, full speed) and protein concentration was determined with Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Next, 50µg protein per sample were precipitated with the four-fold volume of cold 100% acetone (60min, -80°C), pelleted (15min, 4°C, full speed) and washed twice with cold 90% acetone (5min, 4°C, full speed). The air-dried pellet was subsequently resuspended in 300µL 8M urea buffer. In solution digest was performed by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 5mM (1h, 37°C), addition of chloracetamid to a final concentration of 40mM (20min, protect from light), the addition of endoproteinase Lys-C at an enzyme-substrate ration of 1:75 (4h, 37°C) and dilution with 50mM TEAB to a urea concentration of 2M before adding trypsin at an enzyme-substrate ration of 1:75 (overnight, 37°C, protect from light). The digest was stopped with formic acid (1% final concentration). Digested protein lysates were loaded on SDB-RPS stage tips and submitted to the CECAD proteomic facility for further processing. The samples were further processed using a ‘Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap’ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with an ‘EASY nLC’ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 μm I.D., filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) was used to load the samples with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Chromatographic separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 5-28% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 220.0 min, 28-55% solvent B within 5.0 min, 55-90% solvent B within 5.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.1h window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20s.

### Data Protocol
The generated mass-spectrometry (MS) raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software. Peptides and proteins were identified using the mouse UniProt trembl database (downloaded 08/2019) with common contaminants. All parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.6.10.50) software. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed. Welch’s Student t-test with S0=0.1 and a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 or 0.01 with 500 randomizations was performed to obtain differentially regulated proteins between the two groups. Identified proteins were annotated with the following Gene Ontology terms: Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Compartment, and the Reactome Pathway database. Finally, graphical visualization was achieved using Instant Clue software.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial integrated stress response (mitoISR) has emerged as a major adaptive pathway to respiratory chain deficiency, but both the tissue specificity of its regulation, and how mitoISR adapts to different levels of mitochondrial dysfunction are largely unknown. Here, we report that diverse levels of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy activate mitoISR, including high production of FGF21, a cytokine with both paracrine and endocrine function, shown to be induced by respiratory chain dysfunction. Although being fully dispensable for the cell-autonomous and systemic responses to severe mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, in the conditions of mild-to-moderate cardiac OXPHOS dysfunction, FGF21 regulates a portion of mitoISR. In the absence of FGF21, a large part of the metabolic adaptation to mitochondrial dysfunction (one-carbon metabolism, transsulfuration, and serine and proline biosynthesis) is strongly blunted, independent of the primary mitoISR activator ATF4. Collectively, our work highlights the complexity of mitochondrial stress responses by revealing the importance of the tissue specificity and dose dependency of mitoISR.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cardiomyopathy, Clpp, Oxphos, Fgf21

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Aging, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Trifunovic
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Aging, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


