### Accession
PXD004817

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of cell response to photon and particle irradiation

### Description
The growing number of particle treatment facilities worldwide and patients treated with particles instead of X-rays marks the upcoming rearrangement of modern radiotherapy. Especially for tumors being difficult to access and for tumors that are resistant to conventional X-ray treatment particle radiotherapy is a beneficial technology. At the Heidelberg Ion Beam Therapy Center (HIT) patients are treated with this technology since 2009 as it offers clear benefits.  Contrary to X-rays, which show an exponential dose decrease (after reaching electron equilibrium) with increasing tissue depth, charged particles deposit most of their energy to a small region within the tissue with a sharp dose fall-off after the so-called Bragg peak. This precise dose localization enables further dose escalation within the tumor while sparing healthy tissue. Besides physical advantages, particle radiotherapy offers additional biological advantages. In radiobiology, the term relative-biological effectiveness (RBE) is defined as the ratio of X-rays dose to an alternative irradiation modality dose which produce the same biological effect (e.g. survival or number of DSBs). While protons have a relative biological effectiveness (RBE) comparable to X-rays, carbon ions are more effective in inducing DNA damage(1, 2) and are therefore especially useful for radioresistant tumors. This is due to the fact, that carbon ions induce clustered and direct DNA damage, which is considered to be less dependent on cell cycle stage, oxygen level, genetic background and hinders DNA repair mechanisms(3–6). Nevertheless, their exact mode of action and cellular mechanisms are largely unknown. We show the first comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic study elucidating the cellular response to treatment with protons, carbon ions and X-rays. We found that 2h after treatment with these radiations negligible regulation occurred at protein expression level. But 181 phosphorylation sites were deregulated by ionizing radiation contributing mainly to DNA damage response functionalities. Interestingly we found 55 phosphorylation sites being differentially regulated between the radiations. Here, we observed protons and carbon ions producing equal cellular response whereas X-rays show altered regulation for certain phosphorylation sites. A subset of 28 phosphorylation sites being involved in the DNA damage response or differentially regulated between the ionizing radiations was selected for result confirmation.

### Sample Protocol
To study acute molecular response to different ionizing radiation modalities we performed a comparative proteomic as well as phosphoproteomic study. We exposed well-established human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549) to X-rays, protons and carbon ions at the Heidelberg Ion Beam Therapy Center (HIT). Cells were exposed to 6 Gy X-rays, 3.5 Gy protons and 2 Gy carbon ions, which represent biologically equivalent doses. For accurate quantification cells were metabolically labeled using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Cells of the light SILAC state were sham irradiated and ones of the heavy state were irradiated by the different radiation qualities. Following a waiting period of 2 h the cells were harvested and after cell lysis equal protein amounts were mixed. For protein quantification, lysates (15 µg of light and heavy SILAC sample) were subjected to SDS-PAGE , gel slicing (27 per lane) and subsequent in-gel digestion using trypsin. For phosphoproteome analysis lysates (150 µg of light and heavy SILAC sample) were tryptically digested in-solution and enriched using a combination of IMAC and TiO2 leading to 2 phosphopeptide fractions. Subsequently, proteome samples were separated by a 1 h gradient and the phosphoproteome samples by a 3°h gradient using a nanoUPLC system coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Using this discovery dataset, candidates were selected for confirmation in a targeted spike-in experiment. To this end, selected phosphopeptides were synthesized as heavy isotope labeled counterparts and spiked into enriched phosphoproteome samples. This enabled to check co-elution of the endogenous and the synthetic phosphopeptide and compare fragmentation patterns of the peptides, including fragments necessary for exact assignment of the phosphosite localization.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8). Peptide identification was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the human UniProt database (downloaded: 06/07/2015; 146.661 sequences). SILAC quantification was enabled using 13C6,15N4-arginine (+10.0083) and 13C6,15N2-lysine (+8.0142) for the heavy state and their 12C,14N-containing counterparts for the light state. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) was used as fixed modification; methionine oxidation (15.9949), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106), deamidation of asparagine as well as glutamine (+0.9840) and additionally for the phosphoproteome data set serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.9663) as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions were required. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/p with an allowed maximum of two missed cleavages for the proteome analysis and four missed cleavages for the phosphoproteome analysis. Additionally, the “re-quantify” and “match between runs” features were implemented with default settings to increase the number of peptides which can be used for quantification.  Data transformation and evaluation was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.4), which includes all necessary functionalities. Protein and phosphopeptide ratios were normalized, so that the median of their logarithms is zero. For confident protein identification at least two unique peptides were required. Additional filtering for quantitative values was applied in order to have at least two valid values out of three in each sample group (photon, proton, carbon). To define significantly regulated proteins/phosphorylation sites between irradiated samples and control samples one-sample t test was performed to be different from 0 (p-value: 0.01). In addition, proteins/phosphorylation sites were only considered to be regulated if their abundance was changed more than 1.5-fold compared to the control. In order to find proteins/phosphorylation sites differentially regulated between radiation qualities we applied a two-sample t test (p-value: 0.01). In addition, proteins/phosphorylation sites were only considered to be regulated if their abundance was changed more than 1.5-fold between two radiation qualities considered. Visualization and functional analysis was performed with several software tools, including: R (http://www.r-project.org/index.html), Cytoscape (version: 3.2.1, with the plugins ClueGO and CluePedia), Motif-X and NetworKIN (version: 3.0). For quantification of the spike-in samples we used Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Radiotherapy is a cornerstone of cancer therapy. The recently established particle therapy with raster-scanning protons and carbon ions landmarks a new era in the field of high-precision cancer medicine. However, molecular mechanisms governing radiation induced intracellular signaling remain elusive. Here, we present the first comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic study applying stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in combination with high-resolution mass spectrometry to decipher cellular response to irradiation with X-rays, protons and carbon ions. At protein expression level limited alterations were observed 2 h post irradiation of human lung adenocarcinoma cells. In contrast, 181 phosphorylation sites were found to be differentially regulated out of which 151 sites were not hitherto attributed to radiation response as revealed by crosscheck with the PhosphoSitePlus database.Radiation-induced phosphorylation of the p(S/T)Q motif was the prevailing regulation pattern affecting proteins involved in DNA damage response signaling. Because radiation doses were selected to produce same level of cell kill and DNA double-strand breakage for each radiation quality, DNA damage responsive phosphorylation sites were regulated to same extent. However, differential phosphorylation between radiation qualities was observed for 55 phosphorylation sites indicating the existence of distinct signaling circuitries induced by X-ray <i>versus</i> particle (proton/carbon) irradiation beyond the canonical DNA damage response. This unexpected finding was confirmed in targeted spike-in experiments using synthetic isotope labeled phosphopeptides. Herewith, we successfully validated uniform DNA damage response signaling coexisting with altered signaling involved in apoptosis and metabolic processes induced by X-ray and particle based treatments.In summary, the comprehensive insight into the radiation-induced phosphoproteome landscape is instructive for the design of functional studies aiming to decipher cellular signaling processes in response to radiotherapy, space radiation or ionizing radiation <i>per se</i> Further, our data will have a significant impact on the ongoing debate about patient treatment modalities.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Phosphoproteomics, Dna-damage, A549, Silac, Gelc-msms, Radiotherapy

### Affiliations
Functional Proteome Analysis German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Martin Winter

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Schnölzer
Functional Proteome Analysis German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany


