### Accession
PXD012645

### Title
BALF proteomics -  In-depth proteomic analysis of human bronchoalveolar lavage fluid towards the biomarker discovery for lung cancers

### Description
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers and the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. Because the early diagnosis of the cancer is one of the major goals in lung cancer research, the molecule-based sensitive detection of biomarkers from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) to diagnose the lung cancer has been suggested as a promising method. BALF is a fluid that can be easily obtained from patients with lung diseases and the process of collecting the fluid is relatively cheap and non-invasive. Here, we developed a novel method for in-depth single proteomic analysis of BALF by using antibody-based depletion of high abundant proteins from BALF. We identified, in total, 4,615 protein groups mapped to 4,535 gene names using LC-MS/MS. We found our method outperformed conventional methods. With the comprehensive result, we believe that this method would facilitate lung cancer biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed with bronchoalveolar fluid from 14 patients with lung cancer. The sample was obtained from Kyunghee University College Hospital in South Korea and approved by IRB. Samples obtained from patients were collected in a 50 ml tube and centrifuged at 500 g for 4° C and 5 minutes. Only the supernatant except the pellet was aliquoted in 1 mL of 1.5 mL tube and stored at -80 ° C. Samples containing red color or blood were excluded in experiment. 2 tubes each of 14 patients were pooled and concentrated using filters (Amicon® Ultra 15mL Centrifugal Filters, Merck) in 5000 g, 4° C and 60 min. Depletion was performed to remove 14 high abundant proteins; Albumin, IgG, α1-Antitrypsin, IgA, IgM, Transferrin, Haptoglobin, α2-Macroglobulin, Fibrinogen, Complement C3, α1-Acid Glycoprotein (Orosomucoid), HDL (Apolipoproteins A-I and A-II), LDL (mainly Apolipoprotein B) using spin columns (Seppro® IgY14, spin columns, Merck). High abundant proteins of filtered samples bound in depletion column and we can collect flow-through using 1x dilution buffer (Seppro® Dilution buffer, Merck). Before depletion, samples were centrifugated with 0.45 μm filter (Corning® Costar® Spin-X® centrifuge tube filters, cellulose acetate membrane, pore size 0.45 μm, Merck) in 9000g, 4° C and 1min to remove debris. Filtered sample was mixed with dilution buffer until 600μl and load in spin column. To efficient binding of high abundant proteins, spin column was rotated using rotator (DAIHAN-brand® Programmable Digital Rotator) in RT for 15 min, 20 rpm. Sample which was removed high abundant proteins was obtained by centrifugation at 500 g for 1min then repeat this process using dilution buffer. The protein samples were concentrated because of low concentration. 0.5 mL 3k filter (Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit, Merck) was pre-wet stepped with dilution buffer by centrifugation at 14000 g for 30 min at 4 ° C. The sample was injected and centrifuged at 14000 g for 30 min at 4 ° C. After the concentration and buffer change were completed, the sample was obtained at 1000 g, 20 min 4 ℃. To measure the amount of protein, we performed BCA assay (Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher). 140 μg of protein was detected by the BCA assay. 60μg of proteins used in the SDS-PAGE and 80μg of protein was inserted in the in-digestion. We performed SDS-PAGE (8 x 8 cm gel) to confirm that the low abundant protein exists after depletion process. 30 μg of proteins, which was divided half of 60 μg, were used and 2 lines of 30 μg protein were compared with raw sample of Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel, 1.5mm X 10 well, Invitrogen) was used and stained with gel code blue (Thermo Fisher, Gel Code™ Blue Stain Reagent) for 2 hour. Denaturation was performed with 6M Urea in ABC buffer (pH 8.0) for 45 min then reduction was performed using 1M DTT for 1hour. 1M IAA was used for Alkylation in dark room, 30 min and we carried out dilution using ABC buffer (pH 8.0). Because of Digestion, we used 50 : 1 ratio of protein and trypsin reacted at 37 ℃ for 12 hours. After quenching, desalting was performed with a C18 spin column (Harvard, macro spin column). We carried out 24 high-pH reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation using UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-scientific). High-pH RPLC fractionation was performed to separate digested peptides based on their hydrophobicity. Xbridge C18 column (4.6 x 250mm, 5um) was used and high-pH buffer A (10mM ammonium formate in water, pH10) and buffer B (10mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH10) was used. Each peptide was divided into 24 fractions and linear gradient was used as follow: 0–10min, 5% B; 10–70 min, 5–35% B; 70–80 min, 70% B; 80–105 min, 5% B. The separated peptides were collected and dried in a speed vacuum. Each fraction was vacuum dried and stored at−80°C until liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) experiments. We performed LC-MS/MS analysis using EASY-nLC (Thermo-Scientific) and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo-Scientific). Single fractions were loaded in column. PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 15cm, Thermo-Scientific) was used as trap column and PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50cm, Thermo-Scientific) was used by analytical column. Solvents were used 0.1% FA in water (sol A) and 80% ACN in water (sol B). NSI Ion Source Type was used and run time was 120 min each fractions. Samples were analyzed using Orbitrap and resolution for precursor was 60,000. Single lock mass was at 445.12003, scan range was 400-1600 m/z and maximum injection time was 50ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 12s. HCD activation type was used and resolution for fragments was 15,000 and maximum injection time was 22ms. Automatic gain control (AGC) was 50,000 and data type was centroid.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.8) software and searched with UniProt Homo sapiens database (June, 2018). The search parameters were carboamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. We processed Trypsin/P as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavage was allowed. The FDR for both peptide and protein was set to 0.01. We discarded proteins which were corresponding 'Reverse' and 'Potential contaminant'. Gene Ontology Consortium (http://geneontology.org/) was used to obtain Gene Ontology of our data. Displaying only results for Bonferroni-corrected for P-value < 0.01 and fold enrichment > 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Depletion, Balf, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Kyung-Hee university
Department of New Biology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Seo-Young Sim

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Department of New Biology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


