### Accession
PXD016524

### Title
Drosha/Dicer/miR-7/TGF-β2 axis Sustained Acidic Microenvironment-induced Lung Metastasis

### Description
Extracellular pH (pHe) is lower in many tumors than in the corresponding normal tissue. Acidic tumor microenvironment has been shown to facilitate epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis, while the mechanisms underlying tumor acidic microenvironment-induced tumor cell metastasis remain undefined. Here, we aimed to investigate the tumor metastasis and the EMT by acidic microenvironment and to explore their mechanisms and clinical significance in lung cancer. Results showed that acidic pHe remarkably enhanced invasion ability of lung cells accompanying with increased mesenchymal and decreased epithelial markers. Moreover, acidic pHe triggered the inhibition of microRNA-7 (miR-7) expression and activation of TGF-β2/SMAD signaling. Mechanistic studies showed that TGF-β2 is a direct potential target gene of miR-7, and acidity-induced metastasis could be abolished by treatment with a TGFβRI inhibitor, anti-TGF-β2 antibody and miR-7 mimic, respectively. The clinical samples further revealed that miR-7 was decreased in lung tissues and antagonistically correlated with TGF-β2 expression, associating with overall survival and metastasis. In conclusion, our study indicated that acidic pHe showed enhanced invasive potential, and enhanced potential to develop experimental metastases by a novel mechanism involving tumor acidic microenvironment-induced regulation of miR-7/TGF-β2/SMAD axis. Our findings suggest that the possibility that pHe of the primary tumor may be an important prognostic parameter for lung cancer patients merit clinical investigation. Moreover, miR-7 may serve as prognostic molecular marker and a novel therapeutic target for lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The primary experimental procedures for TMT proteomics analysis include protein preparation, trypsin digestion, TMT labeling, HPLC fractionation, LC-MS/MS analysis and data analysis. Details are as follows: samples were removed from -80 °C, and 4 times volume of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor) was added, respectively. Cells were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, cell debris was removed, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit. Dithiositol was added to the protein solution to reduce the final concentration to 5 mM and 56 °C for 30 min. Then iodoacetamide was added to make the final concentration 11 mM, and incubated in dark for 15 min at room temperature. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) and digested overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) and continued enzymatic hydrolysis for 4 h. The trypsin enzymatic peptides were demineralized with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then vacuum freeze-dried. The peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled according to the instructions of the TMT kit. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
We used Gene Ontology(GO) and KEGG to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species, and then annotated protein domain according to each protein sequence and structure, and then we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Proteins were classified by GO and KEGG annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.1 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
Acidosis, regardless of hypoxia involvement, is recognized as a chronic and harsh tumor microenvironment (TME) that educates malignant cells to thrive and metastasize. Although overwhelming evidence supports an acidic environment as a driver or ubiquitous hallmark of cancer progression, the unrevealed core mechanisms underlying the direct effect of acidification on tumorigenesis have hindered the discovery of novel therapeutic targets and clinical therapy. Here, chemical-induced and transgenic mouse models for colon, liver and lung cancer were established, respectively. miR-7 and TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2 expressions were examined in clinical tissues (<i>n</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;184). RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, proteomics, biosynthesis analyses and functional studies were performed to validate the mechanisms involved in the acidic TME-induced lung cancer metastasis. Our data show that lung cancer is sensitive to the increased acidification of TME, and acidic TME-induced lung cancer metastasis <i>via</i> inhibition of miR-7-5p. TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2 is a direct target of miR-7-5p. The reduced expression of miR-7-5p subsequently increases the expression of TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2 which enhances the metastatic potential of the lung cancer. Indeed, overexpression of miR-7-5p reduces the acidic pH-enhanced lung cancer metastasis. Furthermore, the human lung tumor samples also show a reduced miR-7-5p expression but an elevated level of activated TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2; the expressions of both miR-7-5p and TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2 are correlated with patients' survival. We are the first to identify the role of the miR-7/TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>2 axis in acidic pH-enhanced lung cancer metastasis. Our study not only delineates how acidification directly affects tumorigenesis, but also suggests miR-7 is a novel reliable biomarker for acidic TME and a novel therapeutic target for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. Our study opens an avenue to explore the pH-sensitive subcellular components as novel therapeutic targets for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Tumor acidic microenvironment; epithelial-mesenchymal transition; metastasis; microrna-7; tgf-β2

### Affiliations
Joint Laboratory for Translational Cancer Research of Chinese Medicine of the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China

### Submitter
Linlin Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Linlin Lu
Joint Laboratory for Translational Cancer Research of Chinese Medicine of the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China


