### Accession
PXD006828

### Title
PRMT5: a Novel Regulator of Hepatitis B Virus Replication and an Arginine Methylase of HBV Core

### Description
In the study, we identified protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) as a novel restriction factor of HBV replication. We have also demonstrated that PRMT5 can interact with the HBV core and methylate its arginine residues within arginine-rich domain. We identified two types of HBc post-translational modifications: arginine methylation and ubiquitination. While monomethylated HBc retains cytoplasmic localization, symmetric dimethylation is linked to serine phosphorylation and nuclear transport.  Thus arginine methylation and ubiquitination are novel types of HBc post-translational modifications which add another level of complexity to the understanding of HBc function and regulation of HBV replication

### Sample Protocol
Cells transfected with HA-tagged HBc-expression plasmid were lysed and incubated with anti-HA magnetic beads and extensively washed. The samples were then treated with sampling buffer and separated on SDS PAGE. The gel was separated into 14 bands, destained, reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Peptides were extracted and analyzed by UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III source (Sciex).The peptides were first trapped, desalted and then separated on Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (3 μm, 25 cm×75 μm ID) using 70 min gradient

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were searched against database consisting of human and HBV proteins (Uniprot as of Feb 15 2016) including HA tagged sequence of HBV Core protein. ProteinPilot  search engine was set to select Iodoacetamide as alkylating agent, trypsin as protease, TripleTOF 5600 as instrument, PTM probabilitites included in the set called Biological modification, thorough search effort and running FDR analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In mammals, protein arginine methyltransferase 5, PRMT5, is the main type II enzyme responsible for the majority of symmetric dimethylarginine formation in polypeptides. Recent study reported that PRMT5 restricts Hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication through epigenetic repression of HBV DNA transcription and interference with encapsidation of pregenomic RNA. Here we demonstrate that PRMT5 interacts with the HBV core (HBc) protein and dimethylates arginine residues within the arginine-rich domain (ARD) of the carboxyl-terminus. ARD consists of four arginine rich subdomains, ARDI, ARDII, ARDIII and ARDIV. Mutation analysis of ARDs revealed that arginine methylation of HBc required the wild-type status of both ARDI and ARDII. Mass spectrometry analysis of HBc identified multiple potential ubiquitination, methylation and phosphorylation sites, out of which lysine K7 and arginines R150 (within ARDI) and R156 (outside ARDs) were shown to be modified by ubiquitination and methylation, respectively. The HBc symmetric dimethylation appeared to be linked to serine phosphorylation and nuclear import of HBc protein. Conversely, the monomethylated HBc retained in the cytoplasm. Thus, overexpression of PRMT5 led to increased nuclear accumulation of HBc, and vice versa, down-regulation of PRMT5 resulted in reduced levels of HBc in nuclei of transfected cells. In summary, we identified PRMT5 as a potent controller of HBc cell trafficking and function and described two novel types of HBc post-translational modifications (PTMs), arginine methylation and ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Hepatitis b virus, Phosphorylation, Hbv core protein, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubalek
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences


