### Accession
PXD001063

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cAMP-mediated signaling during differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes

### Description
Initiation of adipocyte differentiation is promoted by the synergistic action of insulin/insulin-like growth factor, glucocorticoids, and agents activating cAMP-dependent signaling. The action of cAMP is mediated via PKA and Epac, where at least part of the PKA function relates to strong repression of Rho kinase activity, whereas Epac counteracts the reduction in insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling associated with complete repression of Rho kinase activity. However, detailed knowledge of the Epac-dependent branch and the interplay with PKA is still limited. In the present study, we present a comprehensive evaluation of Epac-mediated processes and their interplay with PKA during the initiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation using a combination of proteomics, molecular approaches and bioinformatics. Proteomic analyses revealed 7 proteins specifically regulated in response to Epac activation, 4 in response to PKA activation, and 11 in response to the combined activation by Epac and PKA during the initial phase of differentiation. Network analyses indicated that the identified proteins are involved in pathways of importance for glucose metabolism, inositol metabolism and calcium-dependent signaling thereby adding a novel facet to our understanding of cAMP-mediated potentiation of adipocyte differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collection for two-dimensional gel analysis Cells were washed three times with warm (37⁰C) HANK’s buffer and collected by scraping. After collection cells were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. The cell lysates were prepared by addition of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Chaps, 0.4% DTT, 0.5% Pharmalyte 3–10, 0.5% IPG 6–11 buffer) and shaking overnight. Each sample was centrifuged at 1500 rcf for 15 min at 10oC and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. For the 48h time point samples, cells from three independent experiments were analyzed. Results shown as supplementary data represent result of one biological replicate.   Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis To analyze changes in protein expression and/or modification during differentiation, samples collected at day 0, 8 h, 24 h, 48h and day 8 of differentiation were analyzed by two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis. 2D gel electrophoresis was carried out as described. Briefly, the first dimension 18 cm IPG strips, covering a pH gradient from 4 to 7 (IPG 4-7) (GE Healthcare Cat. No. 17-1233-01) were rehydrated in two steps. First strips were rehydrated overnight in 200 μl of sample diluted in lysis buffer (300 μg of protein per gel were loaded). Next, strips were rehydrated for 6 h in 100 μl of lysis buffer. Isoelectric focusing was performed using a linearly increasing profile:  0 V to 600 V for 2:15 h, f600 V to 3500 for 8 h, and 3500 V for 9:25 h. After focusing the strips were incubated in equilibration buffer (6 M urea, 2% SDS, 30% glycerol, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.8, 1% DTT) for 15 min. and then frozen at -80°C. After thawing gels were incubated in equilibration buffer again for 15 min. The second dimension SDS PAGE was performed using the vertical electrophoresis system Protean II™ (BioRad) and 12.5% (w/v) laboratory made acrylamide gels (acrylamide: N,N’-ethylene-bis-acrylamide ratio 200:1). Gels were run overnight at 20oC. 6 mA per gel were applied for the first 2 h of electrophoresis, then 12 mA per gel. The running buffer contained 0.67% Tris-Base, 1.44% of glycine and 1% SDS. Additionally, buffer recirculation was applied. The gels were stained with Sypro Ruby (Invitrogen™ Cat. No. S11900) and scanned on the Typhoon scanner with an excitation wave length of 488 nm and emission filter at 610 nm. Gel images were analyzed using the DECODON Delta 2D software, version 3.6 (Decodon GmbH).  Mass spectrometry  In gel digestion Spots exhibiting significant changes were cut out from the gel. The gel plugs were washed with 100 μl of water for 5 min. Water was removed and gel plugs were washed with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20 min. ACN was removed and gel plugs were dried in a Speed Vac. Dry gel plugs were rehydrated with 10μl of trypsin solution (10 µg/ml, dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8) for 20 min on the ice. Unabsorbed trypsin was removed and the gel plugs were covered with 20 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C.  Target loading Desalting and concentration of peptides mixtures were done as described before. In-house made microcolumns, prepared from GE Loader micropipette tips, packed with POROS R2 (Applied Biosystems, USA) were used. The columns were pre-washed with 10 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 10 μl of peptides mixture from the digested protein were loaded onto microcolumns. The columns were then washed with 10 μl of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were released from the column with 3 μl of 5 μg/μl α- cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid diluted in 70% ACN/0.1% TFA and eluted directly onto the MALDI plate. Trypsin digested β-galactosidase was used as a standard for instrument calibration and was placed on every third spot on the MALDI plate.

### Data Protocol
Sample analysis A 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer from Applied Biosystems was used for recording of positive ion MS and MS/MS spectra. For MS analysis the mass range from 700 to 3500 Da was selected. Total laser shots number was set to 800 and a fixed laser intensity of 3100 was used. For MS/MS analysis, the total number of shots was set to 1280. For each MS spectrum at least three of the most intensive peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. MS and associated MS/MS data were combined into a single mass list in the mgf. file format using an in-house script developed by Jakob Bunkenborg, University of Southern Denmark. Mass lists were searched in Swiss-Prot 57.7 (497,293 sequences; 175,274,722 residues)  database using an in-house MASCOT server (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). The MASCOT server settings were: database: SwissProt, enzyme: trypsin, maximal number of missed cleavages: 1; significant threshold p<0.05; MS mass accuracy: 50 ppm; MS/MS 0.6 Da: partial modification: methionine oxidation

### Publication Abstract
Initiation of adipocyte differentiation is promoted by the synergistic action of insulin/insulin-like growth factor, glucocorticoids, and agents activating cAMP-dependent signaling. The action of cAMP is mediated via PKA and Epac, where at least part of the PKA function relates to strong repression of Rho kinase activity, whereas Epac counteracts the reduction in insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling associated with complete repression of Rho kinase activity. However, detailed knowledge of the Epac-dependent branch and the interplay with PKA is still limited. In the present study, we present a comprehensive evaluation of Epac-mediated processes and their interplay with PKA during the initiation of 3 T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation using a combination of proteomics, molecular approaches, and bioinformatics. Proteomic analyses revealed 7 proteins specifically regulated in response to Epac activation, 4 in response to PKA activation, and 11 in response to the combined activation of Epac and PKA during the initial phase of differentiation. Network analyses indicated that the identified proteins are involved in pathways of importance for glucose metabolism, inositol metabolism, and calcium-dependent signaling thereby adding a novel facet to our understanding of cAMP-mediated potentiation of adipocyte differentiation.

### Keywords
Camp; epac; adipogenesis; two-dimensional gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Kamil Borkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Karsten Kristiansen
Copenhagen University


