### Accession
PXD024331

### Title
Kinetics of abacavir-induced remodelling of the Major Histocompatibility Complex class I peptide repertoire

### Description
Characterisation of the kinetics of abacavir-induced perturbation of the immunopeptidome of the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I molecule HLA-B*57:01.

### Sample Protocol
For monitoring of the time course of immunopeptidome perturbation, CIR.B*57:01 cells were cultured in the presence or absence of 35µM abacavir for designated time periods, prior to harvest and snap freezing. Cells (108) were lysed (Igepal-630) and immunoaffinity purification of the HLA class I performed using the pan HLA class I monoclonal antibody W6/32. HLA-peptide complexes were dissociated using 10 % acetic acid and fractionated by RP-HPLC. Peptide containing fractions were vacuum concentrated and equalised to a volume of 30 µL with 0.1 % formic acid. Data were acquired using a QTRAP 5500 (SCIEX) operated in MRM mode in unit resolution for Q1 and Q3, with any MRM transition exceeding 600 counts triggering an Enhanced Product Ion scan. Transitions were selected from LC-MS/MS data previously acquired using an SCIEX 5600+ TripleTOF system. For proteome comparisons, CIR.B*57:01 were cultured in the presence/absence of 35 µM abacavir for 48 hrs prior to harvest, and snap freezing. Cell pellets were lysed (SDS) and subject to trypsin digestion using a FASPTM Protein Digestion kit (Expedeon). Digested peptides were desalted using OMIX C18 tips (Agilent Technologies) and samples resuspended in 0.1 % FA for mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS was performed using a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) strategy in positive mode: MS1 scan range 375-1800, MS1 resolution 140,000, top 12 fragmentation of charges +2 to +5, MS2 scan range 200-2000, MS2 resolution 17500, 15 sec dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
For selection of transitions for monitoring by MRM, previously acquired LC-MS/MS data were searched against the reviewed human proteome (UniProt/SwissProt accessed April 2016) using ProteinPilot™ software v4.5 (SCIEX), incorporating biological modifications and performing false discovery rate analysis.  MRM data were analysed using Skyline software 64bit 4.1.0.18169 (MacCoss Laboratory). A relative peptide/abacavir abundance within the immunopeptidome was calculated as the total area under the curve for the detected transitions normalised to the area of the β2m peak observed on RP-HPLC separation of the immunoaffinity eluate. For proteome data, data analysis was performed using using MaxQuant (Computational Systems Biochemistry) Version 1.6.1.0 searching against the reviewed human proteome (UniProt/SwissProt accessed April 2016) considering: enzyme  Trypsin/P, fixed modification carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable modifications N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, maximum two missed cleavages. Protein ratios calculated based on at least two common peptides, including unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mhc i antigen presentation, Tapasin, Abacavir, Immunopeptidome, Drug hypersensitivity, T cells, Human leukocyte antigen (hla), Peptide selection

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Patricia Illing

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


