### Accession
PXD024723

### Title
Intact Peptides from Wine Haze Proteins

### Description
Tryptic peptides from wine haze proteins (TLP and CHI) were identified by MS-based peptidomics (top-down proteomics. Their structural visualization and molecular dynamics simulations were used to highlight cleavage spots.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion was performed at different pH values and temperature conditions. Peptides samples after tryptic reaction were isolated by filtration and were subsequently vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS-based peptidomics was performed and bioinformatic tools were used to identifythe origin of each peptide. MS Data were analyzed by the softwares Proteome Discovery (thermo fischer), PMi Byonic (ProteinMetrics) and Patternlab 4.0.The obtained sequences were searched against the UniProtKBdatabases, taxonomically set to Vitis vinifera .

### Publication Abstract
Prevention of haze formation in wines is challenging for winemakers. Thermolabile proteins in wines, notably thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) and chitinases (CHIs), undergo structural changes under varying physicochemical conditions, resulting in protein aggregation and visible haze in bottled products. Peptidases are an alternative fining method, although an effective proteolysis under typical winemaking conditions (acidic pH and low temperature) is difficult to achieve. In this study, tryptic peptides from TLPs and CHIs were identified by MS-based peptidomics (top-down proteomics) after exposure of scissile bonds on the protein surface. As proposed by the theory of limited proteolysis, protein conformational changes following temperature and pH variations allowed the detection of enzyme-accessible regions. Protein structure visualization and molecular dynamics simulations were used to highlight cleavage spots and provide the scientific basis for haze formation mechanisms. The described method offers a tool to the search for ideal enzymes to prevent wine haze.

### Keywords
Intact peptides wine haze proteins

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University - Giessen Institute of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology
Justus Liebig University

### Submitter
Wendell Albuquerque

### Lab Head
Dr Wendell Albuquerque
Justus Liebig University - Giessen Institute of Food Chemistry and Food Biotechnology


