### Accession
PXD010515

### Title
Trichodesmium LC-MSMS iron and phosphorous co-limitation in the ocean

### Description
Nitrogen fixation by cyanobacteria supplies critical bioavailable nitrogen to marine ecosystems worldwide; however, field and lab data have demonstrated it to be limited by iron, phosphorus and/or CO2. To address unknown future interactions among these factors, we grew the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium for 1 year under Fe/P co-limitation following 7 years of both low and high CO2 selection. Fe/P co-limited cell lines demonstrated a complex cellular response including increased growth rates, broad proteome restructuring and cell size reductions relative to steady-state growth limited by either Fe or P alone. Fe/P co-limitation increased abundance of a protein containing a conserved domain previously implicated in cell size regulation, suggesting a similar role in Trichodesmium. Increased CO2 further induced nutrient-limited proteome shifts in widespread core metabolisms. Our results thus suggest that N2-fixing microbes may be significantly impacted by interactions between elevated CO2 and nutrient limitation, with broad implications for global biogeochemical cycles in the future ocean.  Sample number sample description 1 380-1 2 380-2 3 380-3 4 750-1 5 750-2 6 750-3 7 380-1P 8 380-2P 9 380-3P 10 800-1P 11 800-2P 12 800-3P 13 380-1Fe 14 380-2Fe 15 380-3Fe 16 750-1Fe 17 750-2Fe 18 750-3Fe 19 380-1FeP 20 380-2FeP 21 380-3FeP 22 750-1FeP 23 750-2FeP 24 750-3FeP

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, extracted proteins were purified from SDS detergent, reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested while embedded within a polyacrylamide tube gel38. A gel premix was made by combining 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 40% Bis-acrylimide L 29:1 (Acros Organics) at a ratio of 1:3. The premix (103 μl) was combined with an extracted protein sample (35–200 μg), Tris EDTA, 7 μl 1% ammonium persulfate and 3 μl of tetramethylethylenediamine (Acros Organics) to a final volume of 200 μl. After 1 h of polymerization at room temperature 200 μl of gel fix solution (50% ETOH, 10% acetic acid in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) grade water) was added to the top of the gel and incubated at RT for 20 min. Liquid was then removed and the tube gel was transferred into a new 1.5 ml microtube containing 1.2 ml of gel fix solution then incubated at RT, 350 r.p.m. in a Thermomixer R (Eppendorf) for 1 h. gel fix solution was then removed and replaced with 1.2 ml destain solution (50% MeOH, 10% acetic acid in H2O) and incubated at 350 r.p.m., RT for 2 h. Liquid was then removed, gel cut up into 1 mm cubes and then added back to tubes containing 1 ml of 50:50 acetonitrile:25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic) incubated for 1 h, 350 r.p.m. at RT. Liquid was removed and replaced with fresh 50:50 acetonitrile:ambic and incubated at 16 °C 350 r.p.m. overnight. The above step was repeated for 1 h the following morning. Gel pieces were then dehydrated twice in 800 μl of acetonitrile for 10 min at RT and dried for 10 min in a ThermoSavant DNA110 speedvac after removing solvent. 600 μl of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ambic was added to reduce proteins incubating at 56 °C, 350 r.p.m. for 1 h. Unabsorbed dithiothreitol solution was then removed with volume measured. Gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ambic and 600 μl of 55 mM iodacetamide was added to alkylate proteins at RT, 350 r.p.m. for 1 h. Gel cubes were then washed with 1 ml ambic for 20 min, 350 r.p.m. at RT. Acetonitrile dehydrations and speedvac drying were repeated as above. Trypsin (Promega #V5280) was added in appropriate volume of 25 mM ambic to rehydrate and submerse gel pieces at a concentration of 1:20 μg trypsin:protein. Proteins were digested overnight at 350 r.p.m. 37 °C. Unabsorbed solution was removed and transferred to a new tube. 50 μl of peptide extraction buffer (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in water) was added to gels, incubated for 20 min at RT then centrifuged at 14,100g for 2 min. Supernatant was collected and combined with unabsorbed solution. The above peptide extraction step was repeated combining all supernatants. Combined protein extracts were centrifuged at 14,100g for 20 min, supernatants transferred into a new tube and dehydrated down to ∼10–20 μl in the speedvac. Concentrated peptides were then diluted in 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid in water for storage until analysis. All water used in the tube gel digestion protocol was LC/MS grade, and all plastic microtubes were ethanol rinsed and dried before use.        Protein extracts were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (Michrom Advance HPLC coupled to a Thermo Scientific Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a Thermo Flex source). 1 µg of each sample (measured before trypsin digestion) was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 400 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 220 min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer was set to perform MS scans on the orbitrap (240000 resolution at 200 m/z) with a scan range of 380 m/z to 1580 m/z. MS/MS was performed on the ion trap using data-dependent settings (top speed, dynamic exclusion 15 seconds, excluding unassigned and singly charged ions, precursor mass tolerance of ±3ppm, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were made using the SEQUEST HT peptide mapping algorithm within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and the Peptide Prophet algorithm within Scaffold 3.0 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) using 1% FDR protein threshold and 95% peptide threshold confidence levels, allowing two minimum peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen fixation by cyanobacteria supplies critical bioavailable nitrogen to marine ecosystems worldwide; however, field and lab data have demonstrated it to be limited by iron, phosphorus and/or CO2. To address unknown future interactions among these factors, we grew the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium for 1 year under Fe/P co-limitation following 7 years of both low and high CO2 selection. Fe/P co-limited cell lines demonstrated a complex cellular response including increased growth rates, broad proteome restructuring and cell size reductions relative to steady-state growth limited by either Fe or P alone. Fe/P co-limitation increased abundance of a protein containing a conserved domain previously implicated in cell size regulation, suggesting a similar role in Trichodesmium. Increased CO2 further induced nutrient-limited proteome shifts in widespread core metabolisms. Our results thus suggest that N2-fixing microbes may be significantly impacted by interactions between elevated CO2 and nutrient limitation, with broad implications for global biogeochemical cycles in the future ocean.

### Keywords
Ocean marine microbes, Trichodesmium, Thermo fusion, Iron and phosphorus co-limitation

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry/Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution USA
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry/Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution USA


