### Accession
PXD011478

### Title
High-throughput identification of FLT3 wild-type and mutant kinase substrate preferences and application to design of sensitive in vitro kinase assay substrates

### Description
Abnormalities in the FLT3 signaling pathway play an integral role in AML disease relapse and drug resistance. Developing new and specific FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors for use in combination to induction therapy is an important step to reduce disease relapse and achieve clinical remission. To develop potent FLT3 TKI requires sensitive in vitro assay that depended on efficient FLT3 artificial substrates, which there are none reported for FLT3 WT and kinase variants. The kinase assay linked with phosphoproteomics was applied as a high throughput technique to increase the known FLT3 kinase substrates (WT, ITD and D835Y) that were used to identify the FLT3 kinase variant’s preferred kinase sequence using the KINATEST-ID substrate predictive pipeline. The identified substrate sequence was used to synthesize and validate pan-FLT3 artificial substrates to monitor in vitro kinase activity in the presence of clinically relevant FLT3 TKI.

### Sample Protocol
KG-1 cell lysate was trypsin digested, subjected to alkaline phosphatase treatment and aliquot into two equal parts. One part of the cell lysate was incubated with recombinant kinase (WT, ITD or D835Y) and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptide we loaded on to C18 column and eluted from 2-30% acetonitrile over a 60-minute gradient with the mass spectrometer operated under top-12 analysis. The top 12 ions in a survey scan were then subjected to tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were uploaded to the GalaxyP pipeline where the files were converted to MGF for proteomic database search. The reviewed human UniProt database was merged with the cRAP common mass spectrometry lab contaminants within GalaxyP. The MS files were then searched against the merged human UniProt-cRAP database using ProteinPilot v5 search engine. The distinct peptide reports were exported from the group file and uploaded into KinaMINE data miner to identify and retrieve the phosphopeptides and UniProt protein accession numbers with a 99 percent confidence score. The substrate lists were then incorporated into our data formatters in R studio to retrieve the sequences shared within the three kinase treatments. Together, this information was incorporated into an updated KINATEST-ID pipeline identify, synthesize and validate pan-FLT3 artificial substrates.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive disease that is characterized by abnormal increase of immature myeloblasts in blood and bone marrow. The FLT3 receptor tyrosine kinase plays an integral role in hematopoiesis, and one third of AML diagnoses exhibit gain-of-function mutations in FLT3, with the juxtamembrane domain internal tandem duplication (ITD) and the kinase domain D835Y variants observed most frequently. Few FLT3 substrates or phosphorylation sites are known, which limits insight into FLT3's substrate preferences and makes assay design particularly challenging. We applied <i>in vitro</i> phosphorylation of a cell lysate digest (adaptation of the Kinase Assay Linked with Phosphoproteomics (KALIP) technique and similar methods) for high-throughput identification of substrates for three FLT3 variants (wild-type, ITD mutant, and D835Y mutant). Incorporation of identified substrate sequences as input into the KINATEST-ID substrate preference analysis and assay development pipeline facilitated the design of several peptide substrates that are phosphorylated efficiently by all three FLT3 kinase variants. These substrates could be used in assays to identify new FLT3 inhibitors that overcome resistant mutations to improve FLT3-positive AML treatment.

### Keywords
Kinase assay linked with phosphoproteomics, Flt3, Phosphoproteomics, Acute myeloid leukemia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Associate Professor Director of Graduate Studies BMBB Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics 7-140 MCB 420 Washington Avenue SE Minneapolis, MN 55455

### Submitter
Minervo Perez

### Lab Head
Dr Laurie L. Parker
Associate Professor Director of Graduate Studies BMBB Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics 7-140 MCB 420 Washington Avenue SE Minneapolis, MN 55455


