### Accession
PXD023860

### Title
Mouse hepatocyte-derived extracellular vesicle proteome analysis

### Description
Mouse hepatocyte AML12 cells were plated in T175 flasks until they reached >90% confluency after which spent medium was removed, and the cells were rinsed twice with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, United States) prior to incubating them in serum-free medium overnight, followed by replacement with fresh serum-free medium for 48 h. The supernatants were subjected to sequential centrifugation (300 × g for 10 min, 2,000 × g for 20 min, 10,000 × g for 30 min) and ultracentrifugation (100,000 × g for 70 min at 4◦C) in a Type T70i fixed-angle rotor, the pellet from which was resuspended and subjected to the same ultracentrifugation conditions again. The resulting EV pellet was dispersed in PBS, followed by protein concentration measurement by BCA assay. 5 ug of proteins were sent for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
EV protein identification was performed using nano-liquid chromatography-nanospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-SprayTM Sources operated in positive ion mode. The MS/MS analysis was programmed for a full scan recorded between m/z 400–1600 and an MS/MS scan to generate product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in consecutive scans starting from the most abundant peaks in the spectrum, and then selecting the next nine most abundant peaks.

### Data Protocol
Sequence information from the MS/MS data was processed by converting the raw files into a merged file using MS convert (ProteoWizard). The resulting mgf files were searched using Mascot Daemon by Matrix Science version 2.6.0 (Boston, MA, United States) and the database searched against Uniprot Mouse database. A decoy database was also searched to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and peptides were filtered according to the FDR. Proteins with less than 1% FDR as well as a minimal of two significant peptides detected were considered as valid proteins. Proteomics data were summarized in Scaffold 4.9.0 (Proteome Software Inc. Portland, OR, United States) for spectral counting analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membrane-limited nanoparticles that are liberated by cells and contain a complex molecular payload comprising proteins, microRNA, RNAs, and lipids. EVs may be taken up by other cells resulting in their phenotypic or functional reprogramming. In the liver, EVs produced by non-injured hepatocytes are involved in the maintenance of hepatic homeostasis or therapeutic outcomes following injury while EVs produced by damaged hepatocytes may drive or exacerbate liver injury. In this study, we examined the contribution of EV fibronectin (FN1) to the biogenesis, release, uptake, and action of hepatocyte-derived EVs. While FN1 is classically viewed as a component of the extracellular matrix that regulates processes such as cell adhesion, differentiation, and wound healing and can exist in cell-associated or soluble plasma forms, we report that FN1 is also a constituent of hepatocyte EVs that functions in EV uptake by target cells such as hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells (HSC). FN1 co-purified with EVs when EVs were enriched from conditioned medium of human or mouse hepatocytes and a direct association between FN1 and hepatocyte EVs was established by immunoprecipitation and proteinase protection. FN1 ablation in mouse hepatocytes using CRISPR-Cas9 did not alter EV biogenesis but EV uptake by HSC was significantly reduced for FN1 knockout EVs (EV<sup>&#x394;<i>FN1</i></sup> ) as compared to EVs from wild type hepatocytes (EV<sup>WT</sup>). The uptake by hepatocytes or HSC of either EV<sup>WT</sup> or EV<sup>&#x394;<i>FN1</i></sup> required clathrin- and caveolin-mediated endocytosis, cholesterol, lysosomal acidic lipase activity, and low pH, while macropinocytosis was also involved in EV<sup>&#x394;<i>FN1</i></sup> uptake in HSC. Despite their differences in rate and mechanisms of uptake, EV<sup>&#x394;<i>FN1</i></sup> functioned comparably to EV<sup>WT</sup> in ameliorating CCl<sub>4</sub>-induced hepatic fibrosis in mice. In conclusion, FN1 is a constituent of hepatocyte EVs that facilitates EV uptake by target cells but is dispensable for EV-mediated anti-fibrotic activity <i>in vivo</i>.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Proteome, Mouse hepatocytes

### Affiliations
The Abigail Wexner Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital
Nationwide Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Xinlei Li

### Lab Head
Dr David R Brigstock
The Abigail Wexner Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital


