### Accession
PXD003652

### Title
S-acylation and fatty acylation in Naïve and LPS/IFN- gamma activated Raw264.7

### Description
The advances in chemical proteomics have significantly expanded our understanding of the diversity and abundance of fatty-acylated proteins in eukaryotes, and reveal novel functions for these lipid protein modifications. Nonetheless, quantitative comparative proteomic analysis of fatty-acylated proteins in different cellular states is still challenging. To address these limitations, we systematically evaluated different proteomic methods (alk-16 chemical reporter and acyl-RAC) and established robust conditions to selectively and quantitatively profile fatty-acylated proteins in mammalian cells. Using a combination of metabolic labeling with fatty acid chemical reporters, selective chemical enrichment and label-free proteomics, we performed a quantitative analysis of fatty-acylated proteins in naïve and activated macrophages. These studies revealed novel fatty-acylated proteins associated with host immunity that are differently expressed and lipid-modified in different cellular states.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical reporter Naïve and LPS/IFN- activated Raw264.7 were treated with alk-16 (alkyne-tagged reporter of palmitic acid). Following cell lysis, labeled proteins were captured by an azide-biotin via CuAAC and captured on Neutravidin beads. Lysate subjected to NH2OH treatment or cells treated with DMSO were used as a negative control. Proteins were reduced/alkylated (TCEP/iodoacetamide) and on-bead digested with trypsin.  Samples were cleaned-up using a C18 stage tip and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/1% formic acid in H2O for analysis. The experiment comprised four biological replicates of the following samples. RAW files are labeled MS152077XL_Emmanuelle_Hang_ from 1 to 24) - [RAW files 1-4] Naïve Raw264.7 treated with DMSO (4 h) [1-4] - [RAW files 5-8] Naïve Raw264.7 treated with alk-16 (50 µM, 4 h) - [RAW files 9-12] Naïve Raw264.7 treated with alk-16 (50 µM, 4 h) and subjected to NH2OH treatment after CuAAC.  - [RAW files 13-16] LPS/IFN- gamma activated Raw264.7 treated with DMSO (4 h) - [RAW files 17-20] LPS/IFN- gamma activated Raw264.7 treated with alk-16 (50 µM, 4 h) - [RAW files 21-24] LPS/IFN- gamma activated Raw264.7 treated with alk-16 (50 µM, 4 h) and subjected to NH2OH treatment after CuAAC.   Acyl-RAC Naïve and LPS/IFN- activated Raw264.7 were lysed and free Cys were capped with N-ethyl maleimide (NEM) in the presence of TCEP. Acylated Cys were hydrolyzed with hydroxylamine (NH2OH) and reacted with the thiopropyl sepharose 6B resin to enrich S-acylated proteins. Lysate not subjected to NH2OH treatment was used as a negative control. Proteins were on-bead digested with tryspsin, peptides were reduced/alkylated (TCEP/iodoacetamide).  The experiment comprised four biological replicates of the following samples. RAW files are labeled MS151906XL_Emmanuelle_Hang_ from 1 to 16. - [RAW files 1-4] LPS/IFN-gamma activated Raw264.7 –NH2OH  - [RAW files 5-8] LPS/IFN- gamma activated Raw264.7 + NH2OH - [RAW files 9-12] Naïve Raw264.7 –NH2OH  - [RAW files 13-16] Naïve Raw264.7 +NH2OH

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Extracted tryptic peptides were desalted on a trap column prior to separation on a 12 cm/75 μm reversed phase C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). A 120 minutes method increasing from 10% B to% 45% B in 77 minutes (A: 0.1% Formic Acid, B: Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid) were delivered at 200 nL/min.  The liquid chromatography setup was coupled to an Orbitrap XL (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer operated in top-8-CID-mode. Mass spectra were collected in a 300-1800 m/z mass range using 60,000 resolution.  Maxquant search The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the database using the Andromeda search engine. -For the chemical reporter: Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. -For acyl-RAC: Cysteine carbamidomethylation and Cysteine modified by NEM were used as variable modifications. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. For the identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites, the minimum peptide length allowed was seven amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides allowed was set to one. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected; this calculates ratios from unique and razor peptides (Razor peptides are non-unique peptides assigned to the protein group with the most other peptides).

### Publication Abstract
S-Fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human diseases. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterizing the endogenously attached fatty acids are still challenging. Here, we describe the integration and optimization of fatty acid chemical reporter labeling with hydroxylamine-mediated enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins and direct tagging of modified Cys residues to selectively map lipid modification sites. This afforded improved enrichment and direct identification of many protein S-fatty-acylation sites compared to previously described methods. Notably, we directly identified the S-fatty-acylation sites of IFITM3, an important interferon-stimulated inhibitor of virus entry, and we further demonstrated that the highly conserved Cys residues are primarily modified by palmitic acid. The methods described here should facilitate the direct analysis of protein S-fatty-acylation sites and their endogenously attached fatty acids in diverse cell types and activation states important for mammalian physiology and diseases.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, Raw264.7, Fatty acylation, Post translational modifications, S-acylation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis The Rockefeller University New York NY, USA
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C Hang
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis The Rockefeller University New York NY, USA


