### Accession
PXD019274

### Title
Cryo-EM structures of holo condensin reveal a subunit flip-flop mechanism

### Description
This data is from sulfo-SDA crosslinked condensin pentamer. Two datsets, one without atp aand one with ATP. How protein complexes of the SMC family fold DNA into the large loops that are fundamental for the 3D organization of genomes is a central unresolved question of chromosome biology. We used electron cryomicroscopy to investigate the reaction cycle of the SMC complex condensin, which is a key determinant of chromosome morphology and behavior during mitosis. Our structures of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae condensin holo complex at different functional stages suggest that ATP binding induces the transition from a folded-rod SMC conformation into an open architecture and triggers the exchange of the two HEAT-repeat subunits at the SMC ATPase head domains. We propose that these steps result in the interconversion of DNA binding sites in the catalytic core that form the basis of the DNA translocation and loop-extrusion activities of condensin.

### Sample Protocol
sulfo-SDA (sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4′- azipentanoate) (Thermo Scientific Pierce) was dissolved in crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, and 5 % glycerol, pH 7.7) to 100 mM before use. For photo-crosslinking the nucleotide-free apo condensin pentamer with sulfo-SDA, 0.85 mg/mL purified complexes were incubated with sulfo-SDA using three different protein-to-crosslinker molar ratios (1:250, 1:500, 1:1,000) for 2 h at 4 °C. For photo-crosslinking of condensin in the presence of ATP, ATP (3 mM) and MgCl2 (5 mM) were added to the purified condensin pentamer at 0.85 mg/mL and crosslinking was performed using three protein-to-crosslinker molar ratios (1:300, 1:600, 1:1,200). The samples were irradiated with UV light at 365 nm for 20 min and quenched with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Subsequently, samples were denatured in 8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3 derivatized with iodoacetamide and digested with LysC endoproteinase (Wako) for 4 h at 25 °C. After dilution of the sample to a urea concentration of 1.5 M, trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce) was added and the samples were digested for 16 h at 25 °C. The resulting tryptic peptide were extracted and desalted using C18 StageTips .  Eluted peptides were fractionated using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 30 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid as mobile phase. 50 μl fractions were collected and dried. Samples for analysis were resuspended in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid 1.6 % (v/v) acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher). Samples were separated on a 50-cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Flow rates were 0.3 μL/min using gradients optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation, ranging from 2 % mobile phase B to 45 % mobile phase B over 90 min. Mass spec data were acquired in data- dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a three second cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,500 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were isolated and fragmented. Fragmentation by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) employed a decision tree logic with optimized collision energies. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-seconds exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (<1 % False Discovery Rate, FDR) linear peptide identifications. The re-calibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (v.1.6.745). Final crosslink lists were compiled using the identified candidates filtered to 1 % FDR on link level with xiFDR v.1.4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Complexes containing a pair of structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) family proteins are fundamental for the three-dimensional (3D) organization of genomes in all domains of life. The eukaryotic SMC complexes cohesin and condensin are thought to fold interphase and mitotic chromosomes, respectively, into large loop domains, although the underlying molecular mechanisms have remained unknown. We used cryo-EM to investigate the nucleotide-driven reaction cycle of condensin from the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Our structures of the five-subunit condensin holo complex at different functional stages suggest that ATP binding induces the transition of the SMC coiled coils from a folded-rod conformation into a more open architecture. ATP binding simultaneously triggers the exchange of the two HEAT-repeat subunits bound to the SMC ATPase head domains. We propose that these steps result in the interconversion of DNA-binding sites in the catalytic core of condensin, forming the basis of the DNA translocation and loop-extrusion activities.

### Keywords
Bs3, Crosslinking, Condensin

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK.

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK.


