### Accession
PXD011187

### Title
Phosphoproteome and gene expression profiling of ALK inhibition in neuroblastoma cells lines reveals conserved oncogenic pathways

### Description
Neuroblastoma is a neural crest-derived embryonal tumor or the postganglionic sympathetic nervous system. Neuroblastomas show heterogeneous biologic and clinical features and , whereas a subset may undergo spontaneous differentiation or regression with little or no therapy, the majorities are difficult to cure with current modalities. The origin of these tumours remains unknown in most cases, although a number of familial cases have been associated with mutations of the ALK gene.  In this study we established both phosphoproteomic and gene expression profiles of ALK activity in neuroblastoma cells exposed to first and third generation ALK TKIs, to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms and identify relevant biomarkers, signaling networks, and new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Tyrosine/serine/threonine profiling was performed on CLB-BAR, CLB-GE and SK-N-AS cell lines that were serum starved for 24 h prior to treatment for 60 min with crizotinib (250 nM) or lorlatinib (30 nM). Cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS, prior to scraping in urea lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM activated sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerol-phosphate). Approximately 20 mg whole cell extract was harvested. Cells were sonicated 3 times for 30 sec each with a 1 min cooling on ice between each burst followed by centrifugation at 4°C for 20 min at 20 000g in a Beckman JA25.50 rotor. Phospho-profiling was performed by Cell Signaling Technology using techniques described previously (J. Rush et al., Immunoaffinity profiling of tyrosine phosphorylation in cancer cells. Nat Biotechnol 23, 94-101, 2005, and M. P. Stokes et al., PTMScan direct: identification and quantification of peptides from critical signaling proteins by immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with LC-MS/MS. Mol Cell Proteomics 11, 187-201, 2012)

### Data Protocol
All raw data files from Xcalibur software were directly analyzed by GFY-Core (version 2.0) using the Sequest Search engine against the Human database from SwissProt (2015) and NCBI RefSeq (2011).

### Publication Abstract
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a tyrosine kinase receptor that is a clinical target of major interest in cancer. Mutations and rearrangements in <i>ALK</i> trigger the activation of the encoded receptor and its downstream signaling pathways. <i>ALK</i> mutations have been identified in both familial and sporadic neuroblastoma cases as well as in 30 to 40% of relapses, which makes ALK a bona fide target in neuroblastoma therapy. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that target ALK are currently in clinical use for the treatment of patients with ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer. However, monotherapy with the ALK inhibitor crizotinib has been less encouraging in neuroblastoma patients with <i>ALK</i> alterations, raising the question of whether combinatorial therapy would be more effective. In this study, we established both phosphoproteomic and gene expression profiles of ALK activity in neuroblastoma cells exposed to first- and third-generation ALK TKIs, to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms and identify relevant biomarkers, signaling networks, and new therapeutic targets. This analysis has unveiled various important leads for novel combinatorial treatment strategies for patients with neuroblastoma and an increased understanding of ALK signaling involved in this disease.

### Keywords
Oncogenic, Alk inhibition, Pathways, Phosphoproteome, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling Technology Inc.
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Medicinaregatan 9A, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden.

### Submitter
Vicky Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Bengt Hallberg
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Medicinaregatan 9A, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden.


