### Accession
PXD028496

### Title
Quantification of proline to serine mistranslation in a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain expressing an inducible tRNA variant

### Description
Altering the genetic code for applications in synthetic biology and genetic code expansion involves engineered tRNAs that incorporate amino acids that differ from what is defined by the “standard” genetic code. Since these engineered tRNA variants can be lethal due to proteotoxic stress, regulating their expression is necessary to achieve high levels of the resulting novel proteins. Mechanisms to positively regulate transcription with exogenous activator proteins like those often used to regulate RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) transcribed genes are not applicable to tRNAs as their expression by RNA polymerase III requires elements internal to the tRNA. Here, we show that tRNA expression is repressed by overlapping transcription from an adjacent RNAP II promoter. Regulating the expression of the RNAP II promoter allows inverse regulation of the tRNA. Placing either Gal4 or TetR-VP16 activated promoters downstream of a mistranslating tRNA serine variant that mis-incorporates serine at proline codons in Saccharomyces cerevisiae allows mistranslation at a level not otherwise possible because of the toxicity of the unregulated tRNA. Using mass spectrometry, we determine th frequency of mistranslation in both the induced and repressed conditions of the galactose inducible and tetracycline inducible systems.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was performed on strains expressing mistranslating tRNA variants to identify mistranslation. For strains containing the GAL1 regulated tRNA constructs, starter cultures of each strain were grown to saturation in medium lacking uracil and containing 2% galactose, diluted 1:20 in the same media and grown for 18 h at 30°C. For the strains containing the tetO regulated tRNA constructs, starter cultures of each strain were grown to saturation in media lacking uracil and leucine, diluted to an OD600 of 0.05 in the same media and grown to an OD600 of ~ 2 before 10 µg/mL doxycycline was added. Preparation of cell lysates, protein reduction and alkylation were performed as described in Berg et al. (2019b). Robotic purification and digestion of proteins into peptides were performed on the KingFisher Flex using LysC and the R2-P1 method as described in Leutert et al. (2019).  Exploris 480; Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy1200 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were resuspended in 4% acetonitrile, 3% formic acid and loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse‐phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) housed into a column heater set at 50°.  Peptides were separated using a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at 400 nL/min over 95 min, with a total 120 minute acquisition time. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a defined cycle time of 3 seconds. For each cycle one full mass spectrometry scan was acquired from 350 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and automated calculation of injection time. The most abundant ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 2 m/z precursor isolation window and beam‐type collisional‐activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution by setting the AGC target to standard and injection time to automated mode. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae protein sequence database (downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database resource in 2014) using Comet (release 2015.01; Eng et al. 2013) . The precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) and proline to serine (- 10.0207 Da) were used for all searches. A maximum of two of each variable modification were allowed per peptide. Search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inducible, Mistranslation, Yeast, Trna variants

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA

### Submitter
Matthew Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA


