### Accession
PXD036334

### Title
Diferential expression analyses PLAC8 defective cells

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has caused a dramatic health, social and economic crisis worldwide. To better understand the host-virus interactions and identify potentially targetable host factors, we have conducted CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screens using SARS-CoV-2 pseudotyped lentiviruses on human lung cancer cells. Our results recapitulate many findings from previous screens that used full SARS-CoV-2 viruses, but also unveil two novel critical host factors: SPNS1 and PLAC8. Functional experiments with full SARS-CoV-2 viruses have confirmed that loss-of-function of these genes impairs viral entry. Importantly, we have found that PLAC8 is a key limiting host factor whose overexpression boosts viral infection in eight different human lung cancer cell lines. Using single-cell RNA-Seq data analyses, we demonstrate that PLAC8 is highly expressed in ciliated and secretory cells from the respiratory tract and in gut enterocytes, cell types that are highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Finally, proteomics and cell biology studies suggest that SPNS1 and PLAC8 affect viral entry through regulation of autophagy and lysosomal function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from NT596, PLAC8-KO1 and SPNS1-KO1 CALU1ACE2 cells (each with three biological replicates) were on-filter digested with modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at a final ratio of 1:40 (trypsin-protein). Digestion proceeded overnight at 37 ºC in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. The resulting tryptic peptides were labelled with TMT-10plex (thermos Scientific), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting peptides were injected onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano-column (75 mm I.D. and 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher, San José, CA, USA) and analyzed in a continuous acetonitrile gradient consisting of 8-31% B for 240 min, 50-90% B for 1 min (B=0.5% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted from the RP nano-column at a flow rate of ~200 nL/min to an emitter nanospray needle for real-time ionization and peptide fragmentation in a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 20 method. An enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (resolution=70,000) followed by the MS/MS spectra from most intense twenty parent ions were analyzed along the chromatographic run (272 min). Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s. For protein identification, tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All MS/MS samples were analyzed using SEQUEST (Thermo Scientific), using with a precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 amu. Carbamidomethylation in cysteine, TMT-label in N terminus, and TMT-label in lysine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation in methionine as a variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on the search of results against the corresponding decoy database using the refined method (Navarro & Vázquez, 2009) with an additional filter for precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., 2015) and estimation of the corrected Xcorr (Martínez-Bartolomé et al., 2008). An FDR of 1% was used as the criterion for peptide identification. Each peptide was assigned only to the best protein proposed by the Proteome Discoverer algorithm. Quantitative information was extracted from MS/MS spectra, from TMT reporter ions, using an in-house developed program (SanXoT), as described in (Navarro et al., 2014), and protein abundance changes were analyzed using the Generic Integration Algorithm, as described in (García-Marqués et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid, Plac8

### Affiliations
CNIC, Spain
CNIC

### Submitter
Enrique Calvo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Calvo
CNIC, Spain


