### Accession
PXD007819

### Title
Pediatric IBD MLI metaproteomics

### Description
Mucosal-luminal interface (MLI) samples were collected from a cohort of children with new-onset IBD and microbial cells were harvested and processed for metaproteomic analysis. Deep metaproteomics data analysis was then performed for better understanding the MLI microbiota functions in the development of pediatric IBD.

### Sample Protocol
The microbial cells were collected with differential centrifugation and lysed with 4%SDS/8M Urea. The SDS was then removed for in-solution trypsin digestion followed by LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed with MetaPro-IQ workflow implemented in MetaLab platform (http://imetalab.ca/).

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in gut microbiota have been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), however factors that mediate the host-microbiota interactions remain largely unknown. Here we collected mucosal-luminal interface samples from a pediatric IBD inception cohort and characterized both the human and microbiota proteins using metaproteomics. We show that microbial proteins related to oxidative stress responses are upregulated in IBD cases compared to controls. In particular, we demonstrate that the expression of human proteins related to oxidative antimicrobial activities is increased in IBD cases and correlates with the alteration of microbial functions. Additionally, we reveal that many of these human proteins are present and show altered abundance in isolated free extracellular vesicles (EVs). Therefore, our study suggests that the alteration of intestinal EV proteomes is associated with the aberrant host-microbiota interactions in IBD.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Intestine, Ibd, Children, Microbiome

### Affiliations
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Canada


