### Accession
PXD025641

### Title
Chemical modifications induced by phthalic anhydride, a respiratory sensitizer, in reconstructed human epidermis: A combined HRMAS NMR and LC-MS/MS proteomic approach

### Description
Chemical skin and respiratory allergies affect many people around the world and are becoming a major public health problem. To date our knowledge on the process of protein haptenation is still limited and mainly derived from studies performed in solution using either amino acids, model peptides, isolated proteins or cell lysates. In order to better understand chemical interactions occurring between respiratory allergens and the skin, we have investigated the reactivity of phthalic anhydride 1 (PA), a chemical respiratory allergen, towards a reconstructed human epidermis model. This study was performed using a new approach combining reconstructed human epidermis (RHE) as a skin model, HRMAS NMR technique to investigate the in situ chemical reactivity and LC-MS/MS to identify modified epidermal proteins. The reaction of PA appeared to be quite fast in RHE compared to model experiments because after 30 min of incubation, no residual signal corresponding to (13C)-1 could be detected. The major product formed could be assigned to phthalic acid, the hydrolysis product of PA. Two amide type adducts on lysine residues were observed and after 8h of incubation, we also observed the formation of an imide type cyclized adducts with lysine. In parallel, RHE samples topically exposed to phthalic anhydride (13C)-1 were analyzed using the shotgun proteomics method. Thus, 948 different proteins were extracted and identified, 135 of which being modified by PA i.e. 14.2% of the extracted proteome. A total of 886 amino acids were modified by PA, of which 211 modifications were validated by fragmentation spectra. We thus identified 475 modified lysine residues (154 validated modifications associated with 122 proteins i.e. 12.9% of the proteome), 183 modified His residues (22 validated modifications associated with 42 proteins i.e. 4.4% of the proteome), 119 modified Tyr residues (30 validated modifications associated with 58 proteins i.e. 6.1% of the proteome) and 109 modified Arg residues (5 validated modifications associated with 25 proteins i.e. 2.6% of the proteome). The rate of modified residues, as a proportion of the total number of modifiable nucleophilic residues in RHE, was rather low (1%) and PA modifications were mainly observed on lysine residues with the formation of amide type adducts with a mass increase of +149 Da and a small number of imide type adducts with an increase mass of +131 Da. At the protein level, modified proteins were mainly type I and Type II keratins and other proteins which are abundant in the epidermis such as protein S100A, Caspase 14, annexin A2, serpin B3, Fatty-acid binding protein 5, histone H2, H3, H4 etc. However, the most modified protein, mainly on histidine residues, was filaggrin, a protein that is sparse (0.0266 mol%) and rich in histidine.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were first precipitated from the protein lysate. To 10 µg of protein lysate 5 volumes of an ice-cold solution of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol were added. The sample was vortexed and incubated at -20oC for 12 h. The sample was centrifuged at 12000 x g at 4oC for 15 min. The aqueous layer was removed. Proteins precipitated were washed twice by a solution of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac). Proteins were then resolubilized in 50 nM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced with 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min at 95oC, alkylated with 0.1 M iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins, reduced and alkylated, were then incubated with trypsin overnight at 37oC. After digestion, peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac) and stored at -20oC until the analysis by LC-MS/MS. The dried peptides (500-1000 ng for the RHE samples, 250 ng for the BSA samples) were resolubilized with 0.1% formic acid. The solution of tryptic peptides was then loaded onto a C18 reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap, 2 µm, 25 cm x 75 µm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated over a 160 min gradient of 2 to 40% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were recorded on a QExactive+ spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray source (nano-ESI). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z by the Orbitrap detector. The intact multiply-charged peptides were then sequentially selected in the quadrupole and fragmented in an HCD (Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation) collision cell. The MS/MS spectra were finally recorded by the Orbitrap detector with a maximum Injection Time (maxIT) set at 100ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were first converted into peaklists (mgf files) and then submitted to the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science). Data were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens sequence database for the RHE samples, or the SwissProt Mammalia sequence database for the BSA samples. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed for tryptic digestion. The variable modification parameter was set to contain acetylation of the N-terminal amino acid from the protein, oxidation of methionine, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine and 2 possible PA modifications of +149 Da (13C-C(7)-H(4)-O(3)) and +131 Da (13C-C(7)-H(2)-O(2)) of lysine, cysteine, histidine, arginine and tyrosine. Precursor peptides and fragments mass tolerances were set at 10.0 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by running all spectra against a decoy database using the Mascot software and set at less than 1% (FDR < 1%). The data obtained from Mascot's research were then imported into the Proline-Zero 2.0 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on both peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) (score ≥ 40, FDR <1%) and protein sets (FDR <1%). The list of peptides and proteins identified was exported in the form of excel files. Finally, the modifications of the proteins caused by phthalic anhydride were evaluated. In order to validate the location of a modification, fragmentation spectra of modified precursor peptides were manually inspected. A modification is validated if the fragmentation spectrum shows the presence of fragment ions (y and b ions in our case) around the modified site. On the other hand, if the fragmentation spectrum does not show fragment ions around the modified site, the exact location of the modification is ambiguous in the observed peptide, in which case it is a non-validated modification.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical skin and respiratory allergies are becoming a major health problem. To date our knowledge on the process of protein haptenation is still limited and mainly derived from studies performed in solution using model nucleophiles. In order to better understand chemical interactions between chemical allergens and the skin, we have investigated the reactivity of phthalic anhydride <b>1</b> (PA), a chemical respiratory sensitizer, toward reconstructed human epidermis (RHE). This study was performed using a new approach combining HRMAS NMR to investigate the in situ chemical reactivity and LC-MS/MS to identify modified epidermal proteins. In RHE, the reaction of PA appeared to be quite fast and the major product formed was phthalic acid. Two amide type adducts on lysine residues were observed and after 8h of incubation, we also observed the formation of an imide type cyclized adducts with lysine. In parallel, RHE samples topically exposed to phthalic anhydride (<sup>13</sup>C)-1 were analyzed using the shotgun proteomics method. Thus, 948 different proteins were extracted and identified, 135 of which being modified by PA, i.e., 14.2% of the extracted proteome. A total of 211 amino acids were modified by PA and validated by fragmentation spectra. We thus identified 154 modified lysines, 22 modified histidines, 30 modified tyrosines, and 5 modified arginines. The rate of modified residues, as a proportion of the total number of modifiable nucleophilic residues in RHE, was rather low (1%). At the protein level, modified proteins were mainly type I and type II keratins and other proteins which are abundant in the epidermis such as protein S100A, Caspase 14, annexin A2, serpin B3, fatty-acid binding protein 5, histone H2, H3, H4, etc. However, the most modified protein, mainly on histidine residues, was filaggrin, a protein that is of low abundance (0.0266 mol %) and rich in histidine.

### Keywords
Respiratory sensitizer, Phthalic anhydride, Lc-ms/ms, Human epidermis, Hrmas nmr

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Institute of Chemistry UMR 7177, F-67000 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Valérie Berl-Bauder
University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Institute of Chemistry UMR 7177, F-67000 Strasbourg, France


