### Accession
PXD028070

### Title
TMT-based plasma proteomics in humans at high altitude

### Description
In the present study, TMT-based proteomics studies was performed to decipher plasma proteome alterations in humans exposed to high altitude for short- (7 days, HA-D7) and long-term (3 months, HA-D150) stay.

### Sample Protocol
High abundant plasma proteins from each group (Sea level, HA-D7 and HA-D150) were depleted using High-Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin (A36370, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amount (100 µl) of depleted sample (n=8) was pooled together to comprise 800 µl of total volume for each group. Total protein content was determined with ToPA Bradford Protein Assay kit (Cat No. K-0014, ITSI Biosciences, USA) and consistency of protein profiles were checked using SDS-PAGE for each group. Subsequently, 400 μg depleted protein sample was mixed with 75 μL of 8 M urea buffered in 1 M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB). The sample reduction was performed with 5 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C followed by alkylation was with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The sample was diluted by adding 200 mM TEAB and digested at a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, each group of digested peptides was labeled with the TMT reagents following manufacturer protocols (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Torrance, CA, USA). Sample labeling was as follows: Sea level: 128, HA-D7: 129 and HA-D150: 130.   For multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) analysis, all the labelled samples were combined and then fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX). The fractions eluted at 50nM, 75mM, 150mM, 250mM, and 450mM of Ammonium acetate were collected. The samples were desalted using ZipTip and the desalted sample dried in a speedvac, then re-suspended in the appropriate mobile phase. For LC-MS/MS, the chromatography was performed with a Thermo EASY-nLCsystem. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear acetonitrile gradient from 5 to 32% acetonitrile over 90 minutes followed by high and low organic washes for another 20 minutes coupled to Q Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray source with the spray voltage set to 2.0kV and the ion transfer capillary set at 250oC. A data dependent Top 15 method was used where a full MS scan from m/z 350-1600 was followed by MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant ions. Each ion was subjected to HCD (Higher energy C trap dissociation) for fragmentation and peptide identification and TMT reporter ion detection.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files of each SCX fraction were searched against the most recent database for Human downloaded from UniProt using the MudPIT option in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT search algorithm. For protein identification results, only peptides identified with high confidence were used. For confidence, the Percolator algorithm was used for PSM (peptide spectrum match) validation in database searches. The false discovery rate (FDR) threshold calculated in Proteome Discoverer Percolator with high confidence peptides (0.01) were used for protein identification

### Publication Abstract
Acute exposure to high altitude perturbs physiological parameters and induces an array of molecular changes in healthy lowlanders. However, activation of compensatory mechanisms and biological processes facilitates high altitude acclimatization. A large number of lowlanders stay at high altitude regions from weeks to months for work and professional commitments, and thus are vulnerable to altitude-associated disorders. Despite this, there is a scarcity of information for molecular changes associated with long-term stay at high altitudes. In the present study, we evaluated oxygen saturation (SpO<sub>2</sub>), heart rate (HR), and systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP) of lowlanders after short- (7 days, HA-D7) and long-term (3 months, HA-D150) stay at high altitudes, and used TMT-based proteomics studies to decipher plasma proteome alterations. We observed improvements in SpO<sub>2</sub> levels after prolonged stay, while HR, SBP, and DBP remained elevated as compared with short-term stay. Plasma proteomics studies revealed higher levels of apolipoproteins APOB, APOCI, APOCIII, APOE, and APOL, and carbonic anhydrases (CA1 and CA2) during hypoxia exposure. Biological network analysis also identified profound alterations in lipoprotein-associated pathways like plasma lipoprotein assembly, VLDL clearance, chylomicron assembly, chylomicron remodeling, plasma lipoprotein clearance, and chylomicron clearance. In corroboration, lipid profiling revealed higher levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TGs), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) for HA-D150 whereas high density lipoproteins (HDL) levels were lower as compared with HA-D7 and sea-level indicating dyslipidemia. We also observed higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, TNF&#x3b1;, and CRP for HA-D150 along with oxidized LDL (oxLDL), suggesting vascular inflammation and proartherogenic propensity. These results demonstrate that long-term stay at high altitudes exacerbates dyslipidemia and associated disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Tmt lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Peptide and Proteomics Division Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS) Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) Lucknow Road, Timarpur Delhi-110054
Scientist, Peptide and Proteomics Division, Defence Institute of Physiolgy and Allied Science (DIPAS), Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Lucknow Road, Timarpur, Delhi -110054

### Submitter
Niroj K. Sethy

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Niroj Kumar Sethy
Peptide and Proteomics Division Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS) Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) Lucknow Road, Timarpur Delhi-110054


