### Accession
PXD027333

### Title
4-deoxy-4-fluoro-GalNAz (4FGalNAz) is a metabolic chemical reporter of O-GlcNAc modifications, highlighting the notable substrate flexibility of O-GlcNAc transferase

### Description
Bioorthogonal chemistries have revolutionized many fields. For example, metabolic chemical reporters (MCRs) of glycosylation are analogs of monosaccharides that contain bioorthogonal functionality, like azides or alkynes. MCRs are metabolically incorporated into glycoproteins by living systems, and bioorthogonal reactions can be subsequently employed to install visualization and enrichment tags. Unfortunately, most MCRs are not selective for one class of glycosylation (e.g. N-linked vs. O-linked), complicating the types of information that can be gleaned. We and others have successfully created MCRs that are selective for intracellular O-GlcNAc modification by altering the structure of the MCR and thus biasing it to certain metabolic pathways and/or O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Here, we attempt to do the same for the core GalNAc residue of mucin O-linked glycosylation. The most widely applied MCR for mucin O-linked glycosylation, GalNAz, can be enzymatically epimerized at the 4-hydroxyl to give GlcNAz. This results in a mixture of cell-surface and O-GlcNAc labeling. We reasoned that replacing the 4-hydroxyl of GalNAz with a fluorine would lock the stereochemistry of this position in place, causing the MCR to be more selective. After synthesis, we found that 4FGalNAz labels a variety of proteins in mammalian cells and does not perturb endogenous glycosylation pathways unlike 4FGalNAc. However, through subsequent proteomic and biochemical characterization we found that 4FGalNAz does not widely label cell-surface glycoproteins but instead is primarily a substrate for OGT. Although these results are somewhat disappointing from the standpoint of a mucin-selective MCR, they once again highlight the large substrate flexibility of OGT, with interesting and important implications for intracellular protein modification by a potential range of abiotic and native monosaccharides.

### Sample Protocol
The cell-pellets were lysed on ice by probe tip sonication in 1 × PBS + 2% SDS (0.5 mL), containing EDTA-free Pierce HaltTM protease inhibitor cocktail. Debris were removed from the cellular lysate by centrifugation (20,000 × g) for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. A BCA protein assay (Pierce) was performed and protein concentration was adjusted to 7.5 μg/μL with lysis buffer. Protein lysate (3 mg, 400 μL) was treated with a pre-mixed solution of the click chemistry reagents [100 μL; final concentration of 200 μM IsoTaG silane probe (3:1 heavy:light mixture), 500 μM CuSO4, 100 μM THPTA, 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate] and the reaction was incubated for 3.5 h at 24°C. The click reaction was quenched by a methanol-chloroform protein precipitation [aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform = 4:4:1 (v/v/v)]. The protein pellet was allowed to air dry for 5 min at 24°C. The dried pellet was resuspended in 1 × PBS + 1% SDS (400 μL) by probe tip sonication and then diluted in PBS (1.6 mL) to a final concentration of 0.2% SDS. Streptavidin-agarose resin [400 μL, washed with PBS (3 × 1 mL)] were added to the protein solution and the resulting mixture was incubated for 12 h at 24°C with rotation. The beads were washed using spin columns with 8 M urea (5 × 1 mL), and PBS (5 × 1 mL). The washed beads were resuspended in 500 μL PBS containing 10 mM DTT and incubated at 37°C for 30 min, followed by addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. The reduced and alkylated beads were collected by centrifugation (1,500 × g) and resuspended in 520 μL PBS. Urea (8 M, 32 μL) and trypsin (1.5 μg) was added to the resuspended beads and digestion was performed for 16 h at 37°C with rotation. Supernatant was collected and the beads were washed three times with PBS (200 μL) and distilled water (2 × 200 μL). Washes were combined with the supernatant digest to form the trypsin fractions for protein identification. The IsoTaG silane probe was cleaved with 2% formic acid/water (2 × 200 μL) for 30 min at 24°C with rotation and the eluent was collected. The beads were washed with 50% acetonitrile-water + 1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL), and the washes were combined with the eluent to form the cleavage fraction for site level identification. The trypsin and cleavage fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted using C18 tips following the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin fractions were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB (20 μL) and the corresponding amine-based TMT 10-plex (5 μL) was added to the samples and reacted for 1 h at 24°C. The reactions were quenched with 2 µl of a 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated and fractionated into six samples using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were stored at -20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid with a nano-electrospray ion source. Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid and acetonitrile with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, respectively. For the trypsin fractions, peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 4% to 32% B within 50 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 10 min and further to 98% B within 10 min and re-equilibration. The following instrument parameters were used as previously described.{Ge.2021} For the cleavage fractions, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5 to 30% B within 95 min, followed by an increase to 50% B within 15 min and further to 98% B within 10 min, and re-equilibration. The instrument parameters were set as previously described {Darabedian.2020} with minor modifications. Briefly, MS1 spectra were recorded from m/z 400-2,000 Da. If glyco-fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, and 292.103) were observed in the HCD spectra, ETD (250ms) with supplemental activation (35%) was performed in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. Other relevant parameters of EThcD include: isolation window (3 m/z), use calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters (True), Orbitrap resolution (50k), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True). The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the trypsin fraction, the data were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (20,355 proteins, downloaded on Feb. 21, 2019) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. Searches were performed as previously described.{Ge.2021} For the cleavage fraction, both HCD and EThcD spectra were searched against the proteome identified in the trypsin fraction using Byonic algorithms. The searches were performed with the following guidelines: trypsin as enzyme, 3 missed cleavages allowed; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions; 0.02 Da mass error tolerance on fragment ions. Intact glycopeptide searches allowed for the 6 most common tagged O-glycan (rare 1) on cysteine, serine, and threonine. Methionine oxidation (common 1) and cysteine carbaminomethylation (common 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. Glycopeptide spectral assignments (≥2 PSMs) passing a FDR of 1% at the peptide spectrum match level based on a target decoy database were kept. Singly modified glycopeptides assigned from EThCD spectra passing a 1% FDR and possessing a delta modification score of greater than or equal to ten were considered unambiguous glycosites.

### Publication Abstract
Bio-orthogonal chemistries have revolutionized many fields. For example, metabolic chemical reporters (MCRs) of glycosylation are analogues of monosaccharides that contain a bio-orthogonal functionality, such as azides or alkynes. MCRs are metabolically incorporated into glycoproteins by living systems, and bio-orthogonal reactions can be subsequently employed to install visualization and enrichment tags. Unfortunately, most MCRs are not selective for one class of glycosylation (e.g., N-linked vs O-linked), complicating the types of information that can be gleaned. We and others have successfully created MCRs that are selective for intracellular O-GlcNAc modification by altering the structure of the MCR and thus biasing it to certain metabolic pathways and/or O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Here, we attempt to do the same for the core GalNAc residue of mucin O-linked glycosylation. The most widely applied MCR for mucin O-linked glycosylation, GalNAz, can be enzymatically epimerized at the 4-hydroxyl to give GlcNAz. This results in a mixture of cell-surface and O-GlcNAc labeling. We reasoned that replacing the 4-hydroxyl of GalNAz with a fluorine would lock the stereochemistry of this position in place, causing the MCR to be more selective. After synthesis, we found that 4FGalNAz labels a variety of proteins in mammalian cells and does not perturb endogenous glycosylation pathways unlike 4FGalNAc. However, through subsequent proteomic and biochemical characterization, we found that 4FGalNAz does not widely label cell-surface glycoproteins but instead is primarily a substrate for OGT. Although these results are somewhat unexpected, they once again highlight the large substrate flexibility of OGT, with interesting and important implications for intracellular protein modification by a potential range of abiotic and native monosaccharides.

### Keywords
O-glcnac; tmt

### Affiliations
Associate Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Associate Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY


