### Accession
PXD006418

### Title
Molecular basis of USP7 inhibition by selective small molecule inhibitors

### Description
Modification by ubiquitin controls the stability of most cellular proteins, and deregulation contributes to a variety of human diseases such as cancer. Deubiquitinases (DUBs) remove ubiquitin from proteins, and the inhibition of DUBs has been recognized as a therapeutic strategy to induce degradation of specific proteins, a concept extendable to ‘undruggable’ targets such as transcription factors. However, this potential has remained untapped; specific small molecule inhibitors for DUBs are scarce and insights into mechanisms of action are limited. Ubiquitin specific protease (USP) 7 stabilises the oncogenic E3 ligase MDM2 that destabilises the tumour suppressor p53 and inhibition of USP7 results in MDM2 degradation and p53 re-activation in a variety of cancers. We here present two small molecule inhibitors, FT671 and FT827, that inhibit USP7 with nanomolar affinity and display exquisite specificity towards USP7 in vitro and in cells. USP7-inhibitor co-crystal structures reveal that both compounds target the auto-inhibited apo-form of USP7 and bind in proximity to the misaligned catalytic triad in a dynamic hydrophobic pocket that serves as the binding site for the ubiquitin C-terminus. The unique auto-inhibited conformation of apo USP7 differs from other USP DUBs, explaining compound selectivity. Consistent with USP7 target engagement in cells, FT671 destabilises MDM2, stabilises p53 and results in transcription of p53 target genes, induction of the tumour suppressor p21, and tumour growth inhibition in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated material was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and desalted using C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested samples were analysed in triplicate by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) DMSO to 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) DMSO at a flow rate of ~250 nl/min (~600 bar/40 oC column temperature). MS data were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive High Field (HF) instrument in which survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 @ 400 m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for CID fragmentation

### Data Protocol
From raw MS files, peak list files were generated with MSConvert (Proteowizard V3.0.5211) using the 200 most abundant peaks/spectra. The Mascot (V2.3, Matrix Science) search engine was used for protein identification at a false discovery rate of 1 %, mass deviation of 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.06 Da (Q Exactive HF) for MS2 spectra, Cys carbamidylation as fixed modification, Met oxidation and Gln deamidation as variable modification. Searches were performed against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (retrieved 15.10.2014). Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant Software (v1.5.2), and data were further analysed using GraphPad Prism software (v7.0) and Microsoft Excel. For the statistical analysis, we applied ANOVA including multiple comparison testing via the Dunnett method available through the GraphPad Prism software.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination controls the stability of most cellular proteins, and its deregulation contributes to human diseases including cancer. Deubiquitinases remove ubiquitin from proteins, and their inhibition can induce the degradation of selected proteins, potentially including otherwise 'undruggable' targets. For example, the inhibition of ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7) results in the degradation of the oncogenic E3 ligase MDM2, and leads to re-activation of the tumour suppressor p53 in various cancers. Here we report that two compounds, FT671 and FT827, inhibit USP7 with high affinity and specificity in vitro and within human cells. Co-crystal structures reveal that both compounds target a dynamic pocket near the catalytic centre of the auto-inhibited apo form of USP7, which differs from other USP deubiquitinases. Consistent with USP7 target engagement in cells, FT671 destabilizes USP7 substrates including MDM2, increases levels of p53, and results in the transcription of p53 target genes, induction of the tumour suppressor p21, and inhibition of tumour growth in mice.

### Keywords
Usp7 inhibitors cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, UK


