### Accession
PXD010796

### Title
Optimized cross-linking mass spectrometry for in situ interaction proteomics

### Description
ecent development of mass spectrometer cleavable protein cross-linkers and algorithms for their spectral identification now permits large-scale cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). Here, we optimized the use of cleavable disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) cross-linker for labeling native protein complexes in live human cells. We applied a generalized linear mixture model to calibrate cross-link peptide-spectra matching (CSM) scores to control the sensitivity and specificity of large-scale XL-MS. Using specific CSM score thresholds to control the false discovery rate, we found that higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) can both be effective for large-scale XL-MS protein interaction mapping. We found that the density and coverage of protein-protein interaction maps can be significantly improved through the use of multiple proteases. In addition, the use of sample-specific search databases can be used to improve the specificity of cross-linked peptide spectral matching. Application of this approach to human chromatin labeled in live cells recapitulated known and revealed new protein interactions of nucleosomes and other chromatin-associated complexes in situ. This optimized approach for mapping native protein interactions should be useful for a wide range of biological problems.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of BSA was solubilized in 50 µl HEPES buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 8, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1.5 mM magnesium chloride, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol) and cross-linked by adding 1 µl of 50 mM DSSO dissolved in DMSO (1:1 protein amine:DSSO molar ratio). The solution was incubated at room temperature for 1 hour, before quenching by the addition of 1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final concentration of 20 mM. The cross-linked protein was denatured by adding 50 µl of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, then reduced by 100 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 1hr and alkylated with 550 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 100 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56°C for 20 min. The solution was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, pH 8, for a final concentration of 0.2 M guanidine hydrochloride. For digestion with a single protease, either trypsin, chymotrypsin or GluC was added in 1:50 (enzyme:protein, w/w) concentration and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid to 1% (v/v) concentration. Peptides were then purified using solid phase extraction with C18 Macrospin columns. HEK293T cells (50 million) were sedimented by centrifugation at 500 g and then suspended in 1 ml of hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 8, 10 mM sodium chloride, 1 mM magnesium chloride, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, protease inhibitors). For cross-linking, 50 µl of 50 mM DSSO dissolved in DMSO was added and cells were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C. The reaction was then quenched by the addition of 50 µl of 500 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Nuclei were isolated by dounce homogenization, followed by sucrose gradient sedimentation. Purified nuclei were then resuspended in successive low salt, high salt and Triton-X containing buffers, while retaining the insoluble pellet of proteins. Chromatin was released from this pellet by resuspending in 500 µl of 15 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 15 mM sodium chloride, 60 mM potassium chloride, 5 mM magnesium chloride, 1 mM calcium chloride, 0.25 M sucrose and protease inhibitors (0.5 M AEBSF, 0.001 mM Pepstatin, 0.01 mM Bestatin and 0.1 mM Leupeptin). The chromatin suspension was incubated at 37°C for 10 minMmicrococcal nuclease was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. The nuclease digestion was stopped by the addition of EDTA to a final concentration of 50 mM and the solution was centrifuged for 10 min at 18,000 g to remove the nuclear matrix. The supernatant containing cross-linked chromatin was then quantified using the BCA assay. Cross-linked chromatin proteins were then purified by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) using Sartorius Vivacon 500 with a 30,000 MW cut-off filter. Proteins were reduced on the membrane by incubation with 100 mM dithiothreitol in urea buffer for 20 min at room temperature before centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20min. The proteins were then alkylated with 200 µl of 100 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer for 20 min at room temperature in the dark before centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min. Proteins retained on the membrane were then digested with trypsin at 1:50 (enzyme:protein, w/w) concentration at 37°C for 18 hours. Digested peptides then collected and purified using solid phase extraction. The purified peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 100 µl of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then injected onto the strong cation exchange (SCX) column (Protein Pak Hi-Res SP 7µm 4.6 x 100mm, Water) at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min with a column temperature of 30°C using the Alliance HPLC system (Waters). Gradient was run with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A and 1 M potassium chloride in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent B. Column gradient was set as follows: 0-3 min (0% B); 3-33 min (0-10% B); 33-43 min (10-100% B); 43-60 min (100% B); 60-70 min (100-0% B); 70-90 min (0% B). Six fractions were collected from 38 to 60 min and purified using solid phase extraction. Cross-linked peptides were separated by reverse phase nanoflow liquid chromatography (EKspert nanoLC 425, Ekisgent) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo). Cross-linked BSA peptides and HEK293T peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water (v/v). For liquid chromatography, a trap-elute system was used. Trap columns were fabricated by packing Poros R2 10µm C18 particles (Life Technologies) into 4 cm fritted capillaries with internal diameters of 150 µm. Reverse phase columns were fabricated by packing Reprosil 1.9 µm silica C18 particles into 40 cm fritted capillaries with internal diameters of 75 µm. Peptides were resolved over a 90 min gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile and ionized using the DPV-565 Picoview ion source (New Objective) operated with the ionization voltage of 1700 V.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectra raw files were analyzed using XlinkX version 2.2, as implemented in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2. The target search database was based on Homo sapiens Uniprot (downloaded January 2016), supplemented with the common contaminant protein list cRAP. Mass spectral analysis parameters included 2 maximum allowed missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 5 and 4 maximum variable modifications: methionine oxidation, hydrolysis of lysine-DSSO, and lysine-DSSO-Tris adduct. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for Orbitrap and ion trap spectra, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for cross-link peptide spectra matching with minimum score threshold set at 0 using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Recent development of mass spectrometer cleavable protein cross-linkers and algorithms for their spectral identification now permits large-scale cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). Here, we optimized the use of cleavable disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) cross-linker for labeling native protein complexes in live human cells. We applied a generalized linear mixture model to calibrate cross-link peptide-spectra matching (CSM) scores to control the sensitivity and specificity of large-scale XL-MS. Using specific CSM score thresholds to control the false discovery rate, we found that higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) can both be effective for large-scale XL-MS protein interaction mapping. We found that the coverage of protein-protein interaction maps is significantly improved through the use of multiple proteases. In addition, the use of focused sample-specific search databases can be used to improve the specificity of cross-linked peptide spectral matching. Application of this approach to human chromatin labeled in live cells recapitulated known and revealed new protein interactions of nucleosomes and other chromatin-associated complexes in situ. This optimized approach for mapping native protein interactions should be useful for a wide range of biological problems.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatin, Cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center


