### Accession
PXD005803

### Title
Large-scale phosphoproteomics reveals Shp-2 phosphatase-dependent regulators of Pdgf-receptor signaling

### Description
Despite its low cellular abundance, tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) regulates numerous cell signaling pathways in health and disease. We applied comprehensive phosphoproteomics to unravel differential regulators of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)–initiated signaling networks upon activation by Pdgf-ββ, Fgf-2, or Igf-1, and identified over 40,000 phosphorylation sites, including many phosphotyrosine sites without additional enrichment.  The analysis revealed RTK-specific regulation of hundreds of pTyr sites on key signaling molecules. We found the tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 to be the master regulator of Pdgfr pTyr signaling. Application of a recently introduced allosteric Shp2 inhibitor revealed global regulation of the Pdgf-dependent tyrosine phosphoproteome, which significantly impaired cell migration. Additionally, we present a list of hundreds of Shp2-dependent targets and putative substrates including Rasa1 and Cortactin with increased tyrosine phosphorylation, and Gab1 and Erk1/2 with decreased tyrosine phosphorylation. Our study demonstrates that large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics can precisely dissect tightly regulated kinase-phosphatase signaling networks.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed rapidly using boiling guanidine hydrochloride containing reducing (TCEP) and alkylating (CAA) agent. Proteins digested into peptides Lys-C and Trypsin were prepared with C18 solid phase extraction. Resulting peptides were fractionated and concatenated using high pH reversed phase. Resulting fractions were used for proteomics analysis and phosphoproteomics analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide metal oxide affinity enrichment. Resulting samples were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All files were processed together and raw data searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.33 with Andromeda search engine (www.maxquant.org) against the Mus musculus uniprot database. The MS/MS spectra were searched with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification on cysteine and variable modifications oxidation on methionine, protein n-terminus acetylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine along with deamidation on asparagine and glutamine. False discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used at the peptide and protein level, protein quantitation required minimum of two peptides without modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Despite its low cellular abundance, phosphotyrosine (pTyr) regulates numerous cell signaling pathways in&#xa0;health and disease. We applied comprehensive phosphoproteomics to unravel differential regulators of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-initiated signaling networks upon activation by Pdgf-&#x3b2;&#x3b2;, Fgf-2, or Igf-1 and identified more than 40,000 phosphorylation sites, including many phosphotyrosine sites without additional enrichment. The analysis revealed RTK-specific regulation of hundreds of pTyr sites on key signaling molecules. We found the tyrosine phosphatase Shp-2 to be the master regulator of Pdgfr pTyr signaling. Application of a recently introduced allosteric Shp-2 inhibitor revealed global regulation of the Pdgf-dependent tyrosine phosphoproteome, which significantly impaired cell migration. In addition, we present a list of hundreds of Shp-2-dependent targets and putative substrates, including Rasa1 and Cortactin with increased pTyr and Gab1 and Erk1/2 with decreased pTyr. Our study demonstrates that large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics can precisely dissect tightly regulated kinase-phosphatase signaling networks.

### Keywords
Shp-2, Q-exactive, Phosphoproteomics, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Pdgf, Shp099, Label-free quantitation, Orbitrap, Mass spectrometry, Tio2

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Tanveer Batth

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen


