### Accession
PXD019187

### Title
Equine gluteal muscle LC-MSMS: Warmblood

### Description
Myofibrillar myopathy (MFM) in horses is a late onset disease that affects performance and athleticism. It is characterized by myofibrillar disarray and protein aggregation with no known cause. The objective of this study was to elucidate the molecular drivers of MFM in Warmblood (WB) horses by proteomic profiling (5 MFM WB, 4 non-MFM WB) of gluteal muscle. MFM horses used in this study had a chronic history of poor performance and exercise intolerance as well as accumulation of desmin aggregates in > 4 myofibers per muscle sample. The Equine Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory database at Michigan State University was queried to identify WB horses with snap frozen gluteus medius biopsies available for analysis. Non-MFM control horses were defined as horses with no history of exercise intolerance and no evidence of desmin accumulation or other histopathology in muscle biopsies. Muscle biopsy samples were obtained at rest from horses that had not undertaken strenuous exercise in the preceding 48 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples from nine horses were analyzed using a 10-plex tandem mas tag protein quantitation assay. Five MFM WB (2 castrated males, 1 male and 2 females) with the mean age of 14.4 ± 3yrs, four non-MFM WB (2 castrated males and 2 females) with the mean age of 13.8 ± 4.6yrs, and one technical replicate were included in the assay. Proteins was extracted from snap frozen gluteal muscle biopsies with radioimmunoprecipitation lysis buffer and quantified.  Five hundred µg from each sample were digested in trypsin, labeled with TMT10 reagents, fractionated, and eluted from RSLC columns. The eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120,000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top twenty ions in each survey scan subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation with fragment spectra acquired at 45,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer, v2.2 and searched against the UniprotKB Equus caballus reference proteome (UP000002281) appended with common laboratory contaminants using the Sequest HT search algorithm. The search output was then analyzed using Scaffold, v4.8.4 to probabilistically validate protein identifications (FDR < 0.01) . Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins (retaining proteins with at least two identified peptides), and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 108665 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 79921 (74%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying Permutation Test and corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg (FDR ≤ 0.05, P ≤ 0.003).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Gluteal muscle, Horse

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Mary Anne McPhail Dressage Chair in Equine Sports Medicine Department Large Animal Clinical Sciences College of Veterinary Medicine Michigan State University

### Submitter
Stephanie Valberg

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Valberg
Mary Anne McPhail Dressage Chair in Equine Sports Medicine Department Large Animal Clinical Sciences College of Veterinary Medicine Michigan State University


