### Accession
PXD023719

### Title
PRM-MS quantitative analysis of isomeric N-glycopeptides derived from human serum haptoglobin of patients with cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Comprehensive LC-PRM-MS approach where a targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) strategy was coupled to a powerful LC system to study the microheterogeneity of serum haptoglobin (Hp) extracted from 15 patients with cirrhosis and 15 with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

### Sample Protocol
Purification of haptoglobin from human serum. Serum samples were provided by the University of Michigan and the University of Texas Southwestern Hospital according to IRB approval; 15 cases of liver NASH cirrhosis, and 15 cases of NASH related-HCC. Haptoglobin was purified from a 20 microliters aliquot of serum for each patient using and HPLC-based antibody-immobilized method developed in house as previously reported (Huang et al. Electrophoresis 38,17, 2017, pp 2160-2167). Before enzymatic digestion, the purity of the eluted haptoglobin was confirmed by 1D SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining using the ProteoSilver (TM) Plus Silver Stain Kit (Sigma Aldrich).  Tryptic and Glu-C haptoglobin digestion. The purified serum haptoglobin was resuspended with 20 microliters of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and denatured at 90 °C in a water bath for 15 min. The denatured glycoprotein was reduced by the addition of 0.5 microliters of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubation at 60 °C for 45 min. Then, the glycoprotein was alkylated by the addition of 2.0 microliters of iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubation at 37 °C for 45 min. A second addition of 0.5 microliters of 200 mM DTT and incubation at 37 C for 30 min was performed to quench the IAA excess. Trypsin was added tothe treated glycoprotein sample at a concentration ratio of 1:25 and incubated at 37 C overnight. After incubation, the digestion was quenched at 90 °C for 15 min. In a second enzymatic digestion, Glu-C was added to the tryptic digested sample at a concentration ratio 1:25 and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The sample was finally dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator.  LC-PRM-MS analysis.  The dried tryptic and Glu-C digests were resuspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.1% formic acid (FA). Five microliters of the reconstituted sample were injected onto a C18 trap column (75 micras x 10 cm, 2 micras, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) for 10 min, and the samples were then transferred to an Aclaim PepMap C18 capillary column (75 micras x 50 cm, 2 micras, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) using an Ultimate 3000 nanoUHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min with a temperature of 60 °C. Mobile phase A was an aqueous mixture with 2% of MeCN, and 0.1% of FA, while mobile phase B was a mixture of MeCN with 0.1% of FA. The analytical gradient was 100 min long, and started at 2% mobile phase B for the initial 10 min, then increased to 38% at 11 min. During the next 70 min the organic phase B gradually developed to 60%. Subsequently, it ramped up to 90% in a period of 3 min and was maintained for 4 min. Finally, the percentage of organic phase B dropped to 2% in 1 min and was kept at that condition to pre-equilibrate the system. The nanoUHPLC system was interfaced to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), and operated in positive ion mode for PRM-MS analysis. The fragmentation pattern of the precursor ions was evaluated with different collision energy (CE) levels and established as 25 eV. Then, a MS1 scan range of 300 – 2000 m/z and a MS2 scan range of 300 – 3000 m/z were applied to a pooled sample for the identification of the precursor ions, their fragments and retention times. All the identified precursor ions were included in the PRM-MS method with a retention time window of ±3 min, and a mass range of ±2 Da relative to the target mass.

### Data Protocol
A pooled sample was analyzed and used to identify the N-glycopeptides present in the samples based on monoisotopic mass, charge, retention time, and MS2 spectra. The specific information for each detected N-glycopeptide structure was targeted in the LC-PRM-MS approach on the Orbitrap QExactive (Thermo). The selection of the precursor ions for all identified glycopeptide structures was based on the signal intensity so that each case the most abundant ion was used in the PRM strategy. The energy level was tested in the HCD cell of the QExactive before the application of the analysis, the most appropiate collision energy to produce stable and abundant Y fragment ions of the glycan moiety was 25 eV. Six of the most representative and abundant fragment Y ions were selected for each glycopeptide, and their peak area calculated using Xcalibur (Thermo) software. After the area under the curve was computed the data was normalized based on the total area of all identified glycopeptides and their relative abundance calculated. In order to compare the data from two cohorts, the Wilcoxon Test was performed and p values < 0.05 were considered significant. We obtained area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) values, and heat maps using the SPSS® (IBM) software. PCA plots were obtained using the software MarkerView® (AB Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
Currently, surveillance strategies have inadequate performance for cirrhosis and early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The glycosylation of serum haptoglobin has shown to have significant differences between cirrhosis and HCC, thus can be used for diagnosis. We performed a comprehensive liquid chromatography-parallel reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (LC-PRM-MS) approach, where a targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) strategy was coupled to a powerful LC system, to study the site-specific isomerism of haptoglobin (Hp) extracted from cirrhosis and HCC patients. We found that our strategy was able to identify a large number of isomeric <i>N</i>-glycopeptides, mainly located in the Hp glycosylation site Asn207. Four <i>N</i>-glycopeptides were found to have significant changes in abundance between cirrhosis and HCC samples (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Strategic combinations of the significant <i>N</i>-glycopeptides, either with alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) or themselves, better estimate the areas under the curve (AUC) of their respective receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves with respect to AFP. The combination of AFP with the isomeric sialylated fucosylated <i>N</i>-glycopeptides Asn207 + 5-6-1-2 and Asn207 + 5-6-1-3, resulted with an AUC value of 0.98, while the AUC value for AFP alone was 0.85. When comparing cirrhosis vs. early HCC, the isomeric <i>N</i>-glycopeptide Asn207 + 5-6-0-1 better estimated AUC with respect to AFP (AUC<sub>AFP</sub> = 0.81, and AUC<sub>Asn207</sub> + 5-6-0-1 = 0.88, respectively).

### Keywords
Cirrhosis, N-glycopeptides, Haptoglobin, Hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc), Prm

### Affiliations
Graduate student
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry Texas Tech University Lubbock, TX 79409-1061 Tel: 806-742-3059 Fax: 806-742-1289

### Submitter
Cristian Gutierrez Reyes

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry Texas Tech University Lubbock, TX 79409-1061 Tel: 806-742-3059 Fax: 806-742-1289


