### Accession
PXD014028

### Title
A gatekeeper residue controls transcriptional activity of the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 5 (ERK5) through molecular interactions with the C terminal tail.

### Description
We analyzed the interactome of the kinase ERK5 and its mutant Y733E in HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
The experiemnt has been performed in triplicates (not induced samples vs ERK induced samples vs ERK5 mut induced samples). After cell lysis ERK5 or its mutant have been immunopreciptated using anti-Flag antibody and the samples were separated on SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested as published (Francavilla et al., 2016). Samples were run on the QExactive-HF instrument with standard DDA acquisition parameters.

### Data Protocol
The samples were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.5 and the HUMAN_062016\UP000005640_9606 fasta file. Quantification was label free. STY phosphorylation was used as variable modification. Data analysis has been performed with the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Erk5

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Molecular&Cellular Functions | School of Biological Sciences | FBMH C.4252 | Michael Smith Building | Oxford Road | Manchester | M13 9PT Tel: +44 161 275 5208 | Email: chiara.francavilla@manchester.ac.uk

### Submitter
Chiara Francavilla

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Francavilla
Division of Molecular&Cellular Functions | School of Biological Sciences | FBMH C.4252 | Michael Smith Building | Oxford Road | Manchester | M13 9PT Tel: +44 161 275 5208 | Email: chiara.francavilla@manchester.ac.uk


