### Accession
PXD002243

### Title
The effect of oxygen on bile resistance in L. monocytogenes

### Description
Listeria monocytogenes is a gram-positive, facultative anaerobe food-borne pathogen that is the causative agent of listeriosis. Upon ingestion, L. monocytogenes is subjected to a variety of non-specific host defenses such as bile. The main component of bile is bile salts which is known to be bactericidal through inducing DNA damage, oxidative damage, membrane instability, and protein misfolding. Previous studies have focused mainly on aerobic conditions; however the human GI tract is an environment ranging from microaerophilic to anaerobic. The bile salt hydrolase, an enzyme known to reduce toxicity of bile through hydrolysis, has been shown to have an increase in activity under anaerobic conditions. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the effect of oxygen on bile resistance and determine the bile specific proteome that is responsible for this. To do this, we performed survival assays on virulent strains: F2365, 10403S, EGDe and avirulent strain, HCC23. Results showed an increase in viability for all virulent strains when exposed to porcine bile under anaerobic conditions. Interestingly, an increase in resistance was seen in HCC23 only under aerobic conditions. We then used a total proteomic analysis approach to compare the bile specific proteome under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Results showed many difference between all strains including an increase in abundance of proteins associated with stress responses, repair, cell morphology, and cell division under anaerobic conditions. Response to bile salt stress showed to be strain dependent. This study not only identified proteins responsible for L. monocytogenes bile resistance but also differerences between aerobic and anaerobic conditions thus suggesting that oxygen availability is not only a stressor but in some way providing assistance to overcoming bile salts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolations were carried out in triplicate of L. monocytogenes strains F2365, EGDe, 10403S and HCC23. Overnight cultures were diluted into fresh BHIand allowed to grow to mid-log (OD600=0.4) phase under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Under aerobic conditions, Wheaten serum vials were capped with rubbed stoppers and sealed with aluminum. At midlog, 10mL were collected and immediately centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 10minutes at 10ºC. Samples were collected -10 min prior to and 1 hour post exposure to 0% or 5% porcine bile extract (Sigma #B8631). Cell pellets were resuspended in 700 µL NP-40 lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL, 50mM Tris, pH 8.0) and 50µL of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, #P2714), lysed through sonication using Covaris for 60 sec . Lysate was plated to ensure efficient lysis had occurred. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min to remove cell debris. A Fluka protein Quantification Kit was used to determine protein concentration. Proteins (100µg-200µg) were precipitated with 600µL of methanol, 150µL of chloroform and 450µL of sterile deionized water then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 1 min. Supernatant was removed, 450µL of methonal was added to the interface layer, and centrifuged again at 13,000 x g for 1 min. Protein pellets were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature then treated with 2.0µg of trypsin overnight, desalted using a macrotrap and analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) high performance liquid chromatography machine (HPLC) coupled with an LTQ Velos (Thermo Scientific) linear ion trap mass spectrometer. The Easy-nLC was configured for reverse phase chromatography using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated for mass spectrometry analysis using an acetonitrile gradient starting at 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and reaching 50% ACN, 0.1% FA in 120 min, followed by a 15 min wash of 95% ACN, 0.1% FA. Column equilibration was handled automatically using the Dionex UltiMate 3000. The eluate from the HPLC was fed directly to the LTQ Velos for nanospray ionization followed by MS/MS analysis of detected peptides. The LTQ Velos was configured to perform 1 ms scan followed by 18 MS/MS scans of the 18 most intense peaks repeatedly over the 135 min duration of each HPLC run. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 3 min, repeat count of 3, and a list length of 500.

### Data Protocol
Spectral files (RAW format) from LTQ Velos obtained from each strain were converted to mgf searched against their corresponding in silico trypsin digested databases obtained from National Center for Biotechnology Information Reference Sequences [NCBI RefSeq, 10403S: 2814, EGDe: 2867, F2365: 2821 and HCC23: 2974 proteins] using X!tandem. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 1500ppm and 1000ppm respectively. Amino acid modifications included in the database search were single and double oxidation of methionine, both carboxymethylation and carboxamidomethylation of cysteine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and water loss from serine and threonine. A decoy search was also executed against a randomized version of the same protein database with identical parameters as the target database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). Hits from the target search were evaluated as possible outliers with respect to the decoy distribution and a probability score of being correct was associated to each. The probability of peptide and protein identifications were estimated using peptide prophet and protein prophet respectively. Peptides with at least 95% probability of being correct were accepted. : Protein differential expression between treatments was evaluated on the basis of peptide spectral intensity. The raw spectral data were converted to the MS1 tab delimited format using MSConvert from the ProteoWizard toolset. The intensities for each peptide elution peak were identified from the associated MS1 file using Perl script and summed. For each identified protein, the peptide intensities were combined and organized by experimental replicate. Differential expression was evaluated using Monte Carlo resampling techniques to compare the replicate intensities between treatments. Each comparison used 1 million iterations and was assigned a p-value based on the number of times each test favored one treatment over another (p < 0.05 indicated significance).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> is a Gram-positive facultative anaerobe that is the causative agent of the disease listeriosis. The infectious ability of this bacterium is dependent upon resistance to stressors encountered within the gastrointestinal tract, including bile. Previous studies have indicated bile salt hydrolase activity increases under anaerobic conditions, suggesting anaerobic conditions influence stress responses. Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine if reduced oxygen availability increased bile resistance of <i>L. monocytogenes</i>. Four strains representing three serovars were evaluated for changes in viability and proteome expression following exposure to bile in aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Viability for F2365 (serovar 4b), EGD-e (serovar 1/2a), and 10403S (serovar 1/2a) increased following exposure to 10% porcine bile under anaerobic conditions (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). However, HCC23 (serovar 4a) exhibited no difference (<i>P</i> &gt; 0.05) in bile resistance between aerobic and anaerobic conditions, indicating that oxygen availability does not influence resistance in this strain. The proteomic analysis indicated F2365 and EGD-e had an increased expression of proteins associated with cell envelope and membrane bioenergetics under anaerobic conditions, including thioredoxin-disulfide reductase and cell division proteins. Interestingly, HCC23 had an increase in several dehydrogenases following exposure to bile under aerobic conditions, suggesting that the NADH:NAD+ is altered and may impact bile resistance. Variations were observed in the expression of the cell shape proteins between strains, which corresponded to morphological differences observed by scanning electron microscopy. These data indicate that oxygen availability influences bile resistance. Further research is needed to decipher how these changes in metabolism impact pathogenicity <i>in vivo</i> and also the impact that this has on susceptibility of a host to listeriosis.

### Keywords
10403s, Egde, Egd, F2365, Listeria monocytogenes, Hcc23

### Affiliations
Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Biological Sciences Dept, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, 39762

### Submitter
Joseph Reddy

### Lab Head
Dr Janet Donaldson
Biological Sciences Dept, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, 39762


