### Accession
PXD036068

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies molecular players and biological processes specific to SARS-CoV-2 exposure in endothelial cells

### Description
In this study we investigated the global proteomic response of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) after exposure to SARS-CoV-2. For this porpouse HUVECs were incubated with SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 and after different hours post-infection (hpi) samples were submitted to the 50% tissue-culture infective dose assay (TCID50), proteomic analysis and RT-qPCR measurements.To perform the relative quantitative label-free proteomic analysis, cells exposed to SARS-CoV-2 or MOCK were submitted  to protein extraction, trypsin digestion and the tryptic peptides were analyzed in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data analysis of the differently abundant proteins of each cell model revealed distinct cell responses.

### Sample Protocol
The HUVEC supernatants were removed after 48 and 120 h and the cells were washed three times with PBS. Cells were harvested in 1 ml of 2 M urea solution containing 5 mM DTT and maintained at -80°C until protein extraction. Cells were lysed on ice, subjected to ultrasonication (5 cycles: 30 s sonication/ 30 s on ice), and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 30 min. The sample supernatants were subjected to the FASP protocol [25,26] using 10 kDa filter units (Merck Millipore, Hessen, DE), and in-filter trypsin digestion was performed. Tryptic peptides were desalted using custom-made stage tips (SDB-XC membranes) and dried under vacuum using a centrifugal concentrator (22331, Eppendorf, Hamburgo, DE). Samples were dissolved in 20 µL of aqueous buffer containing 0.1% formic acid and quantified, and 250 ng of each sample was subjected to an LC-MS/MS analysis on a nano-LC EASY 1200 (LC-030378, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) system coupled with a Q Exactive Plus (03893L, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) mass spectrometer at the Mass Spectrometry Unit of CENTD (Butantan Institute, Brazil). Peptide mixtures of each sample were loaded onto an Acclaim–PepMap100 C18 trap column (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm internal diameter, and 20 mm column length) in line with an analytical Acclaim PepMap column (2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 150 mm length, and 50 µm inner diameter) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mobile phases, solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid) and solvent B (80% v/v acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid), were used in a linear gradient (5–30% B in 50 min, 30–60% B in 13 min, 60–100% B in 2 min, and a step of 100% B for 5 min). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive, data-dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1,5000, followed by MS/MS acquisition using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the seven most intense ions from the MS scan using a window width of 2.0 m/z. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s. For the survey MS scan, a target AGC value of 3x106 and maximum injection time of 200 ms were set, whereas the target value for the fragmentation ion (MS/MS) was set to 2x105 and maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14 [27] and searches were performed against a customized database including all coronavirus sequences, reviewed Homo sapiens sequences downloaded from UniProt (total of 20,845 sequences, downloaded on 10-01-2020), common mass spectrometry contaminants, and decoy sequences. The Andromeda search engine was set to detect specific tryptic peptides at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and to perform label-free quantification (LFQ) with default parameters. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The identified and quantified protein groups were post-processed in R. Proteins identified as contaminants, reverse sequences, or identified only by site were filtered out. For protein significance analysis, data was used as input for the limma R package [28] and proteins that presented p-value lower than 0.05 and a fold change of 1.5 (-0.585 < log2 FC > 0.585) were considered to be differentially abundant (DA) comparing SARS-CoV-2 and mock samples. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the Reactome database (p-value <0.05) [26], and protein–protein interaction network analysis was performed using STRING [30]. Network enrichment analysis was performed using ClueGO [31] and AutoAnnotate [32] plugins in Cytoscape software [33]. ClueGO presents enrichment analysis as networks, where biological processes or pathways are represented as nodes and kappa scores are represented as edges. For the enrichment analysis, we applied a hypergeometric test and Bonferroni step-down correction for multiple hypothesis testing, considering terms from both Gene Ontology (GO) and Reactome databases. All biological processes and pathways in the networks presented a corrected p-value < 0.05. CluePedia, a functionality of ClueGO, was used to visualize the main proteins associated with the significantly enriched biological processes or pathways. All other ClueGO parameters were maintained at default. To facilitate visualization, clusters of semantically related terms were created using AutoAnnotate.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been responsible for the severe pandemic of acute respiratory disease, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), experienced in the 21st century. The clinical manifestations range from mild symptoms to abnormal blood coagulation and severe respiratory failure. In severe cases, COVID-19 manifests as a thromboinflammatory disease. Damage to the vascular compartment caused by SARS-CoV-2 has been linked to thrombosis, triggered by an enhanced immune response. The molecular mechanisms underlying endothelial activation have not been fully elucidated. We aimed to identify the proteins correlated to the molecular response of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) after exposure to SARS-CoV-2, which might help to unravel the molecular mechanisms of endothelium activation in COVID-19. In this direction, we exposed HUVECs to SARS-CoV-2 and analyzed the expression of specific cellular receptors, and changes in the proteome of HUVECs at different time points. We identified that HUVECs exhibit non-productive infection without cytopathic effects, in addition to the lack of expression of specific cell receptors known to be essential for SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells. We highlighted the enrichment of the protein SUMOylation pathway and the increase in SUMO2, which was confirmed by orthogonal assays. In conclusion, proteomic analysis revealed that the exposure to SARS-CoV-2 induced oxidative stress and changes in protein abundance and pathways enrichment that resembled endothelial dysfunction.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Proteomics, Huvec, Mass spectrometry, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Centre of Excellence in New Target Discovery (CENTD), Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
University of Virginia

### Submitter
Dilza Trevisan Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Marisa Chudzinski-Tavassi
Centre of Excellence in New Target Discovery (CENTD), Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, Brazil.


