### Accession
PXD009566

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the papaverine degrading Arthrobacter sp.

### Description
In previous work in our group, shotgun genome sequencing of Arthrobacter sp. revealed potential new P450 monooxygenases and many other oxidoreductases with putative hydroxylation activity. A targeted approach to identify enzymes involved in the degradation of certain molecules is proteomic analysis. In the case of growth on certain substances, enzymes like P450s, which are responsible for the observed organism’s capabilities, might be overexpressed or initially induced.

### Sample Protocol
Samples cultivated on different C-sources were harvested at OD600 of approx. 1.6 by centrifugation and lysed through enzymatic and mechanical methods. The cells were resuspended in 3 mL gcww-1 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X, 100 mM NaCl, directly before use: 1 mM DTT, 20 μg mL-1 DNase I and protease inhibitors: 1 μM Pepstatin, 0.1 mM AEBSF, 0.1 mM PMSF) and treated with Lysozyme for 2 h at 37°C. Subsequently, the lysis was continued through a high-pressure homogenizer (EmulsiFlex-C5, Avestin, Ottowa, Canada) for 5 x 5 min cycles under 1700 bar pressure. Remaining DNA was sheared by sonification on ice (Branson Sonifier 250 equipped with a mikrotip: 1/8“ diameter, Danbury, US) for 5 min (pulse: Output 5 – 6, Duty cycle: 35%). Obtaining detailed information of the proteins location the lysed cells were centrifuged for 30 min at 55000xg and 4°C (Beckman Avanti J-26S XP with a JA-25.50 Rotor, Beckman Coulter, Brea, California, USA) to obtain the soluble (cell lysate) and insoluble (cell debris) fraction. The proteome of the samples was visualized through 10% and 12% SDS-PAGE. The following proteomic analysis was conducted by the mass spectrometry unit at the University of Hohenheim (DE). In this respect, the proteins were isolated from the SDS-PAGE, trypsin digested, and the resulting peptide fragments analyzed by LTQ- Orbitrap LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The detected peptides were compared with a list of endogenous oxidation/reduction proteins derived by the genome of Arthrobacter sp. as well as with the global NCBI database to identify the corresponding proteins. The Mascot search engine was used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s) play crucial roles in the cell metabolism and provide an unsurpassed diversity of catalysed reactions. Here, we report the identification and biochemical characterization of two P450s from Arthrobacter sp., a Gram-positive organism known to degrade the opium alkaloid papaverine. Combining phylogenetic and genomic analysis suggested physiological roles for P450s in metabolism and revealed potential gene clusters with redox partners facilitating the reconstitution of the P450 activities in vitro. CYP1232F1 catalyses the para demethylation of 3,4-dimethoxyphenylacetic acid to homovanillic acid while CYP1232A24 continues demethylation to 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid. Interestingly, the latter enzyme is also able to perform both demethylation steps with preference for the meta position. The crystal structure of CYP1232A24, which shares only 29% identity to previous published structures of P450s helped to rationalize the preferred demethylation specificity for the meta position and also the broader substrate specificity profile. In addition to the detailed characterization of the two P450s using their physiological redox partners, we report the construction of a highly active whole-cell Escherichia coli biocatalyst expressing CYP1232A24, which formed up to 1.77 g l-1 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid. Our results revealed the P450s' role in the metabolic pathway of papaverine enabling further investigation and application of these biocatalysts.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Papaverine, Arthrobacter

### Affiliations
JK
Institute for Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Klenk

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Hauer
Institute for Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany


