### Accession
PXD022037

### Title
Exploring the interaction between the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex and the zinc finger factor CTCF

### Description
The transcription factor CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) modulates pleiotropic functions mostly related to gene expression regulation. The role of CTCF in large scale genome organization is also well established. A unifying model to explain relationships between many CTCF-mediated activities involve direct or indirect interactions with numerous protein cofactors recruited to specific binding sites. The co-association of CTCF with other architectural proteins such as cohesin, chromodomain helicases and BRG1 further support the interplay between master regulators of mammalian genome folding. Here we report a comprehensive LC-MS/MS mapping of the components of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex co-associated with CTCF including subunits belonging to the core, signature and ATPase modules. We further show that the localization patterns of representative SWI/SNF members significantly overlap with CTCF sites on transcriptionally active chromatin regions. Moreover, we provide evidence of a direct binding of the BRK-BRG1 domain to the zinc finger motifs 4-8 of CTCF, thus suggesting that these domains mediate the interaction of CTCF with the SWI/SNF complex. These findings provide an updated view of the cooperative nature between CTCF and the SWI/SNF ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complexes, an important step for understanding how these architectural proteins collaborate to shape the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as reported by Marino et al., 2019 (The Journal of biological chemistry 294, 861-873). Solvent composition was 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were loaded on a trapping PepMap™100 μCartridge Column C18 (300 μm x 0.5 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) and desalted with solvent A for 3 min with at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. After trapping, eluted peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray analytical column (15 cm x 75 μm ID PepMap RSLC C18, 3 μm, 100 Angstrom), heated to 35°C, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by using the following gradient: 4%B for 3 min, from 4% to 22%B in 50 min, from 22% to 35%B in 10 min, from 35% to 90%B in 5 min. A washing (90%B for 5 min) and a re-equilibration (4%B for 15 min) step was always included at the end of the gradient. Eluting peptides were analyzed on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 280°C and a potential of 1.9 kV applied to the capillary probe. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 70000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 for a scan range of 375−1500 m/z and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 100 ms. The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass. A data-dependent top 5 method was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra were obtained at 17500 MS2 resolution with an AGC target of 1 × 105 for a scan range of 200−2000 m/z, maximum IT of 55 ms, 2 m/z isolation width and a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 27. Precursor ions targeted for HCD were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Full scans and Orbitrap MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode, whereas ion trap mass spectra were acquired in centroid mode. Charge state recognition was enabled by excluding unassigned and singly charge states.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SEQUEST HT search engine. The HCD MS/MS spectra were searched against a custom database including all subunits of the human SWI/SNF complex and their isoforms assuming trypsin (Full) as digestion enzyme and two allowed number of missed cleavage sites. The mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) as static modification. False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node in Proteome Discoverer. The Target Decoy PSM Validator node specifies the PSM confidences on the basis of dynamic score-based thresholds. It calculates the node-dependent score thresholds needed to determine the FDRs, which are given as input parameters of the node. Target Decoy PSM Validator was run with the following settings: Maximum Delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, a relaxed target FDR of 0.05 and validation based on q-value. The Protein FDR Validator Node in Proteome Discoverer was used to classify protein identifications based on q-value. Proteins with a q-value of <0.01 were classified as high confidence identifications and proteins with a q-value of 0.01-0.05 were classified as medium confidence identifications. Only proteins identified with high confidence were retained with an FDR of 1%. The resulting list of SWI/SNF complex subunits identified in the CTCF affinity pull-down were filtered according to criteria reported by Marino et al., 2019 (The Journal of biological chemistry 294, 861-873) and the absence in control IgG IP sample. Proteins identified by searching MS/MS spectra against a custom common contaminant database were also not considered.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) modulates pleiotropic functions mostly related to gene expression regulation. The role of CTCF in large scale genome organization is also well established. A unifying model to explain relationships among many CTCF-mediated activities involves direct or indirect interactions with numerous protein cofactors recruited to specific binding sites. The co-association of CTCF with other architectural proteins such as cohesin, chromodomain helicases, and BRG1, further supports the interplay between master regulators of mammalian genome folding. Here, we report a comprehensive LC-MS/MS mapping of the components of the switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex co-associated with CTCF including subunits belonging to the core, signature, and ATPase modules. We further show that the localization patterns of representative SWI/SNF members significantly overlap with CTCF sites on transcriptionally active chromatin regions. Moreover, we provide evidence of a direct binding of the BRK-BRG1 domain to the zinc finger motifs 4-8 of CTCF, thus, suggesting that these domains mediate the interaction of CTCF with the SWI/SNF complex. These findings provide an updated view of the cooperative nature between CTCF and the SWI/SNF ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes, an important step for understanding how these architectural proteins collaborate to shape the genome.

### Keywords
Ctcf; swi/snf; brg1; mass spectrometry; protein‐protein interaction; brk; transcription factor; chromatin

### Affiliations
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelly"
Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, 81100 Caserta, Italy

### Submitter
Angela Chambery

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Chambery
Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, 81100 Caserta, Italy


