### Accession
PXD033707

### Title
A conserved long intergenic non-coding RNA containing snoRNA sequences, lncCOBRA1,  affects Arabidopsis germination and development

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an increasingly studied group of non-protein coding transcripts with a wide variety of molecular functions gaining attention for their roles in numerous biological processes. Nearly 6,000 lncRNAs have been identified in Arabidopsis thaliana but many have yet to be studied. Here, we examine a class of previously uncharacterized lncRNAs termed CONSERVED IN BRASSICA RAPA (lncCOBRA) transcripts that were previously identified for their high level of sequence conservation in the related crop species Brassica rapa, their nuclear-localization and protein-bound nature. In particular, we focus on lncCOBRA1 and demonstrate that its abundance is highly tissue and developmental specific, with particularly high levels early in germination. lncCOBRA1 contains two snoRNAs domains within it, making it the first sno-lincRNA example in a non-mammalian system. However, we find that it is processed differently than its mammalian counterparts. We further show that plants lacking lncCOBRA1 display patterns of delayed gemination and are overall smaller than wild-type plants. Lastly, we identify the proteins that interact with lncCOBRA1 and propose a novel mechanism of lincRNA action in which it may act as a scaffold with the RACK1A protein to regulate germination and development, possibly through a role in ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin isolation by RNA purification (ChIRP) was performed as previously described (Chu et al., 2011, 2012, 2015), with several modifications. Modified Pierce High Capacity Streptavadin Agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Carlsbad, CA, USA) were first washed twice and resuspended in nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH = 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) and RNaseOUT (Invitrogen, Carlsblad, CA, USA). Chromatin lysates were then pre-cleared with 30 L modified beads for 30 minutes with mixing in a 37C hybridization oven with rotation. After pre-clearing, samples were centrifuged twice at 3000 RPM for 5 minutes at room temperature (RT) to thoroughly remove any beads, and 10% of the sample was removed for both RNA input and protein input. The lysates were then split into a scrambled and lncCOBRA1 probe sample and 2X Hybridization buffer was added (750 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 15% Formamide) supplemented with PMSF (100 L/10 mL), RNaseOUT (5 L/10 mL; Invitrogen, Carlsblad, CA, USA), and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). 100 pmol of probes were then added per 1 mL chromatin (i.e. 1.67 L for each of the 6 probes used for lncCOBRA1) and the samples incubated in a 37C hybridization oven with rotation.   After 5 hours, 100 L of modified beads were added to each tube and incubated in a 37C hybridization oven with rotation for another 2 hrs. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3000 RPM, supernatant removed, and resuspended in 1 mL wash buffer (2S SSC, 0.5% SDS) pre-warmed to 37C and incubated in a 37C hybridization oven with rotation for another 30 minutes. Samples were washed for a total of 4 washes. After the last spin, samples are resuspended in 1 mL wash buffer and 150 L removed for RNA isolation and the remaining 850 L used for mass spectrometry. Protein samples were centrifuged at 3000 RPM for 5 minutes, supernatant removed, and the beads were wash 3 times with 100 mM NH4HCO3, and ultimately resuspended in 400 L 100 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 200 mM NaCl and incubated overnight at 65C to reverse crosslinks. The next day the samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C until processing. Samples were thawed on ice and resuspended in an appropriate volume of the resuspension buffer (50 mM SDS and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) final concentrations) and reduced with final 10 mM DTT (US Biological, Salem, MA, USA) for 30 min at 30 °C, followed by alkylation with final 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min at 30 °C. The samples were processed using an S-TrapTM column according to the protocol recommended by the supplier (Protifi; Farmingdale, NY,USA; C02-mini): loaded onto the column and digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Carlsblad, CA, USA) in 1:10 (w/w) enzyme/protein ratio for 1 h at 47 °C.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed via Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with the default QExactive Precursor Quant and LFQ MPS with SequestHT and Percolator processing template and Comprehensive Enhanced Annotation LFQ and Precursor Quant consensus template with the following parameters. The spectra match with peptide sequence was performed with SequestHT with contaminants.fasta from MaxQuant and Arabidopsis thaliana fasta 2019.04 release, full tryptic digestion, maximum missed cleavage 3, peptide length between 6 to 144, MS1 mass tolerance 10ppm, MS2 mass tolerance 0.02 Da, dynamic modification with oxidation on methionine, acetylation and methionine loss on protein N-terminal, static modification with carbamidomethyl on cysteine. The protein inference and identification validation was performed with Percolator with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut off. Normalization was performed by total peptide amount and scaling mode was set to on all average. Protein Abundance was peptide summed with the top 3 most abundant peptides for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an increasingly studied group of non-protein coding transcripts with a wide variety of molecular functions gaining attention for their roles in numerous biological processes. Nearly 6,000 lncRNAs have been identified in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> but many have yet to be studied. Here, we examine a class of previously uncharacterized lncRNAs termed <i>CONSERVED IN</i> BRASSICA RAPA (<i>lncCOBRA</i>) transcripts that were previously identified for their high level of sequence conservation in the related crop species <i>Brassica rapa</i>, their nuclear-localization and protein-bound nature. In particular, we focus on <i>lncCOBRA1</i> and demonstrate that its abundance is highly tissue and developmental specific, with particularly high levels early in germination. <i>lncCOBRA1</i> contains two snoRNAs domains within it, making it the first sno-lincRNA example in a non-mammalian system. However, we find that it is processed differently than its mammalian counterparts. We further show that plants lacking <i>lncCOBRA1</i> display patterns of delayed germination and are overall smaller than wild-type plants. Lastly, we identify the proteins that interact with <i>lncCOBRA1</i> and propose a novel mechanism of lincRNA action in which it may act as a scaffold with the RACK1A protein to regulate germination and development, possibly through a role in ribosome biogenesis.

### Keywords
Lincrna; snorna; rbp; chirp; arabidopsis; development;

### Affiliations
University of Pennsyvania, Washington University in St. Louis
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Hee Jong Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Aaron Garcia
University of Pennsyvania, Washington University in St. Louis


