### Accession
PXD000438

### Title
Super-SILAC analysis of human lung primary tumor-derived xenografts LC-MS/MS

### Description
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of lung cancers, and is subdived into 2 major histological subtypes: adenocacinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Super-SILAC methodology was used to facilitate the quantitative comparisons of human primary tumor-derived xenograft proteomes by high resolution MS analysis. Xeno092 and Xeno441 were ADCs. Xeno 561 and Xeno691 were SCCs. Principal component analysis and supervised t-tests revealed differentially expressed proteins responsible for the classification of the samples according to their distinctive proteomes. These results confirm known differentiators between ADC and SCC subtypes of NSCLC (e.g. a keratin signature, cell adhesion molecules, and metabolism proteins), and reveal novel candidates that may be useful to classify and treat NSCLC tumors.        The raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5). Peaks were searched against the UniProt human database (released Jul, 2012; http://www.uniprot.org) using the Andromeda search engine included in MaxQuant. Two miscleavages were allowed and at least six amino acids per identified peptide were required. The false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 0.01. 'Match between runs' option was selected within a time window of 2 min. A minimum ratio count of 2 was used for quantification of SILAC pairs. Further data analysis was performed in Perseus.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of lung cancers, and is subdivided into two major histological subtypes: adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). There is an unmet need to further subdivide NSCLC according to distinctive molecular features that may be associated with responsiveness to therapies. Four primary tumor-derived xenograft proteomes (two-each ADC and SCC) were quantitatively compared by using a super-SILAC labeling approach together with ultrahigh-resolution MS. Proteins highly differentially expressed in the two subtypes were identified, including 30 that were validated in an independent cohort of 12 NSCLC primary tumor-derived xenograft tumors whose proteomes were quantified by an alternative, label-free shotgun MS methodology. The 30-protein signature contains metabolism enzymes including phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, which is more highly expressed in SCC, as well as a comprehensive set of cytokeratins and other components of the epithelial barrier, which is therefore distinctly different between ADC and SCC. These results demonstrate the utility of the super-SILAC method for the characterization of primary tissues, and compatibility with datasets derived from different MS-based platforms. The validation of proteome signatures of NSCLC subtypes supports the further development and application of MS-based quantitative proteomics as a basis for precision classifications and treatments of tumors. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000438 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000438).

### Keywords
Proteomic profile, Super-silac, Nsclc

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
Wen Zhang

### Lab Head


