### Accession
PXD017134

### Title
A genetic analysis reveals novel histone residues required for transcriptional reprogramming upon stress

### Description
Cells have the ability to sense, respond and adapt to environmental fluctuations. Stress causes a massive reorganization of the transcriptional program. Many examples of histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) have been associated with transcriptional activation or repression under steady-state growth conditions. Comparatively less is known about the role of histone PTMs in the cellular adaptive response to stress. Here, we performed high-throughput genetic screenings that provide a novel global map of the histone residues required for transcriptional reprogramming in response to heat and osmotic stress. Of note, we observed that the histone residues needed depend on the type of gene and/or stress, thereby suggesting a “personalized”, rather than general, subset of histone requirements for each chromatin context. In addition, we identified a number of new residues that unexpectedly serve to regulate transcription. As a proof of concept, we characterized the function of the histone residues H4-S47 and H4-T30 in response to osmotic and heat stress, respectively. Our results uncover novel roles for the kinases Cla4 and Ste20, yeast homologs of the mammalian PAK2 family, which phosphorylate H4-S47 and for the kinase Ste11 that targets H4-T30. This study provides new insights into the role of histone residues in transcriptional regulation under stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and lysis: wild-type cells (Y8205 strain) were grown overnight at 30ºC in YPAD and diluted to OD 0.1 in 250 ml fresh YPAD media. Cultures were collected by centrifugation at 4000x g for 15 min when OD600 reached ~0.7 and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Pellets were washed with PBS and cells were lysed using Lysis buffer A (20mM Tris pH 8.0, 15mM EDTA pH8, 15mM EGTA pH8.0, phoStop phosphatase inhibitors and 0.1% Triton X-100) and glass beads beating at 4ºC for 10min. Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), Triton X-100, urea, Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and chloroacetamide (CAA) were added to final concentrations of 1%, 1%, 6M, 5mM and 30 mM, respectively. MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 40 mM before addition of benzonase (Merck millipore, 1% final concentration) and sonication using a bioruptor XL (Diagenode, 45 cycles of 30 seconds on/30 seconds off). Methanol/chloroform protein precipitation was then performed and the precipitate was resuspended in the digestion buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1% SDC, 5 mM TCEP and 30 mM CAA) before addition of trypsin at a 1:25 ratio w/w. Digestion was performed overnight at room temperature. Then, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic (TFA, final concentration 1%) and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 minutes to pellet SDC precipitate. The supernatant was loaded onto a Waters t-C18 SePak 200 mg column and peptides were washed twice with 1 ml 0.1% TFA before elution with 500 μl of 40% acetonitrile acidified with 0.1% TFA, followed by lyophilisation. Phosphopeptide enrichment: The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as previously described, with few modifications. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 70% acetonitrile/0.07% TFA (buffer A) before injection on a ProPac IMAC-10 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 4 x 50 mm) previously loaded with Fe3+ cations. Peptides were loaded for 6 minutes at a flow rate of 400 µL/min using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then washed with 100% buffer A for 6 minutes at 1 ml/min, before elution by switching to 50% buffer B (0.3% ammonia) for 2 minutes, at a flow rate of 500 µl/min. The fraction containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized. High pH fractionation: Phosphopeptides high pH fractionation was performed using in-house packed C18 microcolumns. To do so, gel loader tips were plugged with C18 resin (Affinisep AttractSPE C18 disks) and packed with 1 mg of C18 material (Dr Maisch, 5 µm, 120 Å). Lyophilized phosphopeptides were resuspended in 40 µL 20 mM ammonium formate at pH 10 (buffer A), loaded onto the microcolumn by centrifugation (with a loading speed ≈ 10 µl/min) then washed with 10 µL buffer A. Phosphopeptides were fractionated using a gradient of acetonitrile consisting of sequential elutions with 10 µl of the following solutions: 1%, 3%, 5%, 7%, 9%, 11%, 13%, 15%, 17%, 19%, 21%, 23%, 24%, 26%, 28%, 30%, 40% acetonitrile/buffer A (with an elution speed ≈ 10 µl/min). The flow-through and wash were collected and pooled, while the other elutions were pooled as follow: F1 = 1%, 13%, 24% ; F2 = 3%, 15%, 26% ; F3 = 5%, 17%, 28% ; F4 = 7%, 19%, 30% ; F5 = 9%, 21%, 40% ; F6 = 11%, 23%. LC-MS/MS measurements: LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Phosphopeptides were resuspended in a mixture of 50 mM citric acid and 1% formic acid, first trapped on a cartridge for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 30 μl/min (Precolumn; C18 PepMap 100, 5 μm, 300 μm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 Å) before separation on an analytical column (Waters nanoEase HSS C18 T3, 75 μm × 25 cm, 1.8 μm, 100 Å) using a linear gradient from 8% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in LC‐MS grade acetonitrile), followed by an increase to 80% solvent B and column reequilibration with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, total analysis time of 90 minutes). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.4 kV and a capillary temperature of 275°C. Full-scan MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 375–1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 (maximum injection time of 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 4e5 charges). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode and the 15 most intense precursors with charge states 2–6 and a minimum intensity of 2e5 were sequentially isolated (isolation window of 1.6 m/z) and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 32%) with a 16 seconds dynamic exclusion window. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 110 ms and an AGC target of 1e5 charges.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) and searched against a reviewed Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (UniProt, April 2019), with the following parameters: trypsin digestion (cleavage at the C-term of lysine and arginine, even when followed by a proline residue) with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, variable oxidation of methionine residues, variable acetylation of protein N-terminus, as well as variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. A score cut-off of 40 was used for modified peptides, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 and the minimum peptide length to 7 residues.

### Publication Abstract
Cells have the ability to sense, respond and adapt to environmental fluctuations. Stress causes a massive reorganization of the transcriptional program. Many examples of histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) have been associated with transcriptional activation or repression under steady-state growth conditions. Comparatively less is known about the role of histone PTMs in the cellular adaptive response to stress. Here, we performed high-throughput genetic screenings that provide a novel global map of the histone residues required for transcriptional reprogramming in response to heat and osmotic stress. Of note, we observed that the histone residues needed depend on the type of gene and/or stress, thereby suggesting a 'personalized', rather than general, subset of histone requirements for each chromatin context. In addition, we identified a number of new residues that unexpectedly serve to regulate transcription. As a proof of concept, we characterized the function of the histone residues H4-S47 and H4-T30 in response to osmotic and heat stress, respectively. Our results uncover novel roles for the kinases Cla4 and Ste20, yeast homologs of the mammalian PAK2 family, and the Ste11 MAPK as regulators of H4-S47 and H4-T30, respectively. This study provides new insights into the role of histone residues in transcriptional regulation under stress conditions.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Histone, Ptms

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
EMBL 

### Submitter
Clement Potel

### Lab Head
Dr Eulàlia de Nadal
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain


