### Accession
PXD026968

### Title
Craspedostauros australis frustule associated components analysis

### Description
The biomolecular composition of diatom underwater adhesives remains unknown as does the precise mechanism by which the secretion of adhesive material from the raphe slit is coupled to an intracellular motor that provides the force for cell motility. In this study we have characterized the previously identified frustule associated components (FACs) from the common fouling diatom Craspedostauors australis and demonstrated that they form a continuous cell wall coating. The FACs are encoded by a single polypeptide (caFAP1) that has a domain structure of alternating cysteine-rich and PTS-rich regions which is reminiscent of the gel-forming mucins. CaFAP1 is notably absent from the raphe slit and therefore does not play a direct role in cell adhesion and motility but may rather play an important role in lubrication and self-cleaning that is required for epipsammic benthic diatoms that grow attached to sand grains, or moving through sand.

### Sample Protocol
FACs obtained following anion exchange purification (sample #1) were separated on a 6% SDS-PAG and stained with Coomassie blue R250 (0.5% Coomassie Blue R250, 50% methanol, 10% acetic acid). Following destaining (45% methanol, 2% Acetic Acid) and then extensive washing with water, all protein bands were cut out of the gel. To analyze the entire 8M Urea/500 mM DTT extract (sample #2) the sample was run 2 cm into a 6% SDS-PAG and stained with Coomassie blue R250 (0.5% Coomassie Blue R250, 50% methanol, 10% acetic acid). Following destaining (45% methanol, 2% Acetic Acid) and then extensive washing with water, the gel slab was cut into four pieces. The gel pieces were digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were eluted according to a previously published protocol (17). Digestion was performed in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and enzyme concentration was 10 ng/µl. Extracted peptides were dried in vacuum and stored until analysis at -20°C. For analysis by HPLC-MS/MS protein digests were recovered in 3 µl 30% formic acid containing retention time peptide standard (25 fmol/µl, Thermo Pierce) and diluted by addition of 20 µl H2O. For analysis by HPLC-MS/MS 5 µl were injected into Ultimate3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) system equipped with a 75 µm x 2 cm trap column and 75 µm x 15 cm separation column (Acclaim C18 PepMap, Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Samples were separated in a linear gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) from 0% B to 55% B in 30 min (sample #1) or 90 min (sample #2). The flow rates for sample loading on the trap column was 3 µl/min while the flow rate for separation and analysis was 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF, ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany) was operated in data dependent analysis (DDA).

### Data Protocol
. Acquired spectra were searched against 3’-frame translated C. australis transcriptome and predicted proteome (27834 entries) by Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK, v.2.6.0). The hits were evaluated by Scaffold program v.4.8.2 (Proteome Software Inc 2017; Craig & Beavis 2003; Nesvizhskii & Keller 2003) and accepted if two of more peptides were matched under 95% and 99% probability thresholds for peptides and proteins respectively. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was below 1.5% as calculated by Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms are single-celled microalgae with silica-based cell walls (frustules) that are abundantly present in aquatic habitats, and form the basis of the food chain in many ecosystems. Many benthic diatoms have the remarkable ability to glide on all natural or man-made underwater surfaces using a carbohydrate- and protein-based adhesive to generate traction. Previously, three glycoproteins, termed FACs (Frustule Associated Components), have been identified from the common fouling diatom Craspedostauros australis and were implicated in surface adhesion through inhibition studies with a glycan-specific antibody. The polypeptide sequences of FACs remained unknown, and it was unresolved whether the FAC glycoproteins are indeed involved in adhesion, or whether this is achieved by different components sharing the same glycan epitope with FACs. Here we have determined the polypeptide sequences of FACs using peptide mapping by LC-MS/MS. Unexpectedly, FACs share the same polypeptide backbone (termed CaFAP1), which has a domain structure of alternating Cys-rich and Pro-Thr/Ser-rich regions reminiscent of the gel-forming mucins. By developing a genetic transformation system for C. australis, we were able to directly investigate the function of CaFAP1-based glycoproteins in&#xa0;vivo. GFP-tagging of CaFAP1 revealed that it constitutes a coat around all parts of the frustule and is not an integral component of the adhesive. CaFAP1-GFP producing transformants exhibited the same properties as wild type cells regarding surface adhesion and motility speed. Our results demonstrate that FAC glycoproteins are not involved in adhesion and motility, but might rather act as a lubricant to prevent fouling of the diatom surface.

### Keywords
Motility, Diatom, Frustule assopciated protein, Adhesion

### Affiliations
B CUBE, TU Dresden, Tatzberg 41, 01309, Dresden, Germany
TU Dresden

### Submitter
Nicole Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Poulsen
B CUBE, TU Dresden, Tatzberg 41, 01309, Dresden, Germany


