### Accession
PXD037617

### Title
RBPMS  mediates smooth muscle specific alternative splicing via oligomerization and modulation of trans factor recruitment

### Description
RBPMS regulate splicing decisions by modulating the transcript-bound proteome. This experiment aims to investigate the proteome assembled on an experimental RNA, TM3 transcript, in human Hela nuclear extract under the various conditions, ± ATP and ± RBPMS. The model RNA is tethered on amylose bead via a protein, MPB-MS2. After pull-down, the protein-RNA complexes are eluted from the beads with maltose. The sample series "N" and "NA" are two negative control conditions. "B" and "R" are sample series of two experimental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
120 mins LC- MS/MS was used to identify and quantify proteins recovered from RNA assisted pull-down.  Elute was trichoroacetic acid (TCA) precipitated, re-dissolved in reducing Laemmli loading, separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized with silver staining. The serial gel slices were excised and digested in situ with trypsin. The extracted tryptic peptides were analyzed using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Raw data were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Grouping: Group name ; Condition ; Samples in triplicate G1 ; ATP-RNA-RBPMA- ; N1, N3, N5 G2 ; ATP-RNA-RBPMA+ ;N2, N4,N6 G3 ; ATP+RNA-RBPMA- ;NA1, NA3,NA5 G4 ; ATP+RNA-RBPMA+ ; NA2, NA4,NA6 G5 ; ATP-RNA+RBPMA- ; B1, B3, B5 G6 ; ATP-RNA+RBPMA+ ; R1, R3, R5 G7 ; ATP+RNA+RBPMA- ; B2, B4, B6 G8 ; ATP+RNA+RBPMA+ ; R2, R4, R6  Background subtraction: (G5-G1) (G6-G2) (G7-G3) (G8-G4)  Differential analysis: (G6-G2) vs (G5-G1) (G8-G4) vs (G7-G3)   Protein identification was conducted by searching Human database downloaded in 2020, UniPort, using Mascot algorithm. This generated a list of 1081 entries containing common contaminant proteins (human keratins, heat-shock proteins and BSA), which were identified and removed from downstream analysis. The data obtained from ProteomeDiscoverer was abundance data at peptide level. Data was grouped and processed with R package and filtered to remove entries that only identified in 1 out of 3 replicates of at least one conditions. The resulting 978 entries was background corrected and normalized by variance stabilizing transformations. Inspection of the list revealed repetitive interpretation due to isoforms of the same protein and searching multiple databases. We collapsed the repetitive isoform entries of the same protein, shortlisted 200 unique identifications for further analysis. Low intensity missing values were,  not at random, biased to no RNA background samples and no RBPMS added conditions. To conduct the differential expression (DEP) analysis, missing Total Precursor Intensity was imputed using random draws from a Gaussian distribution centered around a minimal value, q-th quantile = 0.01.  We used R package Limma to test the significant changes between background subtracted  groups. The fold-changes were estimated by the Bayes method, while the adjusted P-value were corrected by the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative pre-mRNA splicing decisions are regulated by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) that can activate or repress regulated splice sites. Repressive RBPs typically harness multivalent interactions to bind stably to target RNAs. Multivalency can be achieved by homomeric oligomerization and heteromeric interactions with other RBPs, often mediated by intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), and by possessing multiple RNA binding domains. Cell-specific splicing decisions often involve the action of widely expressed RBPs, which are able to bind multivalently around target exons, but without effect in the absence of a cell-specific regulator. To address how cell-specific regulators can collaborate with constitutive RBPs in alternative splicing regulation, we used the smooth-muscle specific regulator RBPMS. Recombinant RBPMS is sufficient to confer smooth muscle cell specific alternative splicing of Tpm1 exon 3 in cell-free assays by preventing assembly of ATP-dependent splicing complexes. This activity depends upon a C-terminal IDR that facilitates dynamic higher-order self-assembly, cooperative binding to multivalent RNA and interactions with widely expressed splicing co-regulators, including MBNL1 and RBFOX2, allowing cooperative assembly of stable cell-specific regulatory complexes.

### Keywords
Human, Lc ms/ms, Rna, Alternative splicing factor

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Chris WJ Smith
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge


