### Accession
PXD004510

### Title
Mapping and Quantification of Brain Protein O-GlcNAcylation in Alzheimer’s Disease

### Description
Comprehensive, quantitative proteomics analysis of protein O-GlcNAcylation in post-mortem human brains with and without Alzheimer’s using isobaric tandem mass tags labeling, chemoenzymatic photocleavage enrichment and liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, labelled with 6-plex TMT, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Protein modification by O-linked &#x3b2;-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is emerging as an important factor in the pathogenesis of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, detailed molecular characterization of this important protein post-translational modification at the proteome level has been highly challenging, owing to its low stoichiometry and labile nature. Herein, we report the most comprehensive, quantitative proteomics analysis for protein O-GlcNAcylation in postmortem human brain tissues with and without AD by the use of isobaric tandem mass tag labelling, chemoenzymatic photocleavage enrichment, and liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. A total of 1850 O-GlcNAc peptides covering 1094 O-GlcNAcylation sites were identified from 530 proteins in the human brain. One hundred and thirty-one O-GlcNAc peptides covering 81 proteins were altered in AD brains as compared with controls (q&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Moreover, alteration of O-GlcNAc peptide abundance could be attributed more to O-GlcNAcylation level than to protein level changes. The altered O-GlcNAcylated proteins belong to several structural and functional categories, including synaptic proteins, cytoskeleton proteins, and memory-associated proteins. These findings suggest that dysregulation of O-GlcNAcylation of multiple brain proteins may be involved in the development of sporadic AD. Copyright &#xa9; 2017 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Brain, O-glcnac, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Liu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


