### Accession
PXD009980

### Title
Assessment of 2nSILAC for proteome quantification

### Description
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a systems-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Sample Protocol
BY4741 cells were cultured in synthetic complete (SC) medium containing 0.17% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.5% (w/v) ammonium sulfate, CSM-Arg-Lys amino acid dropout mix (Sunrise Science Products), L-proline (200 mg/l), L-arginine and L-lysine (50 mg/l each), and 3% (w/v) glycerol/0.02% (w/v) glucose. Metabolic labeling was performed using stable isotope-coded 'heavy' (H) arginine (13C6/15N4; Arg10) and lysine (13C6/15N2; Lys8) or 'medium-heavy' (M) arginine (13C6/14N2; Arg6) and lysine (2H4; Lys4) instead of the respective 'light' (L) counterparts. Cells were either labeled with stable isotope-coded lysine only or with both arginine and lysine. Cells were pre-cultured in 30 ml of medium with an initial OD600 of 0.1 and grown overnight at 160 rpm and 30°C. Pre-cultured cells were diluted into 150 ml of fresh medium to reach an OD600 of 0.025. Cells were further cultivated at 160 rpm and 30°C. Cells were harvested at exponential growth phase (OD600 1.0-1.5) by centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 x g, washed with deionized water, and mixed in a 1:6:1.5 ratio (H:L:M) based on OD600. Whole cell lysates were prepared by resuspending the cells in 500 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA) followed by cell lysis (bead-beating; twice for 4 min) using a MiniLys homogenizer (Peqlab/VWR) operated at 5,000 rpm. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 15,000 x g and 4°C. 10 µg of protein were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 10 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated as described previously (Peikert et al., 2017, Nature Communications) followed by proteolytic digestion using LysC (for lysates of cells labeled with lysine only), trypsin, or a combination of both proteases (for lysates of cells labeled with both arginine and lysine). Urea concentration was diluted to 4 M for LysC and 1.6 M for trypsin digestion using 50 mM NH4HCO3. LysC digestion was performed for 4 h at 37°C using 100 ng LysC and digestion with trypsin (200 ng) was performed overnight at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 0.5% [v/v] final concentration) and peptide mixtures were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 12,000 x g (RT). Peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using StageTips. To this end, peptide mixtures were loaded onto StageTips conditioned with 100% MeOH followed by 80% (v/v) ACN/0.5% (v/v) acetic acid and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA and subsequently serially eluted into 8 fractions with 0, 3, 6, 10, 13, 16, 40, and 72% (v/v each) ACN in 10 mM NH4OH. Solvents were evaporated and peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 0.1% TFA. Experiments were performed in four biological replicates.  Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with PepMap C18 pre-columns (Thermo Scientific; length: 5 mm; inner diameter: 0.3 mm; loading flow rate: 30 µl/min) and an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (Thermo Scientific; length: 500 mm; inner diameter: 75 µm; particle size: 2 µm; packing density: 10 nm; flow rate: 0.25 µl/min) online coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on precolumns and subsequently separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted applying the following gradient: 4% solvent B for 5 min, 4 - 40% B in 50 min, 40 - 95% B in 5 min, 95% B for 5 min. The Q Exactive was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel (Thermo Scientific) or fused silica emitters (New Objective, Woburn, USA). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: full MS scans were acquired with a mass range of m/z 375 - 1,700, a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 10E6, and a maximum ion time (IT) of 60 ms. The 15 most intensive peptide ions (z ≥ +2) were chosen for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). A normalized collision energy of 28% was applied. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. The AGC for MS/MS scans was set to 10E5, the maximum IT to 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant with its integrated search engine Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1). MS/MS data were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/; downloaded September 2011) and a list of common contaminants included in the MaxQuant software. Database searches were performed with the appropriate enzymatic specificity (i.e., LysC, trypsin, or both), a maximum number of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Proteins were identified with at least one unique peptide with a length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein identifications. Lys0/Arg0, Lys4/Arg6, and Lys8/Arg10 were considered as light, medium-heavy, and heavy labels. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled. Relative protein quantification was based on unique peptides and a ratio count (i.e., SILAC peptide pairs) of ≥ 1. The assignment of proteins to distinct subcellular compartments was based on annotations in the Gene Ontology domain 'Cellular Component' provided by the SGD (downloaded 12/08/2016) and, for mitochondrial proteins, on the high-confidence mitochondrial proteome reported recently (Morgenstern et al., Cell Reports, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a system-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide comparative quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions, making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Native silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


