### Accession
PXD013445

### Title
The effect of very-high-molecular-mass hyaluronan (vHMM-HA) on CD44 protein-protein interactions.

### Description
Naked mole-rat skin fibroblasts (NSF) produces vHMM-HA. Although NSF-HA has been shown to suppress NSF transformation, it is still unclear if exceptional polymer length of vHMM-HA is important for its functions. Here, we compared the effect of intact control NSF-HA (cNSF-HA) and partially fragmented NSF-HA (fNSF-HA) on CD44 protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
IMR90 cells were incubated with cNSF-HA, fNSF-HA, or equivalent volume of PBS for 6h, and then cross-linked with DSP and DTME and harvested into RIPA buffer. After exchanging the buffer to TBST, lysates were immunoprecipitated with CD44 antibodies and then trypsin-digested and purified with S-columns (Protifi). Peptides were resuspended in MS-grade water and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex; Thermo Fisher).  Samples were resolved by nano-electrospray ionization on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instrument (Thermo) in positive ion mode using a 30cm home-made column packed with 1.8μm C-18 beads to resolve the peptides.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile (CAN) with 0.1% formic acid.  Gradient parameters were 0-2min at 3%B; 2-9min was 3-10%B; 9-103min was 10-38%B; and 103-108min was 38-90%B.  Flow rate was 300nl/min throughout.  CID (35% collision energy) was used for MS2 fragmentation.  HCD (60% collision energy) was used for MS3 detection of TMT groups.  Other details of the run parameters may be found in the embedded run report of the RAW data file uploaded to the ProteomeXchange database.

### Data Protocol
Peptide assignments were made using Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo) and Sequest search algorithm.  Quantitation of MS3 ions was done with the Reporter Ions Quantifier in Proteome Discoverer’s processing step using the most confident centroid with an integration tolerance of 20ppm. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using a Decoy Database Search with Target FDR (strict) set to 0.01 and Target FDR (relaxed) set to 0.05.  Validation was based on q-value.   In the consensus step, ions with a co-isolation threshold above 30% were excluded.  Quantification data were normalized to the levels of CD44 in each sample for comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Naked mole-rat (NMR), the longest-living rodent, produces very-high-molecular-mass hyaluronan (vHMM-HA), compared to other mammalian species. However, it is unclear if exceptional polymer length of vHMM-HA is important for longevity. Here, we show that vHMM-HA (&gt;6.1 MDa) has superior cytoprotective properties compared to the shorter HMM-HA. It protects not only NMR cells, but also mouse and human cells from stress-induced cell-cycle arrest and cell death in a polymer length-dependent manner. The cytoprotective effect is dependent on the major HA-receptor, CD44. We find that vHMM-HA suppresses CD44 protein-protein interactions, whereas HMM-HA promotes them. As a result, vHMM-HA and HMM-HA induce opposing effects on the expression of CD44-dependent genes, which are associated with the p53 pathway. Concomitantly, vHMM-HA partially attenuates p53 and protects cells from stress in a p53-dependent manner. Our results implicate vHMM-HA in anti-aging mechanisms and suggest the potential applications of vHMM-HA for enhancing cellular stress resistance.

### Keywords
Naked mole rat / hyaluronan / cd44

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
University of Rochester, Department of Biology

### Submitter
Masaki Takasugi

### Lab Head
Dr Vera Gorbunova / Andrei Seluanov
University of Rochester, Department of Biology


