### Accession
PXD022264

### Title
Isolation and characterization of equine uterine extracellular vesicles: a comparative methodological study

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been identified in the uterine fluid in different species and pointed as key players in the embryo-maternal dialogue, maternal recognition of pregnancy (MRP) and establishment of pregnancy. However, little is known about the uterine EVs in the mare. Therefore, the present study aimed at characterizing EVs from uterine lavage of cyclic mares by comparing five EVs isolation methods and the combination of them: (1) Ultracentrifugation (UC); (2) Concentration of lavage volume by Centricon ultrafiltration (CE); (3) the use of CE with different washing steps (PBS versus trehalose); (4) Size-exclusion chromatography with iZON-qEV columns to yield high-purity EVs and (5) a combination of the methods with best results based on EVs yield, purity, and protein cargo profiles. Transmission electron microscopy and Western blotting confirmed the isolation of EVs by all methods but with quantitative and qualitative differences. Mass spectrometry provided different protein profiles among methods with marked differences in the number of proteins and protein classes. Our results indicate that the combination of CE/trehalose/iZON/UC is an optimal method to isolate equine uterine EVs with good yield and purity that can be applied in future studies to determine the role of uterine EVs during MRP in the mare.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for mass spectrometry, 50 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) / 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to give a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at 37°C for protein reduction. Cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min in the dark. For protein digestion Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) was added (enzyme/substrate ratio 1/100) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Then, a second overnight digestion step with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/50) at 37 °C was performed. LC-MS/MS analysis was done with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected at a flow rate of 20 µl/min to a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 200-250 nl/min using EasySpray columns (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm ID, 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 0.1% formic acid as solvent A. The chromatography method consisted of two consecutive gradients from 3% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 30 min and from 25% to 40% B in 5 min. For data dependent acquisition cycles of one full scan (350 to 1600 m/z) at a resolution of 60k and up to 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15k were used.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.1.0) [31] and the equine subset of the NCBI RefSeq protein database. For protein identification, a false discovery date (FDR) < 0.01 at the peptide and protein level was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been identified in the uterine fluid in different species and have been pointed as key players in the embryo-maternal dialogue, maternal recognition of pregnancy and establishment of pregnancy. However, little is known about the uterine EVs in the mare. Therefore, the present study aimed at characterizing EVs from uterine lavage of cyclic mares by comparing five EVs isolation methods and the combination of them: (1) ultracentrifugation (UC); (2) concentration of lavage volume by Centricon ultrafiltration (CE); (3) the use of CE with different washing steps (phosphate-buffered saline with or without trehalose); (4) size-exclusion chromatography with iZON-qEV columns, and (5) a combination of the methods with best results based on EVs yield, purity, and protein cargo profiles. Transmission electron microscopy and Western blotting confirmed the isolation of EVs by all methods but with quantitative and qualitative differences. Mass spectrometry provided differences in protein profiles between methods, number of identified proteins, and protein classes. Our results indicate that the combination of CE/trehalose/iZON/UC is an optimal method to isolate equine uterine EVs with good yield and purity that can be applied in future studies to determine the role of equine uterine EVs in embryo-maternal interactions.

### Keywords
Equus caballus, Mare, Evs protein cargo, Uterus, Uterine lavage, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Uterine fluid

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


