### Accession
PXD017702

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals the regulatory networks of elovl6 on lipid and glucose metabolism in zebrafish

### Description
Elongation of very long-chain fatty acids protein 6 (Elovl6) has been reported to be associated with clinical treatments of a variety of metabolic diseases. However, there is no systematic and comprehensive study to reveal the regulatory role of Elovl6 in the mRNA, protein and phosphorylation levels. We established the first knock-out (KO), elovl6-/-, in zebrafish. Compared with wild type (WT) zebrafish, KO presented significant higher content of whole-body lipid and lower content of fasting blood glucose. We utilized RNA-Seq, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based quantitative technology, and LC-MS/MS to perform the transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic analyses of livers from WT and elovl6-/- zebrafish. There were 734 differentially expressed genes (DEG) and 559 differentially expressed proteins (DEP) identified out of quantifiable 47251 transcripts and 5525 proteins between elovl6-/- and WT zebrafish. Meanwhile, 680 differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEPP) with 1054 sites were found out of quantifiable 1230 proteins with 3604 sites. GO and KEGG analysis of the transcriptomic and proteomic data further suggested that the abnormal lipid metabolism and glucose metabolism in KO were mainly related to fatty acid degradation and biosynthesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and PPAR signaling pathway. In the phosphoproteomics, some phosphoproteins and kinases critical for lipid metabolism and glucose metabolism, including ribosomal protein S6 kinase (Rps6kb), mitogen-activated protein kinase14 (Mapk14), and V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 2, -like (Akt2l), were identified. These results allowed us to catch on the regulatory networks of elovl6 on lipid and glucose metabolism in zebrafish. To our knowledge, this is the first multi-omic study of zebrafish lacking elovl6, which provides strong datasets to better understand many lipid/glucose metabolic risks posed to human health.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Protein extraction and trypsin digestion with some changes were based on previously published methods (29). Nine WT zebrafish and nine elovl6-/- zebrafish (each kind of zebrafish three to a biological sample) were randomly selected and their livers were taken for analysis. The samples were grinded with liquid nitrogen and transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tubes. Then four volumes of lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1% Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (for protein post-translational modification (PTM) experiment)) were added to the powder, and the sample mixture was sonicated for three times on ice with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz Biotechnology, Ningbo, China). The remaining fragments were centrifuged at 12000 g, 4°C for 10 minutes. After that, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Beyotime Biotechnology., Shanghai, China) and details were carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein samples were diluted with 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) to reduce the urea concentration<2M. Trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first step of digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the second step of digestion for 4 h. TMT labeling   After digestion with trypsin, the peptide was desalted by the Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex), followed by vacuum-drying. The peptide was dissolved with 0.5 M TEAB, and TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions of the TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, NewYork, USA). The brief instructions were as follows. TMT reagent (one unit) was thawed and dissolved in acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical, NewYork, USA). The peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. After that, the mixtures were pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation and immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 250 mm × 4.6 mm) so that the sample complexity was reduced. A gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH=9.0) was used for peptide separation over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into the final 9 fractions (or 6 fractions for PTM experiment) and dried by vacuum centrifuging before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide mixtures were first dissolved in the loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid) and incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension on a rotary shaker with gentle shaking. After incubation, the phosphopeptides in the IMAC microspheres were collected by centrifugation. And then the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides for three times, in turn. Finally, in order to elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, the phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH by vibration and vacuum-dried. After that, the supernatant was desalted according to the instructions and then collected for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search The LC-MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Retrieval parameter settings: The database was UniProt Danio rerio (44132 sequences). We added reverse decoy database to calculate false discovery rate (FDR) caused by random matches. Trypsin / P was specified as the cleavage enzyme. The number of missing cleavages was allowing up to two. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. The mass tolerances for the primary precursor ions in the first search and main search were set as 20 ppm and 5 ppm. The mass tolerances for fragment ions were set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation on Met, N-terminal acetylation of protein, desamidization of asparagine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. The quantitative method was set to TMT-10plex, and the FDR was adjusted to <1%. Subcellular localization We used wolfpsort (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/), a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization in this study.  Motif analysis The software MoMo (http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo), a motif-x algorithm was used to analyze the model of sequences, in which amino acids constituted at specific positions with modify-13-mers. The identified phosphosites were 6 upstream and downstream, and the background database parameters were set as all the database of protein sequences. The minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. The statistical test p-value was set to less than 0.000001. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters were with default. Functional analysis GO annotations of proteomic and phosphoproteomic data were performed based on the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, the identified protein ID was converted into UniProt ID, and then UniProt ID was mapping to GO ID. The information was obtained from the UniProt-GOA database according to GO ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database, a software based on the protein sequence alignment method, InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), would be used to annotate the protein’s GO function. GO annotation of proteomics was classified into three categories: biological process (BP), cellular compartment (CC) and molecular function (MF).  KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used for annotation analysis of protein pathway. First, KEGG automatic annotation server (KAAS) (https://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas/) was used to annotate protein’s KEGG database description. Then the annotation result was mapping on the KEGG pathway database by KEGG mapper (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/mapper.html). These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.  A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was utilized to test the DEP and DEPP against all identified proteins. p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.  Protein-protein interaction network DEP or DEPP database accessions or sequences were searched against the STRING database version 11.0 (https://string-db.org/) for protein-protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Elongation of very long-chain fatty acids protein 6 (Elovl6) has been reported to be associated with clinical treatments of a variety of metabolic diseases. However, there is no systematic and comprehensive study to reveal the regulatory role of Elovl6 in mRNA, protein and phosphorylation levels. We established the first knock-out (KO), <i>elovl6<sup>-/-</sup></i>, in zebrafish. Compared with wild type (WT) zebrafish, KO presented significant higher whole-body lipid content and lower content of fasting blood glucose. We utilized RNA-Seq, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based quantitative technology and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to perform the transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of livers from WT and <i>elovl6<sup>-/-</sup></i> zebrafish. There were 734 differentially expressed genes (DEG) and 559 differentially expressed proteins (DEP) between <i>elovl6<sup>-/-</sup></i> and WT zebrafish, identified out of quantifiable 47251 transcripts and 5525 proteins. Meanwhile, 680 differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEPP) with 1054 sites were found out of quantifiable 1230 proteins with 3604 sites. Gene ontology (GO) and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analysis of the transcriptomic and proteomic data further suggested that the abnormal lipid metabolism and glucose metabolism in KO were mainly related to fatty acid degradation and biosynthesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and PPAR signaling pathway. Based on phosphoproteomic analyses, some kinases critical for lipid metabolism and glucose metabolism, including ribosomal protein S6 kinase (Rps6kb), mitogen-activated protein kinase14 (Mapk14) and V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 2-like (Akt2l), were identified. These results allowed us to catch on the regulatory networks of <i>elovl6</i> on lipid and glucose metabolism in zebrafish. To our knowledge, this is the first multi-omic study of zebrafish lacking <i>elovl6</i>, which provides strong datasets to better understand many lipid/glucose metabolic risks posed to human health.

### Keywords
Zebrafish; elovl6 knockout; transcriptomics; proteomics; phosphoproteomics; lipid/glucose metabolism

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jian Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Gao
Huazhong Agricultural University


