### Accession
PXD029868

### Title
Arabidopsis and spruce grown at different light intensity - proteins in thylakoids

### Description
The aim of the project is to estimate the relative protein content of photosynthetic proteins in thylakoids isolated from Arabidopsis leaves and spruce needles grown at different light intensity (high, normal, low).

### Sample Protocol
All samples of both, Arabidopsis and spruce thylakoid membranes were lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 30 min, 95°C, 750 rpm). After that, sample was centrifuged (15 min, 20,000 x g) and the supernatant used for filter-aided sample preparation as described elsewhere (Wisniewski et al. 2009) using 0.5 μg of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptides were done using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particles; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 160454). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 164570) by 100 min gradient program (3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–2,000). The resolution of the survey scan was 60,000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 1×106 ions and maximum injection time of 1,000 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50,000 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 400). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.17) (Cox J, Mann M. 2008) with inbuild Andromeda search engine (Cox J et al 2011). Searches of samples from Arabidopsis and spruce were done separately. Arabidopsis samples were searched against protein databases of Arabidopsis thaliana (27,500 protein sequences, version from 12-08-2020, downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, version from 22-11-2018, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Spruce samples were searched against databases of spruce thylakoid protein database (66,989 protein sequences, based on database S2, Grebe et al 2019) and cRAP contaminants. Modifications were set as follows for database search: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers reverse hits and contaminant protein groups (cRAP) removal, protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (loessF). For the purpose of this article, protein groups reported by MaxQuant are referred to as proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The acclimation of higher plants to different light intensities is associated with a reorganization of the photosynthetic apparatus. These modifications, namely, changes in the amount of peripheral antenna (LHCII) of photosystem (PS) II and changes in PSII/PSI stoichiometry, typically lead to an altered chlorophyll (Chl) a/b ratio. However, our previous studies show that in spruce, this ratio is not affected by changes in growth light intensity. The evolutionary loss of PSII antenna proteins LHCB3 and LHCB6 in the Pinaceae family is another indication that the light acclimation strategy in spruce could be different. Here we show that, unlike Arabidopsis, spruce does not modify its PSII/PSI ratio and PSII antenna size to maximize its photosynthetic performance during light acclimation. Its large PSII antenna consists of many weakly bound LHCIIs, which form effective quenching centers, even at relatively low light. This, together with sensitive photosynthetic control on the level of cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>f complex (protecting PSI), is the crucial photoprotective mechanism in spruce. High-light acclimation of spruce involves the disruption of PSII macro-organization, reduction of the amount of both PSII and PSI core complexes, synthesis of stress proteins that bind released Chls, and formation of "locked-in" quenching centers from uncoupled LHCIIs. Such response has been previously observed in the evergreen angiosperm Monstera deliciosa exposed to high light. We suggest that, in contrast to annuals, shade-tolerant evergreen land plants have their own strategy to cope with light intensity changes and the hallmark of this strategy is a stable Chl a/b ratio.

### Keywords
Spruce, Arabidopsis, Proteome, Picea, Thylakoid membranes

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
Proteomics Core facility, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Proteomics Core facility, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


