### Accession
PXD004636

### Title
Nanoparticle protein corona LC-MS/MS

### Description
Engineered nanoparticles for biomedical applications require increased effectiveness in targeting specific cells while preserving non-target cells’ safety. Native nanoparticles entering a protein-rich liquid media quickly form a macromolecular structure called protein corona.  This protein structure defines the physical interaction between nanoparticles and target cells. We describe SUSTU (surface proteomics for nanoparticle safety, targeting and uptake) a proteomics-based method to analyze the surface of a nanoparticle protein corona. This method provides qualitative and quantitative analysis from the protein corona surface. Those exposed proteins compose the first line of interaction between this macromolecular structure and the cell surface of a target cell. With SUSTU, the spatial and temporal dynamics of the protein corona surface can be studied. Data from SUSTU would ascertain the nanoparticle functionalized groups exposed at destiny; circumventing preliminary in vitro experiments. Therefore this method evaluates nanoparticle targeting and uptake capability and could be integrated into a rapid prototyping strategy which is a major challenge in nanomaterial science.

### Sample Protocol
We have implemented a biotin labelling method for NP-PC surface and integrated it into a label free quantitative proteomics pipeline. SUSTU consisted of biotin labelling of PC surfaces by adding 0.4mM Sulfo-NHS-SS biotin to NP- PC suspensions in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubating for 3 h at 4oC. Then biotin-labelled proteins were digested using endopeptidase trypsin. The biotinylated tryptic peptides were captured on NeutrAvidin resin and eluted with DTT and guanidine allowing the cleavage of biotin from peptides before identification and quantification by label-free quantitative proteomics analysis. The mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a reversed-phase nano liquid chromatography coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
The data analysis workflow includes MS raw data processing through Proteome discoverer using SEQUEST algorithm and a second analysis with ScaffoldQ+ v4.2.1 using X! tandem algorithm (peptide threshold: FDR 1,0% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm, protein threshold: FDR 1,0 % ; min 2 peptides). The relative protein abundance was estimated from the top 3 most intense precursor ions.

### Publication Abstract
Engineered nanoparticles for biomedical applications require increasing effectiveness in targeting specific cells while preserving non-target cells' safety. We developed a surface proteomics method for a rapid and systematic analysis of the interphase between the nanoparticle protein corona and the targeted cells that could implement the rapid prototyping of nanomedicines. Native nanoparticles entering in a protein-rich liquid medium quickly form a macromolecular structure called protein corona. This protein structure defines the physical interaction between nanoparticles and target cells. The surface proteins compose the first line of interaction between this macromolecular structure and the cell surface of a target cell. We demonstrated that SUSTU (SUrface proteomics, Safety, Targeting, Uptake) provides a qualitative and quantitative analysis from the protein corona surface. With SUSTU, the spatial dynamics of the protein corona surface can be studied. Data from SUSTU would ascertain the nanoparticle functionalized groups exposed at a destiny that could circumvent preliminary in vitro experiments. Therefore, this method could implement in the analysis of nanoparticle targeting and uptake capability and could be integrated into a rapid prototyping strategy which is a major challenge in nanomaterials science. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD004636.

### Keywords
Nanoparticle (np), Lc-ms/ms, Protein corona (pc)

### Affiliations
Department of clinical and experimental medicine, Linkoping University, Sweden.
Linkoping University

### Submitter
Jacob Kuruvilla

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Christobal
Department of clinical and experimental medicine, Linkoping University, Sweden.


