### Accession
PXD007935

### Title
Comparison of the MHC I immunopeptidome repertoire of B-cell lymphoblasts using two isolation methods

### Description
Significant technological advances in both affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry have facilitated the identification of peptides associated with the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules, and enabled a greater understanding of the dynamic nature of the immunopeptidome of normal and neoplastic cells. While the isolation of MHC I-associated peptides (MIPs) typically used mild acid elution (MAE) or immunoprecipitation (IP), limited information currently exists regarding their respective analytical merits. Here, we present a comparison of these approaches for the isolation of two different B-cell lymphoblasts cell models, and report on the recovery, reproducibility, scalability and complementarity of identification from each method. Both approaches yielded reproducible datasets for peptide extracts obtained from 2 to 100 million cells, with 2016 to 5093 MIPs, respectively. The IP typically provides up to 6.4 fold increase in MIPs compared to the MAE. We extended the comprehensiveness of these immunopeptidome analyses using personalized genomic database of B-cell lymphoblasts, and discovered that 0.4 % of their respective MIP repertoire harbored non-synonymous single nucleotide variations (also known as minor histocompatibility antigens, MiHAs).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation.  The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B-lymphoblastoid cells were grown in RPMI1640 containing Hepes and supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, penicillin/streptomycin and L-glutamine. The cells were washed with PBS and either used fresh or stored at -800C.  B-ALL specimen used in this study was from an adult male B-ALL patient. B-ALL cells were expanded in vivo after transplantation in mice as follows. NOD Cg-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice were bred in a specific pathogen–free animal facility. B-ALL cells were thawed at 37°C, washed and resuspended in RPMI. A total of 1-2 × 106 B-ALL cells were transplanted via the tail vein into 8–12-week-old sub-lethally irradiated NSG mice. Mice were sacrificed 30-60 days post-injection when showing signs of disease. Spleens were mechanically dissociated and leukemic cells were isolated by Ficoll gradient. Purity and viability of the samples (usually > 90%) were then assessed by flow cytometry. B-ALL cells were identified as human CD45+CD19+.  Flow cytometry  Data acquisition was performed on a BD Canto II cytometer (BD Bioscience). The analysis was done with BD FACSDiva 4.1 software. Antibodies used were anti-human CD45 Pacific Blue, anti-human CD19 PE-Cy7, anti-mouse CD45.1 APC-efluor 730 and anti-human HLA-ABC PE. The absolute membrane density of MHC I was evaluated by indirect  labeling with a purified anti-human HLA-ABC (clone W6/32), using commercially available QIFIKIT® (Dako) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptide isolation by immunoprecipitation  The W6/32 antibodies were incubated in PBS for 60 minutes at room temperature with PureProteome protein A magnetic beads at a ratio of 1 mg of antibody per mL of slurry. Antibodies were covalently cross-linked to magnetic beads using dimethylpimelidate. Biological replicates of cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS pH 7.2 and solubilized by adding 1 mL of detergent buffer containing PBS pH 7.2, 1% (w/v) CHAPS supplemented with Protease inhibitor cocktail. After 60 minute incubation with tumbling at 4°C, samples were spun at 10000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Post-nuclear supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing magnetic beads coupled to W6/32 antibodies at a ratio of 10 mg of W6/32 antibody per 1 × 106 cells. Samples were incubated with tumbling for 180 minutes at 4°C and placed on a magnet to recover bound MHC I complexes to magnetic beads. Magnetic beads were first washed with 4 × 1 mL PBS, then with 1 × 1 mL of 0.1X PBS and finally with 1 × 1 mL of water. MHC I complexes were eluted from the magnetic beads by acidic treatment using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). To remove any residual magnetic beads, eluates were transferred into 2.0 mL Costar mL Spin-X centrifuge tube filters (0.45 mm) and spun 2 minutes at 3000g. Filtrates containing peptides were separated from MHC I subunits (HLA molecules and b-2 macroglobulin) using home-made stage tips packed with twenty 1 mm diameter octadecyl (C-18) solid phase extraction disks. Stage tips were pre-washed first with methanol then with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% TFA and finally with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were loaded onto  the stage tips and the peptides were retained on the stage tips while the HLA molecules and b-2 macroglobulin were found in the flow through. Stage tips were washed with 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 30% ACN in 0.1%TFA. The peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation and then stored at -20°C until MS analysis.  Peptide isolation by mild acid elution  Peptides were released by mild acid elution using citrate pH 3.3 buffer. Samples were desalted using an HLB cartridge and filtered with a 3,000 Da cut-off column.  Mass spectrometry and peptide sequencing  Vacuum dried fractions were resuspended in 17 µL of 5% ACN, 0.2% FA and analyzed by LC–MS/MS using an Easy nLC1000 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a custom C18 reversed phase column (150 mm i.d. X 100 mm) using a flow rate of 600 nL/min and a linear gradient of 5–30% ACN (0.2% FA) in 56 min, followed by 3.3 min at 80% ACN (0.2% FA). Survey scan (MS1) were acquired with the Orbitrap at a resolving power of 60,000 (at m/z 200) over a scan range of 350-1200 m/z with a target values of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Mass calibration used an internal lock mass (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120029) and mass accuracy of peptide measurements was within 5 ppm. MS/MS spectra were acquired at higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 25. Up to twenty precursor ions were accumulated with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, an advanced gain control (AGC) of 5 × 104 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and fragment ions were transferred to the Orbitrap analyzer operating at a resolution of 30, 000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and label-free quantification  Database searches were performed using PEAKS 8. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Searches were performed without enzyme specificity and with variable modifications for deamidation (N, Q) and Oxidation (M). Subject-specific protein sequence databases that incorporate single amino-acid polymorphism (SAP) detected by RNAseq were generated with a Python script relying on pyGeno (v1.2.9. Ensembl reference genome release 75 (GRCh37.p13) and 88 (GRCh38.p10) were used for B-LCL and B-ALL cells, respectively. Polymorphisms were called by Casava for B-LCL and FreeBayes for B-ALL. Additionally, for B-ALL, only sequences with expressed transcript were retained. Label-free quantification was performed using PEAKS with mass tolerance of 6 ppm and retention time windows of 0.8 min to compare MHC I peptide abundance across samples. Peaks areas were median normalized only for replicates of the same condition.

### Publication Abstract
Significant technological advances in both affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry have facilitated the identification of peptides associated with the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules, and enabled a greater understanding of the dynamic nature of the immunopeptidome of normal and neoplastic cells. While the isolation of MHC I-associated peptides (MIPs) typically used mild acid elution (MAE) or immunoprecipitation (IP), limited information currently exists regarding their respective analytical merits. Here, a comparison of these approaches for the isolation of two different B-cell lymphoblast cell models is presented, and it is reported on the recovery, reproducibility, scalability, and complementarity of identification from each method. Both approaches yielded reproducible datasets for peptide extracts obtained from 2 to 100 million cells, with 2016 to 5093 MIPs, respectively. The IP typically provides up to 6.4-fold increase in MIPs compared to the MAE. The comprehensiveness of these immunopeptidome analyses is extended using personalized genomic database of B-cell lymphoblasts, and it is discovered that 0.4% of their respective MIP repertoire harbored nonsynonymous single nucleotide variations (also known as minor histocompatibility antigens, MiHAs).

### Keywords
Human, Mae, B-cell, Ip, Mips, Mhc i-associated peptides

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4
IRIC

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


