### Accession
PXD038581

### Title
Flucloxacillin-modified proteins identified in primary human hepatocytes

### Description
Flucloxacillin is a β-lactam antibiotic associated with a high incidence of drug-induced liver injury. Although expression of HLA-B*57:01 increases susceptibility, little is known of the pathological mechanisms involved in the induction of the clinical phenotype. Irreversible protein modification is suspected to drive the reaction through the provision of flucloxacillin-modified peptides that are presented to T-cells by the protein encoded by the risk allele. In this study, the binding of flucloxacillin to human primary hepatocytes was characterized.  Flucloxacillin was shown to bind to multiple intracellular proteins including major hepatocellular proteins (haemoglobin and albumin) and mitochondrial proteins (glutamate dehydrogenase and carbamoyl-phosphate synthase). Inhibition of membrane transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) appeared to reduce the levels of covalent binding. These flucloxacillin-modified intracellular proteins provide a potential source of neo-antigens for HLA-B*57:01 presentation by hepatocytes, that may drive CD8+ T-cell responses. More importantly, covalent binding to mitochondrial proteins, particularly those involved in the metabolism of both endogenous compounds and xenobiotics, could potentially affect their functional activity. This may increase cellular stress signalling and alter the regulatory threshold for activation of the adaptive immune system and thereby play an important role in determining the progression and severity of liver injury. Of particular interest, flucloxacillin binding to Lys50 on 14-3-3 proteins, a key residue within the 14-3-3 protein phospho-binding pocket, could potentially block its binding to signalling proteins as demonstrated by computational modelling, leading to regulating major cellular functions including cell proliferation, growth, apoptosis, autophagy, and cell motility.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human hepatocytes were treated with 1.5 mM flucloxacillin for 24hrs and snap frozen. Cells were lysed, reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated  with 55 mM IAA followed by trypsin digestion. Flucloxacillin modified peptides were isolated using polyclonal rabbit-anti-flucloxacillin antibody. Flucloxacillin-modified peptides were eluted using 10% actic acid and further purified using C18 ZipTips. Samples were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and  analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a data dependent acquisition (DDA) strategy on a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled with a Eksigent NanoLC Ultra HPLC system (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched using PEAKS X Pro (Version 10.6 build 20201015) with the following specifications: incorporating enzymatic cleavage restriction for Trypsin (maximum 3 missed cleavages, allowing for non-specific cleavage), fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine, Variable modifications – methionine oxidation (+15.99), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98), flucloxacillin modification of lysine and arginine (+453.06, incorporating a neutral loss of 159.04 on fragmentation).

### Publication Abstract
Flucloxacillin is a &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotic associated with a high incidence of drug-induced liver injury. Although expression of HLA-B*57:01 is associated with increased susceptibility, little is known of the pathological mechanisms involved in the induction of the clinical phenotype. Irreversible protein modification is suspected to drive the reaction through the provision of flucloxacillin-modified peptides that are presented to T-cells by the protein encoded by the risk allele. In this study, we have shown that flucloxacillin binds to multiple proteins within human primary hepatocytes, including major hepatocellular proteins (hemoglobin and albumin) and mitochondrial proteins. Inhibition of membrane transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) appeared to reduce the levels of covalent binding. A diverse range of proteins with different functions was found to be targeted by flucloxacillin, including adaptor proteins (14-3-3), proteins with catalytic activities (liver carboxylesterase 1, tRNA-splicing endonuclease subunit Sen2, All-trans-retinol dehydrogenase ADH1B, Glutamate dehydrogenase 1 mitochondrial, Carbamoyl-phosphate synthase [ammonia] mitochondrial), and transporters (hemoglobin, albumin, and UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase). These flucloxacillin-modified intracellular proteins could provide a potential source of neoantigens for HLA-B*57:01 presentation by hepatocytes. More importantly, covalent binding to critical cellular proteins could be the molecular initiating events that lead to flucloxacillin-induced cholestasis Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD038581.

### Keywords
Flucloxaxillin, Primary human hepatocytes, Protein modification

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Xiaoli Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoli Meng
University of Liverpool


