### Accession
PXD024398

### Title
Proteomic landscape of SARS-CoV-2- and MERS-CoV-infected primary human renal epithelial cells

### Description
Acute kidney injury is strongly associated with mortality in COVID-19 patients. However, host cell changes underlying infection of kidney cells with SARS-CoV-2 remain unknown and prevent understanding of the mechanisms leading to renal pathology. Here, we carried out extensive, dual-level proteomic analyses of primary human kidney cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 or MERS-CoV to disseminate virus and cell type specific changes. We established cellular infection models of proximal and distal tubular epithelial cells derived from human donors. Infected cells were analyzed by quantitative translatome and whole-cell proteomics over time. Our findings reveal shared pathways modified upon infection with both viruses, as well as SARS-CoV-2 specific host cell modulation driving key changes in innate immune activation, cellular protein quality control and mitochondrial biology. In addition, we identified extensive modulation in pathways associated with kidney failure that were instinctively regulated in a virus- and cell type-specific manner. Our findings provide an overview of the effects of SARS-CoV-2 or MERS-CoV infection on primary kidney cells revealing key pathways and highlighting potential treatment options.

### Sample Protocol
5 µg of dried peptides of each fraction was resuspended in 2% (v/v) ACN / 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) solution and 1 µg was shot with settings described previously29,31. Data acquisition was done using centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). A spray voltage of 2.6 kV was applied with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 30 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN in water (Buffer B). Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 min followed by a step-wise increase to 90% B in 6 min and held for another 9 min. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 10 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected together with their labeled counterparts (Targeted Mass Difference Filter, arginine and lysine delta mass, 5-100% partner intensity range with 7 ppm mass difference tolerance), resulting in 20 dependent scans (Top20). Precursors were selected with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.4 Th and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy of 35%. MS2-analysis was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200 using a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. To limit repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors a dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 7 ppm was set and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches were performed using the Sequest HT node in PD against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (20531 sequences), SARS-CoV-2 database (UniProt pre-release, 14 sequences), MERS-CoV database (10 sequences) and MaxQuant contaminants FASTA.  Static modifications were set as TMTpro at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: TMTpro (K, +304.207 Da), TMTpro+K8 (K, +312.221 Da) and Arg10 (R, +10.008 Da). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Default Percolator settings in PD were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantifications were achieved using default settings in the consensus workflow. Minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. PSMs and protein files were exported for translatome and proteome analysis using in-house Python scripts (Python 3.7.1 and packages- pandas 0.23.4, numpy 1.15.4 and scipy 1.1.0) as described before30. Briefly, for translatome, PSMs were adjusted with their ion injection time (IT) to account for peptide abundance in TMT intensities. Adjusted PSMs were normalized using total intensity normalization, followed by extraction of heavy labeled peptides and baseline correction using the noise channel where negative intensities were substituted with zero. All heavy peptides belonging to the same UniProt accession number were summed and combined with the protein file. For each set of three plexes belonging to either SARS-CoV-2 or MERS-CoV, internal reference scaling (IRS) and trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) normalization was performed to obtain global translation rates across replicates. Proteome was quantified by IT adjustment of PSMs, concatenation of adjusted PSMs belonging to the same viral infection (three plexes) and processed exclusively for each viral infection using total intensity normalization, IRS87 and TMM88 normalization. Peptides belonging to the same UniProt accession were summed and global proteome quantifications for each virus was obtained. Statistical significance was assessed using a two-sided, unpaired t-test assuming equal variance, unless stated otherwise. All contaminants including all detected keratins were removed before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Coronavirus, Mers-cov, Meprod, Tmd, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Aneesha Kohli

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


