### Accession
PXD027151

### Title
Plant homeodomain targeting cyclic peptides allosterically modulate KDM7 histone demethylase activity

### Description
Here we report the discovery of a set of potent de-novo cyclic peptides (CPs) targeting different binding sites on KDM7B. One CP (OC9) bound directly to the KDM7 PHD-finger, as supported by bio-layer interferometry (BLI), isothermal calorimetry (ITC), hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDxMS) and NMR studies, and was highly selective for KDM7s over other PHD-fingers. OC9 disrupted PHD-finger binding to H3K4me3, and allosterically modulated KDM7 demethylase activity at H3K9me2 site on peptides and histone extracts demonstrating PHD-finger targeting is as JmjC-domain targeted inhibitors, but more selective for specific KDM7 subfamily member and certain combinatorial histone PTM signatures.  Proteomic analysis confirmed OC9 to selectively target KDM7 in nuclear lysates demonstrating its high affinity and selectivity against other H3K4me3 reader domains and KDMs.

### Sample Protocol
SUP-T1 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % FBS (heat inactivated), 1 % penicillin/streptomcyin and 1 % L-glutamine. Aliquots of 1x107 cells were donated by Dr John-Paul Bukowski. One aliquot was processed per ‘use’ of a Nuclear Complex Co Ip isolation kit (ActiveMotif, 54001) on ice according to the manufacturer’s instructions, but without adding EDTA at any stage. The extracted nuclear lysate from three cell pellets was combined (700 µL) and measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit 23227 and Albumin Standards 23209, Thermo Scientific) (0.84 mg/mL). Low bind tubes were used throughout. 650 µL of lysate was pre-cleared with 140 µL of magnetic streptavidin beads (Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin 11206D, Invitrogen) (prepared by washing once in PBS). 1 µL of OC9 (final 20, 5, 1, 0.1, 0 µM) was added to 50 µL of pre-cleared lysate in duplicate on ice for 15 mins (final DMSO in lysate = 0.1 % v/v). OC9-Biotin (1.7 µL of 30 µM, 1 µM final) was added to each, and Biotin was added (1 µM final) to an additional duplicate DMSO control, on ice for 30 mins. Solutions were then used to re-suspend 30 µL worth of pre-washed magnetic streptavidin beads in fresh tubes rotated at 4 °C for 20 mins. Unbound supernatants were then removed, and beads re-suspended in 50 µL of ice-cold PBS then immediately transferred to a new tube and supernatant again removed. Finally, beads were re-suspended in 50 µL of elution buffer (250 µL 4X LDS, 750 µL water, 20 µL 1 M DTT (20 mM final)) and heated at 95 °C for 5 mins, with elute recovered immediately whilst hot to a fresh tube. 15 µL of pre-cleared input was added to 5 µL of 4X LDS and 1 µL 1 M DTT. All samples were stored for short-term at  20 °C. 5 µL of each elute sample and input was analysed by 4-12% BisTris SDS-PAGE gel (1 mm, 15-well, NuPAGE) Western blot for KDM7B and KDM7C. MS sample preparation:  Eluted samples (25 μL) were diluted to 200 μL in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 7.8), reduced with DTT (5 mM final concentration) for 1 h at room temperature, and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM final concentration) for 30 mins at room temperature in the dark. Protein was precipitated by sequential addition of MeOH (600 μL), CHCl3 (150 μL), and H2O (450 μL), vortexing between each addition. The mixture was spun (17,000 g, 5 min) and the aqueous layer removed without disturbing the peptide precipitate at the interface. Further MeOH was added (450 μL), the protein precipitate pelleted by centrifugation (17,000 g, 5 min), and the supernatant removed. The pellet was washed with MeOH (600 µL), re-pelleted, and air dried for 10 minutes at room temperature before resuspension in 6 M urea (pH 7.8, 50 μL) by vortexing. The peptide solution was diluted with 250 μL H2O and incubated with trypsin (0.8 µg) overnight at 37°C. The digests were acidified with formic acid (FA) (1% v/v final concentration), desalted using SOLA HRP SPE Cartridges (Thermo Fisher), eluting with 69% v/v MeCN, 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (600 μL) and dried in vacuo. Dried peptides were stored at  20°C before resuspension in (2% v/v MeCN, 0.1% v/v FA in H2O) (20 μL) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition: Mass spectrometry data were acquired at the Discovery Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford). Digested samples were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC fitted with an EASY spray column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific), coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive instrument. A 60 min gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) DMSO to 0.1% (v/v) formic acid with 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) DMSO at a flow rate of 250 nL min−1 was used. The instrument was operated in a data-dependant manner, with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and the 15 most abundant precursors selected for HCD fragmentation with an AGC target of 1 x 105 ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analysed as previously described1. Briefly, data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (Uniprot). Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and Match Between Runs were selected; replicates were collated into parameter groups to ensure matching between replicates only. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically, a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.5.0. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the LFQ intensities transformed by Log2. Experimental replicates were grouped, and the data filtered such that 2 valid LFQ values were required for the condition without any OC9 competition, and at least one valid LFQ value in each of the remaining experimental groups. Missing values were imputed using default settings, and the data distribution visually inspected to ensure that a normal distribution was maintained. Statistically significant competition was determined through the application of P2 tests, using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and volcano plot visualisation.

### Publication Abstract
Plant homeodomain fingers (PHD-fingers) are a family of reader domains that can recruit epigenetic proteins to specific histone modification sites. Many PHD-fingers recognise methylated lysines on histone tails and play crucial roles in transcriptional regulation, with their dysregulation linked to various human diseases. Despite their biological importance, chemical inhibitors for targeting PHD-fingers are very limited. Here we report a potent and selective <i>de novo</i> cyclic peptide inhibitor (OC9) targeting the <i>N</i><sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-trimethyllysine-binding PHD-fingers of the KDM7 histone demethylases, developed using mRNA display. OC9 disrupts PHD-finger interaction with histone H3K4me3 by engaging the <i>N</i><sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-methyllysine-binding aromatic cage through a valine, revealing a new non-lysine recognition motif for the PHD-fingers that does not require cation-&#x3c0; interaction. PHD-finger inhibition by OC9 impacted JmjC-domain mediated demethylase activity at H3K9me2, leading to inhibition of KDM7B (PHF8) but stimulation of KDM7A (KIAA1718), representing a new approach for selective allosteric modulation of demethylase activity. Chemoproteomic analysis showed selective engagement of OC9 with KDM7s in T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma SUP T1 cells. Our results highlight the utility of mRNA-display derived cyclic peptides for targeting challenging epigenetic reader proteins to probe their biology, and the broader potential of this approach for targeting protein-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Kdm7, Cyclic peptide, Proteomics, Ptm

### Affiliations
Centre for medicines discovery, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Jennifer Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Kilian Huber
Centre for medicines discovery, University of Oxford


