### Accession
PXD020215

### Title
Development of a multiplexed platform to study laccases and cellulase activities using nanostructure-initiator mass spectrometry (NIMS)

### Description
Lignocellulosic biomass is composed of three major biopolymers: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Although lignin has long been considered a waste product in biomass conversion efforts, its utilization has since been identified as critical to the economic viability of second-generation biofuel production. There is thus increasing interest in finding enzymes and enzyme cocktails which can efficiently deconstruct both the cellulose/hemicellulose and lignin components of lignocellulosic biomass. Analytical tools capable of quickly detecting both glycan and lignin deconstruction could are needed to support the development and characterization of efficient enzymes/enzyme cocktails.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the submitted zymogram gel slices were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Briefly, gel slices were washed until the dye was removed. Proteins were in-gel reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide, followed by a washing step, including dehydrating gel pieces with acetonitrile and rehydrating with ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Gel slices were again dehydrated and further rehydrated with ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 0.125 ng trypsin. The gel slices were incubated on ice for 30 minutes and additional buffer was added when necessary to cover the gel slices prior to overnight incubation at 37 degree C. The tryptic peptides were extracted from gel slices and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). For in solution protein samples, the concentrations were determined by the DC protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA). 50 μg proteins of each sample were reduced, alkylated and digested with 1 μg of trypsin (Promega). The tryptic peptides were desalted with a C18 column (Harvard apparatus) and eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge. All dried peptides were stored at -20 degree C until LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were exported as .mgf files. Peptides and proteins were identified by searching the .mgf files against the downloaded protein databases from Uniprot as well as Swiss-Prot database using Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). Mascot search results were run through Scaffold for scoring. Identified peptides are filtered by a 1% peptide-level false discovery rate. In addition, the false discovery rate at the protein level is calculated, and only the proteins with false discovery rate ≤1% were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Lignocellulosic biomass is composed of three major biopolymers: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Analytical tools capable of quickly detecting both glycan and lignin deconstruction are needed to support the development and characterization of efficient enzymes/enzyme cocktails. Previously we have described nanostructure-initiator mass spectrometry-based assays for the analysis of glycosyl hydrolase and most recently an assay for lignin modifying enzymes. Here we integrate these two assays into a single multiplexed assay against both classes of enzymes and use it to characterize crude commercial enzyme mixtures. Application of our multiplexed platform based on nanostructure-initiator mass spectrometry enabled us to characterize crude mixtures of laccase enzymes from fungi Agaricus bisporus (Ab) and Myceliopthora thermophila (Mt) revealing activity on both carbohydrate and aromatic substrates. Using time-series analysis we determined that crude laccase from Ab has the higher GH activity and that laccase from Mt has the higher activity against our lignin model compound. Inhibitor studies showed a significant reduction in Mt GH activity under low oxygen conditions and increased activities in the presence of vanillin (common GH inhibitor). Ultimately, this assay can help to discover mixtures of enzymes that could be incorporated into biomass pretreatments to deconstruct diverse components of lignocellulosic biomass.

### Keywords
Lignin, Ghs (glycosyl hydrolases), Enzyme assays, Laccases, Nims, Multiplex assay

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


