### Accession
PXD015658

### Title
The structure and symmetry of the Radial Spoke protein complex in Chlamydomonas flagella

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the organization of the Radial Spoke protein complex from Chlamydomonas. Experiments were performed by on-bead cross-linking of the immobilized complex with the amine-reactive cross-linking reagent disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Herzog et al., Science, 2012; Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system.  Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the complex subunits, co-purified proteins and contaminants.   Additional search/filter settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 3 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
The radial spoke is a key element in a transducer apparatus controlling the motility of eukaryotic cilia. The transduction biomechanics is a long-standing question in cilia biology. The radial spoke has three regions - a spoke head, a bifurcated neck and a stalk. Although the neck and the stalk are asymmetric, twofold symmetry of the head has remained controversial. In this work we used single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) analysis to generate a 3D structure of the whole radial spoke at unprecedented resolution. We show the head region at 15&#x2005;&#xc5; (1.5 nm) resolution and confirm twofold symmetry. Using distance constraints generated by cross-linking mass spectrometry, we locate two components, RSP2 and RSP4, at the head and neck regions. Our biophysical analysis of isolated RSP4, RSP9, and RSP10 affirmed their oligomeric state. Our results enable us to redefine the boundaries of the regions and propose a model of organization of the radial spoke component proteins.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; radial spoke complex

### Affiliations
Department of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), Villigen, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Ishikawa
Department of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), Villigen, Switzerland


