### Accession
PXD029651

### Title
mice Renal tubular epithelial cells LC-MS/MS

### Description
Diabetic nephropathy is considered one of the most common microvascular complications of diabetes and the pathophysiology involves multiple factors. Progressive diabetic nephropathy is believed to be related to the structure and function of the tubular epithelial cells in the kidney. However, the role of lysine acetylation in lesions of the renal tubular epithelial cells arising from hyperglycemia is poorly understood. Consequently, in this study, we cultured mouse renal tubular epithelial cells in vitro under high glucose conditions and analyzed the acetylation levels of proteins by liquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry. We identified 48 upregulated proteins and downregulated 86 proteins. In addition, we identified 113 sites with higher acetylation levels and 374 sites with lower acetylation levels. Subcellular localization analysis showed that the majority of the acetylated proteins were located in the mitochondria (43.17%), nucleus (28.57%) and cytoplasm (16.19%). Enrichment analysis indicated that these acetylated proteins are primarily associated with oxidative phosphorylation, the citrate cycle (TCA cycle), metabolic pathways and carbon metabolism. In addition, we used the MCODE plug-in and the cytoHubba plug-in in Cytoscape software to analyze the PPI network and displayed the first four most compact MOCDEs and the top 10 hub genes from the differentially expressed proteins between global and acetylated proteomes. Finally, we extracted 37 conserved motifs from 4915 acetylated peptides. Collectively, this comprehensive analysis of the proteome reveals novel insights into the role of lysine acetylation in tubular epithelial cells and may make a valuable contribution towards the identification of the pathological mechanisms of diabetic nephropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics procedures Sample Preparation and Protein Extraction TKPT cells were cultured in T75 cell culture vials with DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10% fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and glucose at 37℃ and 5% CO2 for 48 hours. Three replicates were set for the control group (5.6 mM glucose) and the experimental group (40 mM glucose). The density of cells was 1 × 108 in each group. Afterwards, the cells were whashed for three times with pre-cooled PBS and collected into 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tubes with a cell scraper. Samples were stored at -80◦C to await analysis. Trypsin Digestion and Tandem Mass Tag Labeling For each sample, 0.7 mg of protein material per microcentrifuge tube was reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56℃. Iodineacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at ambient temperature in darkness for 15 min. Then, 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added and proteins were precipitated at 4℃ for 2h. Finally, the samples were centrifuged at 4500 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was then discarded, and the pellet was washed 2-3 times with pre-cooled acetone for protein precipitation The precipitate was allowed to air-dry and triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to a final concentration of 200 mM. After ultrasonic dispersion and precipitation, trypsin was added to a protease:protein ratio of 1:50 and enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out overnight. Following hydrolysis with trypsin, peptides were dehydrated with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and freeze-dried in a vacuum. The peptides were then dissolved with 0.5 M TEAB and labeled with a tandem mass tag (TMT) kit in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The simple operations were as follows: the labeling reagent was dissolved with acetonitrile and mixed with the peptides resuspended by TEAB. After the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 2 h, 5% hydroxylamine was added to terminate the reaction. Samples with different labels were mixed together and vacuum freeze-dried after desalting with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex). HPLC Fractionation, Affinity Enrichment and LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile in 10 mM NH4CO3(pH 9) over 60 min into 60 fractions. The injection volume was 20 μl, and the same sample was repeated 6 times. Then, the peptides were combined into 9 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  For acetylated peptides enrichment, 3 mg trypsinized peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris–HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with 20 μl agarose beads coupled to anti-acetyl-lysine antibody PTM-104 (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4℃ overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The obtained peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to manufacturer instructions. Next, the peptides were separated by an EASY-NLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid system as follows: mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B consisted of the aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile (liquid gradient setting: 0–40 min, 6%–22% B; 40–54 min, 22%–32% B; 54–57 min, 32%–80% B; 57–60 min, 80% B; flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min. Following separation, the peptides were injected into an NSI ion source and analyzed using Q Exactive™ HF-X mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.1kV; the parent ion and secondary fragment of the peptide were detected and analyzed with a high-resolution Orbitrap. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1600 and the scan resolution was set to 120,000; the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 30,000 at m/z 100. Data were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) program; following the primary scan, the top 20 peptide parent ions with the highest signal intensities were selected and successively entered into an HCD collision pool for fragmentation with 28% collision energy, and secondary mass spectrometry was conducted. To improve the efficiency of mass spectrometry, we used the following parameter settings: automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5; the signal threshold was set to 8.3E4 ions/s; the maximum injection time was set to 60 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time for tandem mass spectrometry was set to 30 s to avoid repeated exploration of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data obtained were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.6.15.0). First, the database was set to Mus_musculus_10090 (20395 sequences); then an inverted database was used to calculate false positive rates (FDR) due to random matches. We also included a common database for contamination to remove the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results. Second, the method of enzymatic digestion was set to Trypsin/P; the number of missing bits was set to 2; the minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 residues, and the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. Third, the tolerance for mass errors with regards to the primary parent ions in the first search and the main search was set to 20 parts per million (PPM) and 4.5 PPM, respectively. The tolerance for mass error with regards to the secondary fragment ions was set to 20 PPM. Fourth, carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification; oxidized methionine, acetylated protein N-termini, deamidation (NQ) and acetylation on Lys were set as variable modifications. Finally, the quantitative method was set as TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. Protein identifications were based on a minimum of one unique peptides. Bioinformatics analysis Functional annotation of proteins and enrichment analysis  The UniProt-GOA database2 was used for the ontological annotation of proteins. The KEGG database3 was used to investigate pathway enrichment. The InterPro database4 was used to analyze the enrichment of functional protein domains. The precise Fisher’s exact test was used to test the identified proteins against proteins in the database. FDR < 0.05 in the enrichment analysis was statistically significant. NetSurfP_1.15 was used to predict the secondary protein structure and surface accessibility. Motif discovery and hierarchical clustering analysis The MoMo analysis software, based on the motif-X algorithm, was used to analyze peptides sequences consisting of 10 amino acids upstream and downstream of all modification sites identified by proteome acetylation. When the number of peptides as a characteristic sequence exceeded 20 and the p-value of the statistical test was less than 0.000001, we considered the form of a characteristic sequence as a specific motif of modified peptides. Next, we used the "heatmap" function in the r-package "gplots" to display a location-specific heatmap. The hierarchical clustering method was then used to perform Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG, and structural domain analysis for the Q1-Q4 groups and the results were displayed as heat maps. GPS-PAIL 2.06 software was then used to make simple predictions for seven acetyltransferases of the differentially acetylated proteins we identified. Protein–protein interaction network analysis First, the differential proteins identified between groups according to a multiple difference of 1.3 were analyzed by the STRING protein interaction database (V.11.0)7 to obtain a differential protein interaction network. Next, we utilized the STRING database to visualize the visual network between different proteins. MCODE and CytoHubba modules in Cytoscape software8 were then used to identify highly interconnected clusters and hub genes in the network.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic nephropathy is considered one of the most common microvascular complications of diabetes and the pathophysiology involves multiple factors. Progressive diabetic nephropathy is believed to be related to the structure and function of the tubular epithelial cells in the kidney. However, the role of lysine acetylation in lesions of the renal tubular epithelial cells arising from hyperglycemia is poorly understood. Consequently, in this study, we cultured mouse renal tubular epithelial cells <i>in vitro</i> under high glucose conditions and analyzed the acetylation levels of proteins by liquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry. We identified 48 upregulated proteins and downregulated 86 proteins. In addition, we identified 113 sites with higher acetylation levels and 374 sites with lower acetylation levels. Subcellular localization analysis showed that the majority of the acetylated proteins were located in the mitochondria (43.17%), nucleus (28.57%) and cytoplasm (16.19%). Enrichment analysis indicated that these acetylated proteins are primarily associated with oxidative phosphorylation, the citrate cycle (TCA cycle), metabolic pathways and carbon metabolism. In addition, we used the MCODE plug-in and the cytoHubba plug-in in Cytoscape software to analyze the PPI network and displayed the first four most compact MOCDEs and the top 10 hub genes from the differentially expressed proteins between global and acetylated proteomes. Finally, we extracted 37 conserved motifs from 4915 acetylated peptides. Collectively, this comprehensive analysis of the proteome reveals novel insights into the role of lysine acetylation in tubular epithelial cells and may make a valuable contribution towards the identification of the pathological mechanisms of diabetic nephropathy.

### Keywords
Renal tubular epithelial cells, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Nephrology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, P. R. China

### Submitter
Jiayi Wan

### Lab Head
Dr Jiayi Wan
Department of Nephrology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, P. R. China


