### Accession
PXD023164

### Title
Structural and functional analyses identify unique features of the Smc5/6 complex among SMC family of complexes

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry data for integrative structural analyses of the Smc5/6 holo-complex from budding yeast. Electron microscopy, crosslinking mass spectrometry, and computational modeling reveal that while the complex shares an overall organization with other SMC complexes, it possesses several strikingly different features.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Smc5/6 complex was cross-linked with DSSO or CDI. Cross-linked proteins were purified by filter-aided sample preparation and reduced, alklyated and digested with LysC followed by Trypsin on the filter membrane. Eluted peptides are then desalted by C18 solid phase extraction. Desalted peptides are loaded onto LC-MS for a 120min gradient separation and for mass spectrometry acquisition with CID-MS2/HCD-MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched using XlinkX against a database containing the Smc5/6 complex subunited. Up to 4 missed cleavages were allowed, with cross-link modifications to K, S, T, Y amino acids. Fixed modifications: carbamidylation. Variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N,Q deamidation. For DSSO cross-links, DSSO, DSSO Tris and DSSO hydrolyzed variable modifications were added. For CDI cross-links, CDI, CDI Tris variable modifications were added. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm for Orbitrap spectra. Percolator FDR rate was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) complexes are critical chromatin modulators. In eukaryotes, the cohesin and condensin SMC complexes organize chromatin, while the Smc5/6 complex directly regulates DNA replication and repair. The molecular basis for the distinct functions of Smc5/6 is poorly understood. Here, we report an integrative structural study of the budding yeast Smc5/6 holo-complex using electron microscopy, cross-linking mass spectrometry, and computational modeling. We show that the Smc5/6 complex possesses several unique features, while sharing some architectural characteristics with other SMC complexes. In contrast to arm-folded structures of cohesin and condensin, Smc5 and Smc6 arm regions do not fold back on themselves. Instead, these long filamentous regions interact with subunits uniquely acquired by the Smc5/6 complex, namely the Nse2 SUMO ligase and the Nse5/Nse6 subcomplex, with the latter also serving as a linchpin connecting distal parts of the complex. Our 3.0-&#xc5; resolution cryoelectron microscopy structure of the Nse5/Nse6 core further reveals a clasped-hand topology and a dimeric interface important for cell growth. Finally, we provide evidence that Nse5/Nse6 uses its SUMO-binding motifs to contribute to Nse2-mediated sumoylation. Collectively, our integrative study identifies distinct structural features of the Smc5/6 complex and functional cooperation among its coevolved unique subunits.

### Keywords
Smc5/6, Yeast, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Integrative modeling, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center


