### Accession
PXD009854

### Title
Structural plasticity of actin-spectrin membrane skeleton and functional role of actin and spectrin in axon degeneration

### Description
Axon degeneration sculpts precise patterns of connectivity in the developing nervous system and is an early pathological hallmark of several adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders. Substantial progress has been made in identifying effector mechanisms that drive axon fragmentation, but far less is known about the upstream signaling pathways that initiate this process. Here we describe a role for the newly discovered axonal Membrane-associated Periodic Skeleton (MPS) –a quasi-1D periodic ultrastructure composed of actin, spectrin and associated molecules– during sensory axon degeneration. We find that trophic deprivation (TD) of sensory axons causes a rapid breakdown in the periodicity of the MPS in distal axons. These structural changes occur prior to and independently of caspase-driven axon fragmentation. We further show that acute actin destabilization to break down the MPS can initiate TD-related retrograde signaling. Actin stabilization prevents MPS breakdown during TD and blocks this signal. Moreover, deletion of βII-spectrin (Sptbn1), an obligate component of the MPS, suppresses this retrograde signaling and protects axons against degeneration. Together our data suggest that ultrastructural plasticity of the MPS underlies the earliest steps of axon degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, 620 µg protein per replicate (n=3), in 110uL  8M Urea, were trypsinized and desalted. 20 ug of each digest was subjected to protein profiling while the remainder was subjected to titanium dioxide based phosphopeptide enrichment as described previously 1. Samples were analyzed by high resolution/high accuracy LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive Plus, ThermoFisher). LC setup was operated with a trap column.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were queried against Uniprot’s Mouse Complete Proteome (March 2016) using MaxQuant v. 1.6.0.13 2.  Data were processed as a peptide centric stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture experiment (Lysine +8Da and Arginine +10 Da). Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine were allowed as a variable modifications in addition to methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Only Peptide false discovery rate ( 1%) was used to filter matched peptides. Phosphorylation sites were considered if measured in 2-of-3 replicates and with a localization probability better than 0.75. Data were processed and analyzed using  Perseus 3 . Phosphorylation sites were queried against PhosPhoSite.

### Publication Abstract
Axon degeneration sculpts neuronal connectivity patterns during development and is an early hallmark of several adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders. Substantial progress has been made in identifying effector mechanisms driving axon fragmentation, but less is known about the upstream signaling pathways that initiate this process. Here, we investigate the behavior of the actin-spectrin-based Membrane-associated Periodic Skeleton (MPS), and effects of actin and spectrin manipulations in sensory axon degeneration. We show that trophic deprivation (TD) of mouse sensory neurons causes a rapid disassembly of the axonal MPS, which occurs prior to protein loss and independently of caspase activation. Actin destabilization initiates TD-related retrograde signaling needed for degeneration; actin stabilization prevents MPS disassembly and retrograde signaling during TD. Depletion of &#x3b2;II-spectrin, a key component of the MPS, suppresses retrograde signaling and protects axons against degeneration. These data demonstrate structural plasticity of the MPS and suggest its potential role in early steps of axon degeneration.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Axon degeneration

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr David J. Simon
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305


