### Accession
PXD021667

### Title
Proteomic Study of Tolerant S. aureus Strains after Drug Combination Treatment

### Description
Several groups have shown that through evolution experiments, tolerance evolved rapidly under cyclic antibiotic treatment which then promote the emergence of resistance. In other words, intermittent antibiotic exposure will “train” the bacteria to become tolerant to the drug, and then boost the chances for them to become fully resistant. This evolutionary trajectory of evolving tolerance and resistance not only occurs in vitro, but also in clinical patients with MRSA blood infections. Despite the fact that repetitive antibiotic treatment will lead to tolerance and resistance development in bacterial populations, the difference on the evolutionary path between those treated with a single drug and drug combination remains unaddressed. In this study, we monitored the development of tolerance in MRSA by treating them with either daptomycin alone for 2 weeks (Scheme 1), or daptomycin combined with rifampin for two weeks (Scheme 2), in a cyclic manner. In addition, we also investigate another scenario where we treat MRSA cells with daptomycin alone for one week, and subsequently treat them with daptomycin and rifampin combination in the second week (Scheme 3). At the end of the evolution experiment, we observed that the population from Scheme 1 developed tolerance towards daptomycin, the population from Scheme 2 developed both tolerance and resistance towards daptomycin, while the population from Scheme 3 developed tolerance after a week of treatment, but then the tolerance phenotype diminished at the end of the second week due to the drug combination treatment. We subjected them to whole genome sequencing and identified single point mutations that are responsible for the observed phenotype. Through proteomics, we compared the proteome profile of the population evolved from scheme 1 (S1D14), scheme 2 (S2D14) and scheme 3 (S3D14), and we observed that these three populations employ distinct mechanisms to survive antibiotic treatment, suggesting that the treatment strategy for these populations should be tailored depending on the treatment conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Exponential phase WT, S1D14 (TOL strain), S2D14 (TOL-RES strain) and S3D14 (DIM-TOL strain) were treated with sub-MIC dose of daptomycin (0.25 µg/ml) for 1 hour, which should enable the populations to elicit antibiotic response. The control sample was untreated cells. For all proteomics experiments, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample. The cell pellet was suspended in 350 µL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), froze in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated for 12 min. The sample was centrifuged to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. Aliquot of the sample was taken for BCA protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). After protein quantification, the sample was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 M final concentration) at 37 ⁰C for 1 h. For shotgun proteomics, 150 µg of proteins were mixed with up to 250 µl of the exchange buffer (6M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 600 mM guanidine HCl), transferred to Amicon® filter device and centrifuged for 20 min. The proteins in the filter device was alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 mM in exchange buffer) in dark for 20 min, and then centrifuged for 20 min. To dilute the urea concentration, 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter device and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). This step was repeated once. Proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:50 w/w) for 12 h at 37 ⁰C. Then, the sample was acidified with 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and centrifuged for 16,000 ×g for 5 min. Finally, the samples were desalted by C18 reverse-phase ZipTip and dried with SpeedVac for 30 min. The samples were reconstituted in 25 µl water:acetonitrile:formic acid in a 97.9:2:0.1 ratio (v/v/v), and processed through Bruker nanoElute Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TimsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). A volume of 1 µl (approximately 200 ng of the protein digest) was injected to the UHPLC system and separated on an IonOpticks 25cm Aurora Series Emitter column with Captive Spray Insert (250 mm × 75 µm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 µm particle size C18) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied from 2 to 5% of solvent B for 0.5 min, from 5 to 30% of solvent B for 26.5 min, and then from 30 to 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min. At the end, the mobile phase was kept at 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, and then decreased to 2% of solvent B for 0.1 min. 2 minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were first converted to mgf file, and subsequently mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20229 64-bit). The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev.2) with a custom database. Briefly, the genome sequence of MRSA ATCC 43300 was converted into protein database using GeneMark (version 3.25) gene prediction tool. The proteins were then annotated using BLASTp (version 2.7.1) from NCBI using MRSA NCTC 8325 as the protein database. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequence in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 15 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Recent discoveries indicate that tolerance and resistance could rapidly evolve in bacterial populations under intermittent antibiotic treatment. In the present study, we applied antibiotic combinations in laboratory experiments to generate novel methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> strains with distinct phenotypes (tolerance, resistance, and suppressed tolerance), and compared their proteome profiles to uncover the adaptation mechanisms. While the tolerant strains have very different proteomes than the susceptible ancestral strain, the resistant strain largely resembles the ancestral in terms of their proteomes. Our proteomics data and other assays support the connection between the detected mutations to the observed phenotypes, confirming the general understanding of tolerance and resistance mechanisms. While resistance directly counteracts the action mechanism of the antibiotic, tolerance involves complex substantial changes in the cells' biological process to achieve survival advantages. Overall, this study provides insights into the existence of diverse evolutionary pathways for tolerance and resistance development under different treatment scenarios.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Daptomycin, Tolerance

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


