### Accession
PXD010209

### Title
Rat Liver HFD vs Chow, HFD vs PKCepsilon ASO

### Description
Insulin resistance drives the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). In liver, diacylglycerol (DAG) is a key mediator of lipid-induced insulin resistance. DAG activates protein kinase C epsilon (PKCε), which phosphorylates and inhibits the insulin receptor. In rats, a 3-day high fat diet produces hepatic insulin resistance through this mechanism, and knockdown of hepatic PKCε protects against high fat diet-induced hepatic insulin resistance. Here we employ a systems level approach to uncover additional signaling pathways involved in high fat diet-induced hepatic insulin resistance. We used quantitative phosphoproteomics to map global in vivo changes in hepatic protein phosphorylation in chow-fed, high fat-fed, and high fat-fed with PKCε knockdown rats to distinguish the impact of lipid- and PKCε-induced protein phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Rats were given IP injections of control or PKCepsilon targeting ASO; for the last three days rats were randomized to either chow or high fat diet with sucrose water. After overnight fasting, rats were sacrificed with pentobarbitol, livers were extracted and freeze clamped. Liver was pulverized into powder and homogenized in lysis buffer, followed by methanol-chloroform extraction, Lys-C and Trypsin digestion, and dimethyl labelling. After labeling, phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2, and fractionated using ERLIC. Data was collected on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos with a Waters NanoAquity HPLC driving a 120-min or 200-min method on a 3.2cm trap column and 20cm analytical column with reprosil-pur RP C18 resin (Dr. Maisch) using a Top10 DDA method.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant v 1.5.1.0, and searched using the Uniprot Rat Database (as of 11/12/2013). Data was processed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat liver, Insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Yale University
Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Systems Biology Institute, Yale University

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse Rinehart
Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Systems Biology Institute, Yale University


