### Accession
PXD021087

### Title
Metabolic and genetic integration of the chromatophore

### Description
The cercozoan amoeba Paulinella chromatophora contains photosynthetic organelles - termed chromatophores - that evolved from a cyanobacterium independently from plastids in plants and algae. Despite the more recent origin of the chromatophore, it shows tight integration into the host cell. It imports hundreds of nucleus-encoded proteins, and diverse metabolites are exchanged across the two chromatophore envelope membranes. However, the limited set of chromatophore-encoded transporters appears insufficient for supporting metabolic connectivity or protein import. Furthermore, chromatophore-localized biosynthetic pathways as well as multiprotein complexes include proteins of dual genetic origin, suggesting coordination of gene expression levels between chromatophore and nucleus. These findings imply that similar to the situation in mitochondria and plastids, nuclear factors evolved that control metabolite exchange and gene expression in the chromatophore. Here we show by mass spectrometric analyses of enriched insoluble protein fractions that, unexpectedly, nucleus-encoded transporters are not inserted into the chromatophore inner envelope membrane. Thus, despite the apparent maintenance of its barrier function, canonical metabolite transporters are missing in this membrane. Instead we identified several expanded groups of short chromatophore-targeted orphan proteins. Members of one of these groups are characterized by a single transmembrane helix, and others contain amphipathic helices. We hypothesize that these proteins are involved in modulating membrane permeability. Furthermore, we identified an expanded family of chromatophore-targeted helical repeat proteins. These proteins show similar domain architectures as known organelle-targeted octotrico peptide repeat expression regulators in algae and plants suggesting their convergent evolution as nuclear regulators of gene expression levels in the chromatophore.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were prepared from isolated chromatophores (CM) or P. chromatophora cells (PM) by ultracentrifugation. Lysate of isolated chromatophores (CL) was prepared after precipitation with trichloroacetic acid. Proteins prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by in-gel digestion with trypsin as described (PMID 24646099).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 (MS experiment 1) or MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 (MS experiment 2)  for peptide and protein identification and quantification. Searches were carried out on the basis of 60,108 sequences translated from a P. chromatophora transcriptome and the 867 translated genes predicted on the chromatophore genome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Organelle, Paulinella chromatophora, Evolution, Membrane, Chromatophore

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler)  Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf  Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler)  Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf  Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


