### Accession
PXD008932

### Title
BRAF and IKKα  involvement in DNA Damage Response

### Description
BRAF and IKKα are damage-responsive kinases required for 53BP1 and RIF1 co-recruitment to sites of DNA breaks and for timely resolution of DNA lesions. This provides a novel therapeutic opportunity based on combining BRAF or IKKα inhibitors with therapeutic agents that induce DNA damage

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates obtained in the different experimental conditions were processed and digested with trypsin and LysC (ratio enzyme sample 1:10, 1:10). Then, samples were purified using Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) beads. Phosphopeptide enriched samples were analysed by LCMSMS in an Orbitrap Velos Pro and in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed with proteome Discoverer software v1.4, using the search algorithm Mascot against Swiss Prot Human database. As Only peptides with a false discovery rate below 5% were considered for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylated IKK&#x3b1;(p45) is a nuclear active form of the IKK&#x3b1; kinase that is induced by the MAP kinases BRAF and TAK1 and promotes tumor growth independent of canonical NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. Insights into the sources of IKK&#x3b1;(p45) activation and its downstream substrates in the nucleus remain to be defined. Here, we discover that IKK&#x3b1;(p45) is rapidly activated by DNA damage independent of ATM-ATR, but dependent on BRAF-TAK1-p38-MAPK, and is required for robust ATM activation and efficient DNA repair. Abolishing BRAF or IKK&#x3b1; activity attenuates ATM, Chk1, MDC1, Kap1, and 53BP1 phosphorylation, compromises 53BP1 and RIF1 co-recruitment to sites of DNA lesions, and inhibits 53BP1-dependent fusion of dysfunctional telomeres. Furthermore, IKK&#x3b1; or BRAF inhibition synergistically enhances the therapeutic potential of 5-FU and irinotecan to eradicate chemotherapy-resistant metastatic human tumors in&#xa0;vivo. Our results implicate BRAF and IKK&#x3b1; kinases in the DDR and reveal a combination strategy for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Braf, Ikka, Dnadamage

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), University Pompeu Fabra (UPF)
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), University Pompeu Fabra (UPF)


