### Accession
PXD025000

### Title
SARS-CoV2 manipulates multiple NK ligands and inhibits NK activation, but this can be overcome by ADNKA, which is strongly activated by non-Spike targeting antibodies

### Description
SARS-CoV2 is recognised the antagonise the interferon response, and functioning interferon responses are critical in determining the severity of disease. However, whether the virus antagonises cellular immunity has not been determined. We used quantitative plasma membrane proteomics in lung epithelial cells to investigate viral manipulation of cell surface ligands, revealing that SARS-CoV2 does not affect HLA-I levels, but downregulates B7-H6, MICA, ULBP2, and Nectin1. Downregulation of these activating NK ligands correlated with a reduction in NK activation in response to infected cells. However, this activation could be overcome through antibody dependent NK activation (ADNKA). Surprisingly, monoclonal anti-spike antibodies were relatively poor activators of ADNKA, however expression of additional viral proteins, including ORF3a and Nucleocapsid, also led to NK activation following addition of antibodies. Furthermore, depletion of Spike antibodies revealed that while the neutralising response was dominated by anti-spike antibodies, these played a minor role in ADNKA against infected cells. Finally, we showed that anti-spike antibodies do mediate ADNKA following vaccination, but that by relying solely on spike to prime ADNKA, this response is considerably weaker than the responses seen following natural infection, and are not boosted by a second vaccine dose. Thus, the addition of extra viral proteins such as nucleocapsid to vaccines may recruit additional effector functions more strongly, reducing the impact of spike mutations on vaccine escape.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane was labelled using aminooxybiotin and PM proteins enriched using streptavidin-Agarose. Immobalised PM proiteins were digested on-bead with tryspin and the eluted proteins labelled with TMT pro reagents before pooling. Pooled peptides wre e fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC into 24 fractions which were subsequently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument in SPS mode.

### Data Protocol
raw files were processed in Peaks 10.5 and searched against Uniprot Human data abse appended with SARS-CoV2 proteome and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
A new study sheds light on how SARS-CoV-2 influences the way natural killer cells can recognize and kill infected cells.

### Keywords
Adnka, Nk ligands, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Cambridge, UK


