### Accession
PXD023516

### Title
XIST CHIRP-MS in GM12878 and K562 cell line

### Description
Identification of cell type-specific XIST co-factors during maintenance of X chromosome inactivation by XIST CHIRP-MS

### Sample Protocol
25 T152 flasks of GM12878 or K562 cells were used for ChIRP-MS (0.5-1 billion cells) as previously described (Chu et al., 2015). Cells were cross-linked in 3% formaldehyde for 30 min followed by 0.125 M glycine quenching for 5 min. Cross-linked cells were lysed in fresh NLB buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.0, 10 mM EDTA, and 1% SDS) and sonicated in 1 mL Covaris tube for 20 min with the following parameters (Fill level:10; Duty Cycle:15; PIP:140; Cycles/burst:200). The supernatant was pre-cleared with streptavidin beads (Invitrogen) and then treated with or without 30 ug/mL Rnase A (Cat # EN0531, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C for 45 min. Then the supernatant was hybridized with 8.8 uL XIST probes in Hybridization Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, 750 mM NaCl, and 15% Formamide) at 37°C rotating overnight and added with 880uL of streptavidin beads and rotate for 45 min at 37°C. Beads were washed 5 times in ChIRP Wash Buffer (2X SSC and 0.5% SDS) for 5 min at 37°C. RNA extraction can be performed using a small aliquot of post-CHIRP beads to assess the XIST RNA retrieval efficiency. XIST bound proteins were eluted from beads in Biotin Elution Buffer (12.5 mM biotin (Invitrogen), 7.5 mM HEPES, 75 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM EDTA, 0.15% SDS, 0.075% sarkosyl, 15% Formamide, and 0.02% Na-Deoxycholate) at RT for 20 min then shake at 65°C for 10min, finally precipitated by TCA at 4°C overnight. The proteins were pelleted at 16000 rcf at 4°C for 30 min and the protein pellets were washed once with cold acetone and air-dry for 1 min, then the proteins were solubilized in 1X laemmli sample buffer and boiled at 95C for 30 min. Final proteins were size-selected on 4-12% NuPAGE gels for mass spectrometry. Gel slices were excised and diced to 1 mm cubes prior to proteolytic digestion. Samples were reduced in 5 mM DTT in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 55°C for 30 mins. After removing the residual solvent, proteins were alkylated with 10 mM acrylamide in the same buffer, rinsed with 50% acetonitrile, and then digested using Trypsin-Lys C (Promega) overnight at 37°C to obtain peptides. Samples were centrifuged to condense particulates so that the solvent including peptides could be collected. A further peptide extraction was performed by the addition of 60% acetonitrile, 39.9% water, 0.1% formic acid and incubation for 10-15 min before collection. Samples were dried by speed vac prior to resuspension in 2% aqueous acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The collected mass spectra were analyzed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) for peptide identification and protein inference. The search was performed against the Uniprot homo sapiens database, including isoforms. Cysteine modified with propionamide was set as a fixed modification in the search, with other typical modifications, e.g. oxidation of methionine, included as variable modifications. Data were held to a 12 ppm mass tolerance for precursors and 0.4 Da for MS/MS fragments, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Data were validated using the standard reverse-decoy technique at a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chirp-ms

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Dermatology, Stanford University

### Submitter
Bingfei Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Y. Chang
Department of Dermatology, Stanford University


