### Accession
PXD019239

### Title
STING mediates lupus via the activation of conventional dendritic cell maturation and plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation

### Description
BMDCs from WT, Fcgr2b-/- and Stinggt/gt   were cultured, then stimulated with DMXAA for 3 and 6 hr. Cells were collected and lysed with 1 % IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% TritonX-100, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 5% glycerol, 100 mM beta-Glycerophosphate, 2 mM Na3VO4 and 1X proteases inhibitor cocktail (Roche). First, antibody were mixed with the magnetic beads by adding 10 µg of STING antibody with 400 ug of SureBeads™ Protein A magnetic beads (Biorad, California, USA) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Then, Protein lysates were added and incubated with antibody-conjugated beads for overnight at 4oC.  After incubation, the beads were washed 3 times with wash buffer (150 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4). Samples were eluted by adding 5X laemmli buffer and, boiled 950C for 10 minutes. The eluted protein samples were separated by 10 % SDS-PAGE gel. The STING interacting proteins from co-IP were analyzed by in-gel digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis of mature BMDC was studied using a dimethyl labeling method. Briefly, BMDC from WT mice, Fcgr2b-/- mice, and Fcgr2b-/-.Stinggt/gt mice were cultured, and then stimulated with 10 ug/ml of DMXAA (STING ligand) for 24 hours. Three hundred microgram proteins per group from BMDC were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin [1:50 (w/w)]. Next, stimulated BMDC’s peptides from WT mice, Fcgr2b-/- mice, and Fcgr2b-/-.Stinggt/gt mice were labeled with light reagents [formaldehyde (Sigma) and sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma)], medium reagents [formaldehyde-d2 (CIL) and sodium cyanoborohydride], and heavy reagents [deuterated and 13C-labeled formaldehyde (Sigma) and cyanoborodeuteride (CIL)], respectively, for an hour at room temperature. The peptides were fractionated and subjected to LC-MS/MS (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ ver. 2.1 and MAXQUANT™ ver. 1.4.1.0 software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. We classified the protein function by using the online resource Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, v6.8, https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and Reactome (https://reactome.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lupus, Lyn, Dendritic cell, Sting, Interferon, Fcgr2b

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Poorichaya Somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


