### Accession
PXD020042

### Title
An Undesirable Side Effect of EDC-catalyzed Carboxyl Labeling Approach

### Description
Carbodiimide catalyzed carboxyl and amine conjugation (amidation) has been widely used to protect carboxyl groups. N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N’-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) is the most commonly used carbodiimide reagent in protein chemis-try due to its high efficiency and high solubility in aqueous media. It has also been applied in different proteomics studies including protein terminomics, protein glycosylation and crosslinking. Herein, we report that the EDC catalyzed amidation could cause a +155 Da side-modification at the tyrosine residue and severely hamper the identification of Tyr-containing peptides. We discovered the extremely low identification rate of Tyr-containing peptides in different published studies that employed EDC-catalyzed amidation. We carried out a systematic study and discovered a +155 Da side-modification occur-ring specifically on Tyr as the addition of EDC. Consideration of the side-modification in database search enabled the identification of 13 times more Tyr-containing peptides. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the treatment with carbonate-containing buffer could effectively reduce the side-product. Our study also implies that chemical reactions in proteomic studies should be carefully evaluated prior to their wide applications.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction. HeLa (Human epithelial carcinoma) Cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM (10% fetal bovine serum) with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. HeLa Cells were collected by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 20 min and washed twice with PBS (pH 7.4). The cell pellets were then resuspended in lysis buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB and 10mM DTT). The slurry solution was sonicated for 30 min (2 s sonication and 4 s intervals) in ice incubation. After sonication, the sample was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was collected. The cell lysate was then incubated for 30 min at 37°C for reduction and then for 1 h at 25 °C with 100 mM acrylamide for alkylation. Amine Acetylation. Acetylation was conducted to protect primary amines as previously described.16 Firstly, the sample solution was incubated twice with 10 mM Ac-NHS at 25 °C for 2 h each time; secondly, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.80) was added and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min to quench the acetylation; Finally, 100 mM NH2OH was added and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min to reverse the undesired partial acetylation on Ser and Thr residues. EDC catalyzed amidation. FASP method was applied as previously described. The samples were transferred to Microcon YM-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800 g for buffer displacement with carboxyl protection buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM MES and 2 M ethanolamine, pH 4.5). After three-time buffer displacement, freshly prepared 5 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC were added to trigger the reaction. After 2 h reaction at 25 °C, an additional freshly prepared 100 mM EDC was added and the solution was incubated for another 2 h.  Protein Digestion. Before digestion, another three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer (200 mM TEAB, pH 7.5 or 200 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) was conducted. Trypsin was added at the ratio of enzyme: protein as 1: 50 and the digestion was carried out at 37°C for overnight. After digestion, the solution was filtered out and then followed by once wash with 20% ACN. The filtrate fractions were pooled, and then concentrated to 1 mg/mL using Speedvac. Sample desalting. The desalting was carried out on a homemade Poros R3 microcolumn. Before loading, the samples are acidified with 20% TFA. The workflow of sample desalting is same as described before: washing with 100% ACN, flushing with 1% TFA, loading acidified sample, washing with 1% TFA and eluting with 30% ACN and 60% ACN. The two eluates were pooled and dried in Speedvac. The dried sample was stored at -20 °C freezer. LC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were firstly loaded on a home-made C18 pre-column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ger-many)) and then analyzed on a home-made C18 analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 25 cm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). Samples were eluted using the following gradients: 2-5% B in 3 min, 5-28% B in 67 min, 28–35% B in 5 min. 35-90% B in 2 min, and 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: After MS scan (resolution of 60 000 at m/z 400; AGC target of 1e6 and maximum IIT of 100 ms), the 15 most abundant ions were automatically selected and fragmented in HCD mode (AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IIT of 100 ms; isolation width of 2 m/z; resolution of 15 000 at m/z 400; normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%). Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, U.K.). Human protein database (20160213, 20,186 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: Arg-C as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine, acetylation on lysine, ethanolamine protection on aspartate and glutamate as fixed modifications; acetylation on protein N-terminus, ethanolamine protection on protein C-terminus, oxidation on methionine, EDC on tyrosine as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results.

### Publication Abstract
Carbodiimide-catalyzed carboxyl and amine conjugation (amidation) has been widely used to protect carboxyl groups. <i>N</i>-(3-(Dimethylamino)propyl)-<i>N</i>'-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) is the most common carbodiimide reagent in protein chemistry due to its high catalytic efficiency in aqueous media. The reaction has also been applied in different proteomic studies including protein terminomics, glycosylation, and interaction. Herein, we report that the EDC-catalyzed amidation could cause a +155 Da side modification on the tyrosine residue and severely hamper the identification of Tyr-containing peptides. We revealed the extremely low identification rate of Tyr-containing peptides in different published studies employing the EDC-catalyzed amidation. We discovered a +155 Da side modification occurring specifically on Tyr and decoded it as the addition of EDC. Consideration of the side modification in a database search enabled the identification of 13 times more Tyr-containing peptides. Furthermore, we successfully developed an efficient method to remove the side modification. Our results also imply that chemical reactions in proteomic studies should be carefully evaluated prior to their wide applications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020042.

### Keywords
Tyrosine, C-tails, Carboxyl protection, Edc

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Qingqing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


