### Accession
PXD022334

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of SFTPCI73T expressing patient-specific pluripotent stem cell-derived alveolar epithelial type 2 cells and their gene-edited corrected counterparts.

### Description
We performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of cells derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) using our previously described distal lung directed differentiation protocol to generate alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (iAEC2s). We used the SPC2 human iPSC line and specifically the SPC2-ST-B2 (SFTPCtdT/WT) and SPC2-ST-C11 (SFTPCI73T/tdT) clones containing a SFTPCtdTomato knock-in reporter. SFTPCtdTomato+ cells were sorted on day 41 and again on day 79 of differentiation. iAEC2s were single-cell passaged in self-renewing 3D alveolosphere cultures approximately every 2 weeks through day 113. Live SFTPCtdTomato+ iAEC2s were sorted on day 113 and processed for mass spectrometry. We find that mutant (SFTPCI73T/tdT) iAEC2s display a less proliferative and more mature AEC2 phenotype compared to their corrected (SFTPCtdT/WT) counterparts with a concomitant upregulation of lysosomal and autophagy related pathways and activation of the NF-κB pathway in mutant cells.

### Sample Protocol
To generate iAEC2s, we performed PSC directed differentiation via definitive endoderm into NKX2-1 lung progenitors using methods we have previously described (Hawkins et al., JCI 2017; Jacob et al., Cell Stem Cell 2017; Jacob et al., Nat Protoc 2019). In brief, cells maintained in mTeSR1 media were differentiated into definitive endoderm using the STEMdiff Definitive Endoderm Kit (StemCell Technologies) for 3 days (day 0-3) and after the endoderm-induction stage, cells were dissociated with gentle cell dissociation reagent and passaged into 6-well dishes pre-coated with growth factor reduced Matrigel in ‘‘DS/SB’’ anteriorization media, consisting of complete serum-free differentiation media (cSFDM) base as previously described (Jacob et al., Cell Stem Cell 2017; Jacob et al., Nat Protoc 2019), supplemented with 2 µM Dorsomorphin (‘‘DS’’; Stemgent) and 10 µM SB431542 (‘‘SB’’; Tocris). For the first 24 hour after passaging, 10 µM Y-27632 was added to the media. After anteriorization in DS/SB media for 3 days (day 3-6), cells were cultured in ‘‘CBRa’’ lung progenitor-induction media until day 13, as we have previously published (Jacob et al., Cell Stem Cell 2017). ‘‘CBRa’’ media consists of cSFDM base supplemented with 3 µM CHIR99021 (Tocris), 10 ng/ml recombinant human BMP4 (rhBMP4, R&D Systems), and 100 nM retinoic acid (RA, Sigma). On day 13 of differentiation, live cells were sorted on a high-speed cell sorter (MoFlo Legacy or MoFlo Astrios EQ) to isolate NKX2-1+ lung progenitors based on CD47hi/CD26neg gating (Hawkins et al., JCI 2017). Sorted lung progenitors were resuspended in undiluted growth factor reduced 3D Matrigel (Corning) at a concentration of approximately 400 cells/µl and distal/alveolar differentiation of cells was performed in CK+DCI media, consisting of cSFDM base supplemented with 3 µM CHIR99021, 10 ng/mL rhKGF (CK), and 50 nM dexamethasone (Sigma), 0.1 mM 8-Bromoadenosine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate sodium salt (Sigma) and 0.1 mM 3-Isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX; Sigma) (DCI). SFTPCtdTomato+ cells were sorted on day 41 and again on day 79 of differentiation. iAEC2s were single-cell passaged in self-renewing 3D alveolosphere cultures approximately every 10-12 days (day 57, day 68, day 79, day 91, day 103) through day 113. On day 113, live SFTPCtdTomato+ cells were sorted washed with PBS, pelleted, and stored at -80°C. Cell pellets were thawed in 300 µl of lysis buffer composed of 8 M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCo3), 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), phosphatase (PhosSTOP™, Roche) and protease (Complete™, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) inhibitors and then sonicated on ice using a Branson probe (40 seconds, in 2 second pulses) . Lysates were alkylated in 12 mM iodoacetamide. Protein was quantified by the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad) and samples were diluted with 7 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each sample was digested overnight at 37°C with 2 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo). Digests were terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.1%, de-salted (Waters Sep-Pak), and resuspended in 100 mM HEPES buffer. Total peptide concentration was quantified (Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay, Thermo). Then 100 µg peptide from each sample (volume adjusted to 100 µl with 100 mM HEPES buffer) was mixed with a unique amine-reactive heavy isotope-coded isobaric TMT (TMT-11plex) reagent, allowing for multiplex of samples prior to LC/MS. After pooling, the samples were desalted and dried, and a total of about 0.6 mg of labeled peptide was suspended in 300 µl buffer containing 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and 2% acetonitrile. This mixture was injected onto a reverse-phase Waters Xbridge C18 HPLC column (Waters) connected to an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH) to mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH) over 48 minutes. Fractions were collected every minute, and every 12th fraction was pooled, yielding 12 final fractions, each containing approximately 100 µg peptide. Most of each fraction (95%) was set aside for phospho-peptide enrichment using Fe-NTA magnetic beads (Cube Biotech) while the remaining 5% was analyzed separately by mass spectrometry as bulk proteome measurements, totaling 24 injections. Fractionated peptide samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer connected to Easy nLC 1200 ultra high pressure chromatography system (Thermo). Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in mobile phase A solvent (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile), loaded onto a reverse-phase nano-trap column with mobile phase A, (75μm i.d. × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18 3μm, 100Å, Thermo), and were separated over an EASY-Spray column, (ES803A, Thermo) using a gradient (2% to 35% over 120 min) of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275°C, and with a potential of 2100V applied to the emitter. All data were acquired operating in data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (60,000) MS precursor ion scan (350-1500 m/z range) was performed to select the 12 most intense ions for subsequent fragmentation using HCD (NCE 33 @ 45,000 resolution). Resulting RAW files were converted and searched using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.7.0; http://maxquant.org/) under standard settings against the Uniprot human reference protein sequence database (downloaded: April 16, 2019) allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, variable modifications: phosphorylation at S, T, and Y residues, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy. The MaxQuant output files designated “Phospho(STY)sites” and “ProteinGroups” were used for data normalization and other statistical analysis. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R: A language and environment for Statistical Computing (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org), version 3.6.1. The protein groups and phosphosite tables from MaxQuant were filtered to eliminate entries labelled as reverse hits, potential contaminants, and “only identified by site”. Protein quantitation required at values in at least 70% of TMT channels. The TMT-reporter intensity values were log2 transformed and Loess-normalized. For differential analysis, the LIMMA (Ritchie et al., 2015) R package was used to fit a linear model accounting for the cell lines. Moderated t-tests were corrected with the Benjamini-Hochberg method for FDR. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the fgsea R package (doi: 10.1101/060012) using the Hallmark (H) and Curated (C2) gene set libraries from MSigDB (doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102) with ranked lists where the gene rank is defined as -log(p value)*sign(log2 fold change) (Reimand et al., 2019). In the case of duplicate proteins mapping to a common gene symbol, the one with the highest absolute value rank was retained. Heatmaps were generated with the ComplexHeatmap R package (DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313).

### Publication Abstract
Alveolar epithelial type 2 cell (AEC2) dysfunction is implicated in the pathogenesis of adult and pediatric interstitial lung disease (ILD), including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF); however, identification of disease-initiating mechanisms has been impeded by inability to access primary AEC2s early on. Here, we present a human in&#xa0;vitro model permitting investigation of epithelial-intrinsic events culminating in AEC2 dysfunction, using patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying an AEC2-exclusive disease-associated variant (SFTPC<sup>I73T</sup>). Comparing syngeneic mutant versus gene-corrected iPSCs after differentiation into AEC2s (iAEC2s), we find that mutant iAEC2s accumulate large amounts of misprocessed and mistrafficked pro-SFTPC protein, similar to in&#xa0;vivo changes, resulting in diminished AEC2 progenitor capacity, perturbed proteostasis, altered bioenergetic programs, time-dependent metabolic reprogramming, and nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) pathway activation. Treatment of SFTPC<sup>I73T</sup>-expressing iAEC2s with hydroxychloroquine, a medication used in pediatric ILD, aggravates the observed perturbations. Thus, iAEC2s provide a patient-specific preclinical platform for modeling the epithelial-intrinsic dysfunction at ILD inception.

### Keywords
Pulmonary fibrosis, Proteomics, Pluripotent stem cells, Autophagy, Alveolar epithelial type 2 cells

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Regenerative Medicine, Boston University and Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA  The Pulmonary Center and Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA

### Submitter
Ryan Hekman

### Lab Head
Dr Darrell N. Kotton
Center for Regenerative Medicine, Boston University and Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA  The Pulmonary Center and Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA


