### Accession
PXD028510

### Title
The human proteome project, C-HPP 18 chromosome project

### Description
The Russian part of C-HPP is aimed to identify proteins encoded by the 18 human chromosome. In this project, 3 liver tissue samples were studied by standart SRM and 2 dimensional liquid chromatography approach to enhance the sensitivity of the MS method. The total amount of proteins found in samples encoded by the 18 human chromosome is 118. UPS1 used as calibration and to measure the sensitivity of SRM method.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue (0.1 mg) was lysed in a buffer containing 2 M urea, 1% deoxycholic acid, 15% acetonitrile, 147 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, and 10 mM Na/Pi buffer (pH 7.4). The crude homogenate was sonicated, and the resulting solution was heated to 60 °C for 20 min. After cooling, the proteins were alkylated with 50 mM 2-CAA. The samples were diluted with 100 mM TEA (pH 8.0) to a total protein concentration of 1 mg/mL. Trypsin was added at a 1:100 w/w ratio, and proteins were digested at 38 °C overnight. The digestion was stopped by formic acid at a final concentration of 3%. Samples were centrifuged at 10000×g at 4 °C for 10 min. The peptide samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained by the SRM SIS analysis were processed using the Skyline (version 20.1) software. The results were manually inspected using the Skyline software to find transitions similar to those in the target peptides. Briefly, the peptide was considered to be detected in the run if the differences between relative intensities for three transitions of endogenous and isotopically labeled peptides did not exceed 25%, and the transition chromatographic profiles of endogenous peptides were identical to the corresponding transitions of stable isotope-labeled peptides. For each peptide, a calibration curve was built and the limit of detection (LOD) was determined in a pure standard solution. When analyzing the data, only those signals of endogenous peptides were accepted that exceeded the level of the minimum signal determined during calibration. If the signal was below the LOD but was reproduced in each repetition, such a signal was received. Quantitative analysis was based on the ratio of endogenous peptide peak area and stable isotope-labeled peptide peak area calculated using the Skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
The data was acquired from 3 normal human liver tissues by LC-MS methods. The tissue liver samples from male subjects post mortem were obtained from ILSBio LLC (https://bioivt.com/). Liver tissue was frozen in liquid nitrogen, transported and shipped on dry ice. The proteins were extracted and purified followed up by trypsin hydrolysis. The peptide mixture was aliquoted and analyzed by different LC-MS approaches: one-dimensional shotgun LC-MS, two-dimensional LC-MS, two-dimensional SRM SIS (Selected Reaction Monitoring with Stable Isotope-labeled peptide Standards). The Shotgun assay resulted in a qualitative in-depth human liver proteome, and a semi-quantitative iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) value was calculated to show the relative protein content of the sample. Absolute quantitative concentrations of proteins encoded by human chromosome 18 using SRM SIS were obtained.

### Keywords
Ups1, C-hpp 18, Liver, Mrm, Srm, Chromosome 18

### Affiliations
IBMC (Institute of Biomedical Chemistry)
Department of mass spectrometry and proteomics, IBMC, Russia

### Submitter
Nikita Vavilov

### Lab Head
Dr Victor G. Zgoda
Department of mass spectrometry and proteomics, IBMC, Russia


