### Accession
PXD040736

### Title
Protein content and proximity map of yeast nuclear mRNPs

### Description
We isolated nuclear mRNPs from yeast using an endogenous bi-molecular tagging approach on Sub2 and Hpr1.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative mass spectrometry: TCA-precipitated samples were solubilized by addition of 50 µL of 1x SDC buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 100 mM Tris, pH 8) and sonication using a Bioruptor Plus system (Diogenode) for 10 x 30 sec at high intensity. After incubation for 20 min at 37°C, the samples were diluted 1:1 with water and digested overnight at 37°C by addition of 1 µg of LysC (Wako). Thereafter, the solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting the peptides using SCX stage tips. Peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and 1/3 of the peptides were analyzed using a LC-MS/MS set-up comprising an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column (30 cm, inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) was heated to 60°C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) from 8% to 30% with an additional increase to 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1650 Th (resolution of 60k at m/z = 200 Th), and up to 10 of the most abundant precursors were selected and fragmented using Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy value of 28). Normalized AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3 x 106 and 1 x 105, respectively, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms for the MS1 scans and 60 ms for MS2 scans  Cross-linking mass spectrometry TCA-precipitated, BS3 cross-linked samples were solubilized by addition of 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris and sonication using a Bioruptor Plus system (Diogenode) for 10 x 30 sec at high intensity. After dilution to 4 M, samples were incubated with 1 mM MgCl2 and 1% Benzonase to remove RNA. For reduction and alkylation, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA were added. After incubation for 20 min at 37°C, samples were diluted 1:3 with water and digested overnight at 37°C by addition of 1 µg each of LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega). Thereafter, the solution was acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting of the peptides using SCX stage tips. Desalted peptides were fractionated into 8 concatenated fractions using high pH reversed-phased fractionation. Peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and 1/2 of the peptides were analyzed using a LC-MS/MS set-up comprising an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column (30 cm, inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) was heated to 60°C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 30% over 40 min followed by an increase to 95% over 10 min then 95% over the next 5 min and finally the percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1650 Th (resolution of 60k at m/z = 200 Th), and up to 15 of the most abundant precursors were selected and fragmented using stepped Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 19, 27, 35). The MS2 spectra were recorded with a dynamic m/z range (resolution of 30k at m/z = 200 Th). Normalized AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 300 % and 100 %, respectively, within a maximum injection time of 25 ms for the MS1 scan. The maximum injection time was set to "auto" for the MS2 scans. Charge state 2 was excluded from fragmentation to enrich the fragmentation scans for cross-linked peptide precursors.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative mass spectrometry: Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 2.0.1.069) with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the Uniprot database of S. cerevisiae with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant enables individual peptide mass tolerances by default, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. LysC was set as protease. The match-between-run option was enabled. The iBAQ algorithm was used for calculation of abundances for the identified proteins.  Crosslinking mass spectrometry: The acquired raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400) with XlinkX/PD nodes integrated70). To identify the cross-linked peptide pairs, a database search was performed against a reduced FASTA containing the sequences of the proteins of interest and a contaminant database. BS3/DSS was set as a cross-linker. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at CSM and cross-links level was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are at the center of the central dogma of molecular biology. In eukaryotic cells, these long ribonucleic acid polymers do not exist as naked transcripts; rather, they associate with mRNA-binding proteins to form messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complexes. Recently, global proteomic and transcriptomic studies have provided comprehensive inventories of mRNP components. However, knowledge of the molecular features of distinct mRNP populations has remained elusive. We purified endogenous nuclear mRNPs from <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> by harnessing the mRNP biogenesis factors THO and Sub2 in biochemical procedures optimized to preserve the integrity of these transient ribonucleoprotein assemblies. We found that these mRNPs are compact particles that contain multiple copies of Yra1, an essential protein with RNA-annealing properties. To investigate their molecular and architectural organization, we used a combination of proteomics, RNA sequencing, cryo-electron microscopy, cross-linking mass spectrometry, structural models, and biochemical assays. Our findings indicate that yeast nuclear mRNPs are packaged around an intricate network of interconnected proteins capable of promoting RNA-RNA interactions via their positively charged intrinsically disordered regions. The evolutionary conservation of the major mRNA-packaging factor (yeast Yra1 and Aly/REF in metazoans) points toward a general paradigm governing nuclear mRNP packaging.

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (xl-ms), Mrna synthesis, Ribonucleoprotein particles, Mrnp assembly, Rna annealing

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Department of Structural Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried/Munich, D-82152, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Conti
Department of Structural Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried/Munich, D-82152, Germany


