### Accession
PXD022019

### Title
The influence of delay in mononuclear cell isolation on acute myeloid leukemia phosphorylation profiles

### Description
Phosphorylation is a dynamic, highly regulated post-translational modification that may be affected by variation in pre-analytical sample handling, hampering the translational value of phosphoproteomic-based data. Here, we investigate the temporal effect of delay in mononuclear cell isolation on acute myeloid leukemia (AML) phosphorylation profiles. We performed MS on immuno-precipitated phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing peptides isolated from AML samples after seven pre-defined delays before sample processing (direct processing, thirty minutes, one hour, two hours, three hours, four hours and 24 hours delay). Up to four hours, phosphorylation profiles showed limited variation. However, in samples processed with a delay of 24 hours, we observed significant change in phosphorylation profiles, with differential phosphorylation of 22 phosphopeptides (p < 0.01). This included increased phosphorylation of phosphopeptides of JNK and p38 kinases indicative of stress response activation. Based on these results, we conclude that processing of AML samples should be standardized at all times and should occur within four hours after sample collection.

### Sample Protocol
Whole PB or BM was collected from patients in heparin tubes. Patient material was pooled and MNC load determine before isolation. To enrich for MNCs, material was loaded into tubes containing Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare, Chicago, US. For snap-frozen samples, material was snap-frozen as PBS washed cell pellets using liquid nitrogen (LN2) and stored at -80°C. DMSO-frozen samples were washed using PBS and resuspended in half a volume RPMI 1640 medium with L-glutamine and with 20% FCS, before the same volume of RPMI-1640 supplemented with 20% FCS and 20% was added. Patient samples were lysed in urea lysis buffer for phosphoproteomics (8 M urea, 1 mM orthovanadate, 2.5 mM pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, MilliQ) followed by 1 min. of vortexing and subsequent sonication. Protein content was determined using the DCTM Protein Assay (BioRad Hercules, USA). Sample quality was examined by Coomassie-blue staining. . Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA. Phosphopeptides were desalted using 200-µl STAGE tip fitted with a 16G-needle punch of SDB-XC SPE material at the narrow end, which was previously washed with 20 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 20 µl 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were loaded and centrifuged for 3 min at 1000G. SDB-XC beds were then washed with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, and desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.  Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 500 µg peptides using 2.5 mg  titaniumdioxide beads from GL sciences (10 micron) equilibrated withl of 300 mM acid lactic solution. Desalted peptides were diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/ml lactic acid, 0.07% TFA, 53% ACN) and were loaded in the tips. Tips were washed with 200 µl lactic acid solution, and secondly with 200 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps with 50 µl 0.5% piperidine and 50 µl 5% piperidine, and quenched in 100 µl 20% H3PO4. Phosphopeptides were desalted using SDB-XC STAGE-tips as described above.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4. 0 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.  Q Exactive HF data was acquired (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) at resolution 120. in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15.000 in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide, phosphosite  and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (2014_01 42104 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Lysate searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized (‘normalised intensity’) on summed total intensity of the corresponding lysate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Tyrosine kinase, Aml, Ischemia, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphotyrosine, Pre-analytical variables, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


