### Accession
PXD008347

### Title
Repetitive somatic embryogenesis induced cytological and proteomic changes in propagated embryogenic lines of Pseudotsuga menziesii [Mirb.]

### Description
Objectives: to characterize and to better understand changes at the cellular and molecular levels, in embryogenic lines in Douglas-fir obtained after repetitive somatic embryogenesis, that could explain improvement of their embryogenic potential : to primary lines, secondary ones showed an increase of their embryogenic potential; then tertiary lines showed again an improved embryogenic potential compared to second lines. Interestingly, the proteomic analysis further revealed different sets of significant proteins suggesting that each cycle of repetitive somatic embryogenesis is promoting substantial genome-wide rearrangement of the gene expression pattern.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble proteins extracts were prepared from four biological replicates for each samples (150 mg f.w. of frozen EMs) with 1 ml of urea extraction buffer (4 M urea, 0.1 % v/v SDS 10 %, 0.1 M DTT, 80 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 10 % v/v glycerol).

### Data Protocol
Protein sample were loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel, stained with colloidal blue. Gel bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel, destained and digested by trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (C18 PepMapTM trap column, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.2 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70,000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3E6 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1E5 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a Pseudotsuga menziesii v1 transcriptome database from PineRefSeq (54,595 entries, August 2016, http://dendrome.ucdavis.edu/ftp/Genome_Data/genome/pinerefseq/Psme/v1.0/gene_models/). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionine (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Data processing includes the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across all samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Raw data normalization based on ratio median calculated from LC-MS features, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides). Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryogenesis induction, Plant growth regulators, Somatic embryogenesis, Douglas-fir

### Affiliations
University of Bordeaux, Center of Functionnal Genomics, Proteome Platform
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
University of Bordeaux, Center of Functionnal Genomics, Proteome Platform


