### Accession
PXD012128

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Mammalian COPII Vesicles

### Description
By combining in vitro COPII vesicle reconstitutions and SILAC-based mass spectrometric analysis this study aims to identify the core proteome of mammalian COPII vesicles. Furthermore proteomes generated from vesicles with different Sec24 isoforms have been investigated with the same approach to identify isoform-dependent cargo proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Light and heavy SILAC labeled, purified COPII vesicels have been mixed in a 1:1 ratio and briefly run (approximately 1cm) into a 10% Tris-Glycine gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), stained with Roti®-Blue colloidal coomassie (Roth GmbH, Germany). 2 gel pieces per sample have been reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin using the DigestPro MS platform (Intavis AG, Germany) following the protocol described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 2006;1(6):2856-2860.). Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LCMS) using an UltiMate 3000 LC (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to either an Orbitrap Elite or a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides analyzed by the Orbitrap Elite were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a flow rate of 30µl/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75µm x 250mm) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a 2h gradient of 3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 1 % acetonitrile) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 30 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Peptides analyzed on the Q-Exactive were directly injected to an analytical column (75µm x 300mm), which was self-packed with 3µm Reprosil Pur-AQ C18 material (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany) and separated using the same gradient as described before. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using standard settings for each instrument type and searched against a human specific database extracted from UniProt (UniProt Consortium). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification; Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine and acetylation of protein N-termini was set as variable modification. ‘Requantify’ as well as ‘Match Between Runs’ options were both enabled. Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular transport and homeostasis of the endomembrane system in eukaryotic cells depend on the&#xa0;formation and fusion of vesicular carriers. Coat protein complex (COP) II vesicles export newly synthesized secretory proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), whereas COPI vesicles facilitate traffic from the Golgi to the ER and intra-Golgi transport. Mammalian cells express various isoforms of COPII and COPI coat proteins. To investigate the roles of coat protein paralogs, we have combined in&#xa0;vitro vesicle reconstitution from semi-intact cells with SILAC-based mass spectrometric analysis. Here, we describe the core proteomes of mammalian COPII and COPI vesicles. Whereas the compositions of COPII vesicles reconstituted with various isoforms of the cargo-binding subunit Sec24 differ depending on the paralog used, all of the isoforms of the COPI coat produce COPI-coated vesicles with strikingly similar protein compositions.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Copii vesicels, Silac

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Felix Wieland Heidelberg University Biochemistry Centre (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) - Heidelberg

### Submitter
Bernd Hessling

### Lab Head
Dr Felix T Wieland
Prof. Dr. Felix Wieland Heidelberg University Biochemistry Centre (BZH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


