### Accession
PXD026894

### Title
Phosphorylation regulates arginine-rich RNA-binding protein solubility and oligomerization

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) within splicing factor RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), such as phosphorylation, regulate several critical steps in RNA metabolism including spliceosome assembly, alternative splicing and mRNA export. Notably, the arginine-/serine-rich (RS) domains in SR proteins are densely modified by phosphorylation compared with the remainder of the proteome. Previously, we showed that dephosphorylation of SRSF2 regulated increased interactions with similar arginine-rich RBPs U1-70K and LUC7L3. In this work, we dephosphorylated nuclear extracts using phosphatase in vitro and analyzed equal amounts of detergent-soluble and -insoluble fractions by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Correlation network analysis resolved 27 distinct modules of differentially soluble nucleoplasm proteins. We found classes of arginine-rich RBPs that decrease in solubility following dephosphorylation and enrich to the insoluble pelleted fraction, including the SR protein family and the SR-like LUC7L RBP family. However, increased insolubility was not observed across broad classes of RBPs. Phosphorylation regulated SRSF2 structure, as dephosphorylated SRSF2 formed high molecular weight oligomeric species in vitro. Reciprocally, phosphorylation of SRSF2 by serine-/arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) in vitro prevented high molecular weight SRSF2 species formation. Furthermore, we pharmacologically inhibited SRPKs in mammalian cells and observed increased cytoplasmic granules as well as the formation of cytoplasmic SRSF2 tubular structures that associate with microtubules by immunocytochemical staining. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that phosphorylation may be a critical modification that prevents arginine-rich RBP insolubility and oligomerization.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium [DMEM, high glucose (Gibco)] supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco), and maintained at 37°C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% (v/v) CO2 in air. Cells were grown to 70-80% confluency in 10 cm2 culture dishes and transfected with 10 μg SRSF2-myc plasmid and 30 μg linear polyethylenimine (PEI). Cells were harvested and fractionated to enrich for nucleoplasm. nucleoplasm fractions (100 µg) were incubated with either mock (distilled water) or 50 Units of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (QuickCIP, NEB M0525L) for 1 hour at 37°C. Following this, Laemmli sample buffer (8% glycerol, 2% SDS, 50mM Tris pH 6.8, 3.25% beta-mercaptoethanol) was added to each sample to 1X and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and run by SDS PAGE. For sedimentation assays, nucleoplasm fractions (100 µg) were incubated with either distilled water (mock) or 50 Units of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (QuickCIP, NEB M0525L) and brought up to 100 uL with PBS. The samples were heated at 37°C for 1 hour. Following QuickCIP dephosphorylation, 50 µL of the 100 µL sample was added to polycarbonate ultracentrifuge tubes. Samples were spun at 100,000xg for 1 hour at 4°C. The supernatant (vol=50 µL) was transferred to a LoBind tube (Eppendorf 0030108442) and the insoluble pellet was resuspended in 50 µL 8M Urea and transferred to a separate LoBind tube. The pellet sample was sonicated for 1 sec on/off cycles at 25% amplitude until the pellet disappeared. For western blotting, 7.5 µL of total (pre-spin) fractions were added and 15 µL of soluble and pellet fractions were added. For mass spectrometry analysis 30 µL of soluble and pellet fractions were used. Thirty microliters of soluble and pellet fractions were normalized to 50 µL with 8M urea buffer. Next, 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (RT), then 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ABC was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 min at RT. Samples were then digested overnight with 1 µg of Lys-C (Wako 121-05063). Following Lys-C digestion, samples were diluted to 1M urea and digested overnight with 1 µg of Trypsin (ThermoFisher 90057). The next day samples were incubated with acidifying buffer [10% Formic Acid (FA), 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)] and centrifuged for 2 min. Sample pH was checked to be less than 3. Sample were desalted on an Oasis® PRIME HLB 10 mg plate (Oasis 186008053) and washes were flowed through columns by a 96-well Positive Pressure processor (Waters 186006961). Samples were washed first with methanol, then Buffer A (0.1% TFA). The digested samples were then loaded onto Oasis® PRIME HLB 10 mg plates (Oasis 186008053), washed with Buffer A twice, and then eluted with Buffer C [50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA]. The resulting elutant was lyophilized using a SpeedVac (Labconco 731022). Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% FA, 0.03% TFA, 1% ACN) and separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 μm Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (20 cm × 75 μm internal diameter; New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a NanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters). Linear gradient elution was performed using Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 0% acetonitrile) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) starting from 3% Buffer B to 40% over 100 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer in top speed mode. One full MS1 scan was collected followed by as many data-dependent MS/MS scans that could fit within a three second cycle. MS1 scans (400-1600 m/z range, 400,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 in profile mode with FAIMS CV set at -45. The MS/MS spectra (1.6 m/z isolation width, 35% collision energy, 10,000 AGC), were acquired in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data files for the 16 samples were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda (84) was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human protein sequences (X sequences, downloaded August 9, 2020) with 245 contaminant proteins as a parameter for the search. Methionine oxidation (+ 15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) and STY-phosphorylation (+ 79.966 Da) were included as variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+ 57.0215 Da). Fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 miscleavages allowed in the search. A precursor mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ± 4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. Phosphorylated peptides were not quantified. Protein group intensity was used for protein quantitation. The quantitation method did not consider reverse, contaminant, and by site only protein identifications, leaving 5,017 proteins for downstream analysis. Prior to network analysis, the nucleoplasm proteome (5,017 proteins) was culled to select for proteins with less than or equal to 50% missing values (intensity values in 8 out of 16 samples; 4,366 proteins). The intensity values were then log2-transformed. Missing protein intensity values were imputed using random numbers drawn from a normal distribution of observed protein intensity values of each sample (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8, calculated separately for each column) in Perseus v1.6.15.0. The R package Weighted Gene Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA) v1.68 was used to cluster proteins by abundance into groups of proteins with similar solubility patterns using a dissimilarity metric for clustering distance based on 1 minus the topology overlap matrix (1-TOM), a calculation based on an adjacency matrix of correlations of all pairs of proteins in the abundance matrix supplied to WGCNA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Phosphorylation, Post-translational modifications, Sc35, Srsf2, Protein interactions, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Emory University
Department of Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA

### Submitter
Sean Kundinger

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Department of Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA


