### Accession
PXD008868

### Title
TRiC controls transcription resumption after UV damage by regulating Cockayne Syndrome protein A

### Description
Transcription-blocking DNA lesions are removed by transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) to preserve cell viability. TC-NER is triggered by the stalling of RNA polymerase II at DNA lesions, leading to the recruitment of TC-NER-specific factors such as the CSA-DDB1-CUL4A-RBX1 cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex (CRLCSA). Despite its vital role in TC-NER, little is known about the regulation of the CRLCSA complex during TC-NER. Using conventional and cross-linking immunoprecipitations coupled to mass spectrometry, we uncover a stable interaction between CSA and the TRiC chaperonin. TRiC’s binding to CSA ensures its stability and DDB1-dependent assembly into the CRLCSA complex. Consequently, loss of TRiC leads to mislocalization and depletion of CSA, as well as impaired transcription recovery following UV damage, suggesting defects in TC-NER. Furthermore, Cockayne syndrome (CS)-causing mutations in CSA lead to increased TRiC binding and a failure to compose the CRLCSA complex. Thus, we uncover CSA as a novel TRiC substrate and reveal a role for TRiC in regulating CSA-dependent TC-NER and the development of CS.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS samples were prepped for conventional label free quantitation following GFP-based enrichment of CSA including reduction by DTT, cysteine alkylation by IAA, and digestion by trypsin. Cross-linking samples were prepped by GFP purification from whole cell lysates using stringent washing conditions and cross-linked by lysine-lysine cross-linking agent BS3. Cross-linking samples were similarly reduced by DTT, alkylated by IAA, and digested by tripsin.

### Data Protocol
LFQ data was processed using default setting (including match between runs) with maxQuant including cysteine carbamidometylation as a fixed modification. Cross-linking data was processed using default settings in pLink including cysteine carbamidomethylation and a targeted database of specific interactors as identified by LFQ analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription-blocking DNA lesions are removed by transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) to preserve cell viability. TC-NER is triggered by the stalling of RNA polymerase II at DNA lesions, leading to the recruitment of TC-NER-specific factors such as the CSA-DDB1-CUL4A-RBX1 cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex (CRL<sup>CSA</sup>). Despite its vital role in TC-NER, little is known about the regulation of the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex during TC-NER. Using conventional and cross-linking immunoprecipitations coupled to mass spectrometry, we uncover a stable interaction between CSA and the TRiC chaperonin. TRiC's binding to CSA ensures its stability and DDB1-dependent assembly into the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex. Consequently, loss of TRiC leads to mislocalization and depletion of CSA, as well as impaired transcription recovery following UV damage, suggesting defects in TC-NER. Furthermore, Cockayne syndrome (CS)-causing mutations in CSA lead to increased TRiC binding and a failure to compose the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex. Thus, we uncover CSA as a TRiC substrate and reveal that TRiC regulates CSA-dependent TC-NER and the development of CS.

### Keywords
Csa, Tc-ner, Tric

### Affiliations
Radboud University
Radboud University Comeniuslaan 4 6525 HP Nijmegen the Netherlands

### Submitter
Matthew Makowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Radboud University Comeniuslaan 4 6525 HP Nijmegen the Netherlands


