### Accession
PXD000176

### Title
Identifying RasGAP SH2 binding partners in Drosophila using mass spectrometry

### Description
Drosophila S2 cells were transfected with RasGAP(WT), RasGAP(SH2*32*) and GFP control. 4 mg of S2 cell lysate was used to pulldown LAP and GFP tagged constructs using GFP-Trap. The pulled down fraction was loaded on SDS-PAGE gels and coomassie stained before several bands (a-u) from two independent but parallel experiments were excised and subjected to MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bands of interest were dehydrated using acetonitrile followed by vacuum centrifugation. Dried gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Gel pieces were then washed alternately with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. This was repeated and the gel pieces were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were digested with either trypsin (specificity: C-terminal to Asp/Glu), trypsin & Asp-N (specificity: N-terminal to Asp/Cys), trypsin & Glu-C (V8; specificity: C-terminal to Asp/Glu) or Elastase (specificity: none) overnight at 37 ° C. Digested samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using either (a) a NanoAcquity LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to a LTQ Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer with peptides concentrated on a pre-column (20 mm x 180 μ m inner diameter, Waters) or (b) an UltiMate ® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a LTQ Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer or (c) an UltiMate ® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peak-lists were generated using Mascot Daemon 2.2 (Matrix Science UK) employing the extract_msn.exe utility and the data were searched using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science UK), against the Uniprot database with taxonomy of Drosophila(fruit flies) selected. Data were further validated and searched using Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR), which models the score distribution of the entire dataset of spectra (Humphries et al., 2009). With no MuDPIT analysis technique employed, Mascot generated search (.dat) files were queried against uniprot.v14_0 database, allowing pyro-carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation as well as methionine oxidation as a variable modification. The data were viewed using Scaffold, version 3.00.08, and the results were analyzed at 99% protein identification probability tolerance threshold, with minimum number of 2 peptides at 50% identification probability acceptance threshold for at least one spectra required for protein identification. The Scaffold assigned false discovery rate (FDR) of the proteins within the dataset was 0.2%. Samples were validated for phospho-modifications using either Mascot Delta (MD)-score or manual inspection of the data when applicable.

### Publication Abstract
The GTPase Ras can either promote or inhibit cell survival. Inactivating mutations in Drosophila RasGAP (encoded by vap), a Ras GTPase-activating protein, lead to age-related brain degeneration. Genetic interactions implicate the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-Ras pathway in promoting neurodegeneration but the mechanism is not known. Here, we show that the Src homology 2 (SH2) domains of RasGAP are essential for its neuroprotective function. By using affinity purification and mass spectrometry, we identify a complex containing RasGAP together with Sprint, which is a Ras effector and putative activator of the endocytic GTPase Rab5. Formation of the RasGAP-Sprint complex requires the SH2 domains of RasGAP and tyrosine phosphorylation of Sprint. RasGAP and Sprint colocalize with Rab5-positive early endosomes but not with Rab7-positive late endosomes. We demonstrate a key role for this interaction in neurodegeneration: mutation of Sprint (or Rab5) suppresses neuronal cell death caused by the loss of RasGAP. These results indicate that the long-term survival of adult neurons in Drosophila is crucially dependent on the activities of two GTPases, Ras and Rab5, regulated by the interplay of RasGAP and Sprint.

### Keywords
Schneider 2 (s2) cells, Drosophila, Rasgap, Sh2

### Affiliations
University College London (UCL)

### Submitter
Behzad Rowshanravan

### Lab Head


