### Accession
PXD030753

### Title
The cGAS-STING pathway drives type I IFN immunopathology in COVID-19

### Description
Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is characterized by significant lung pathology and extrapulmonary complications. Type I interferons (IFNs) play an essential role in the pathogenesis of COVID-19. While rapid induction of type I IFNs limits virus propagation, sustained elevation of type I IFNs in the late phase of the infection is associated with aberrant inflammation and poor clinical outcome. Using proteomic data from a lung-on-chip model revealed that, in addition to macrophages, SARS-CoV-2 infection activates cGAS-STING signalling in endothelial cells through mitochondrial DNA release, leading to cell death and type I IFN production.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from the vascular and apical faces of the LoC devices were extracted in a sequential manner via instillation of 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA solution (Gibco) in the vascular channel followed by the apical channel. Cells were centrifuged at 300 g for 5 minutes and washed twice with PBS solution to eliminate extracelluar matrix components. Pelleted cells were then resuspended in a 20 l solution of 100mM HEPES pH8, 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and heat inactivated at 95℃ for 10 minutes before removal from the BSL-3 facility and stored at -20 ℃ for subsequent processing at the Proteomics Core Facility. Here cells were vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and resuspended in 9μl of 100mM HEPES pH8, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine. Samples were first heated for 20 min at 95°C with permanent shaking and then sonicated in a water bath for 15 min. Extracted proteins were alkylated with 1 μl of 400 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark with permanent shaking. Proteins were digested overnight using 400 ng mass spectrometry grade trypsin with permanent shaking. Resulting peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips 49 and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 8 μl HEPES 100 mM pH 8 and labeled with 3µl of isobaric tags (TMT 20ug/ul in pure acetonitrile) for 90min at room temperature. The labelling reaction was stopped with addition of 50% hydroxylamine (final concentration 0.4% (v/v)) for 15 min. A small fraction of the labeled peptides was mixed in a 1:1 ratio across all samples and analysed with a single shot control LC-MS/MS run to evaluate the mixing accuracy. Based on the results of this control run, the remaining labelled peptides were mixed in equal amounts, vacuum-centrifuged and fractionated into 8 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed- Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eight fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda 50 and MS Fragger 51 in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot human reference proteome (Release 2020_10) and Uniprot SARS-CoV-2 reference proteome (Release 2020_10). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications whereas oxidation (M) was considered as a variable. Resulting text files were processed through in-house written R scripts (version 3.6.3) {ref R Core Team}. Two steps of normalization were applied; sample loading (SL) and the Trimmed M-Mean (TMM) normalization. The SL normalization 52 assumes that total protein abundances are equal across the TMT channels, therefore, the reporter ion intensities of all spectra were summed and each channel was scaled according to this sum, so that the sum of reporter ion signals per channel equals the average of the signals across samples. Subsequently, the TMM normalization step was applied using the package EdgeR 53(version 3.26.8). This normalization step works on the assumption that the majority of the protein abundances do not change across samples therefore, it calculates normalization factors according to these presumed unchanged protein abundances. Differential protein expression analysis was performed using the R bioconductor package limma (version 3.40.6, 2020-02-29)) 54, followed by the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple-testing method 55. Adjusted P values lower than 0.00128 (FDR < 0.05) and absolute log2FC > 0.5 were considered as significant. For the time course study, all quantified proteins were monitored. The significant temporal dynamics were defined with the timecourse package in R Bioconductor, which uses a multivariate empirical Bayes model to rank proteins 55. Replicate time course data can be compared allowing for variability both within and between time points. The mb.long method was used to calculate moderated Hotelling T2 statistic, specifying a one-dimensional method (method = "1D"), where significant proteins change over time course. The null hypothesis is that the protein temporal profile equal to 0.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19, which is caused by infection with SARS-CoV-2, is characterized by lung pathology and extrapulmonary complications<sup>1,2</sup>. Type I interferons (IFNs) have an essential role in the pathogenesis of COVID-19&#xa0;(refs&#xa0;<sup>3-5</sup>). Although rapid induction of type I IFNs limits virus propagation, a sustained increase in the levels of type I IFNs in the late phase of the infection is associated with aberrant inflammation and poor clinical outcome<sup>5-17</sup>. Here we show that the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway, which controls immunity to cytosolic DNA, is a critical driver of aberrant type I IFN responses in COVID-19&#xa0;(ref.&#xa0;<sup>18</sup>). Profiling COVID-19 skin manifestations, we uncover a STING-dependent type I IFN signature that is primarily mediated by macrophages adjacent to areas of endothelial cell damage. Moreover, cGAS-STING activity was detected in lung samples from patients with COVID-19 with prominent tissue destruction, and was associated with type I IFN responses. A lung-on-chip model revealed that, in addition to macrophages, infection with SARS-CoV-2 activates cGAS-STING signalling in endothelial cells through mitochondrial DNA release, which leads to cell death and type I IFN production. In mice, pharmacological inhibition of STING reduces severe lung inflammation induced by SARS-CoV-2 and improves disease outcome. Collectively, our study establishes a mechanistic basis of pathological type I IFN responses in COVID-19 and reveals a principle for the development of host-directed therapeutics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Endothelial cells, Lung-on-chip

### Affiliations
Global Health Institute EPFL  Switzerland
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne

### Submitter
Vivek Thacker

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Ablasser
Global Health Institute EPFL  Switzerland


