### Accession
PXD011762

### Title
Large-scale secretome analyses unveil a superior immunosuppressive phenotype from umbilical cord stromal cells compared to other adult mesenchymal stromal cells

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) with regenerative and immunomodulatory potential are being investigated as a potential therapeutic tool for cartilage lesions. MSCs express a wide variety of bioactive molecules including cytokines, trophic factors, and proteases, which act in a paracrine fashion to modulate the tissue microenvironment. Yet, little is known about the divergence of these signalling molecules between MSCs populations from adult or young tissues. This makes it challenging to decide the optimal source of MSCs for a specific clinical application. In this study, we investigated cell secretomes from cultured human stromal cells harvested from Hoffa’s fat pad (HFPSCs), synovial membrane (SMSCs), umbilical cord (UCSCs) and cartilage (ACs) by quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomics. We also performed multiplex protein arrays and functional assays to compare the constitutive immunomodulatory capabilities of different MSCs. Proteins involved in extracellular matrix degradation and inflammation such as MMPs, IL-17, and complement factors were significantly downregulated in UCSCs compared to other cell types. Additionally, we found enhanced expression of TGF-β1 and PGE2 in UCSCs supernatants. UCSCs were superior in inhibiting peripheral blood mononuclear cells proliferation, migration and TNF-α and IFN-γ secretion compared to ACs, HFPSCs and SMSCs. Although all cell types could repress HLA-DR surface expression and cytokine release by activated macrophages, only UCSCs significantly blocked IL-6 and IL-12 production. Our data demonstrate that stromal cells from umbilical cords display superior anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties than stromal cells from adult tissues. This Allogeneic cell source could potentially be considered as an adjuvant therapy for articular cartilage repair.

### Sample Protocol
Human samples were collected from the University Hospital of Northern Norway (UNN). The Regional Ethical Committee (REK Nord 2014/920 and 2010/586) at the University of Tromsø approved the study. All tissue specimens were washed three times with sterile Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline and minced into small pieces for enzymatic digestion in collagenase XI solution at a final concentration of 1.25 mg/mL on a shaker at 37 °C. Cartilage tissue specimens were digested for 3-4 h, and other adult tissue specimens were digested only for 1-1.5 h. UCSCs were isolated from cord matrix (also known as a mixed cord) using 1 h of digestion. Partially digested tissues were centrifuged for 10 min at 800 xg and resuspended in high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium before plating on a T-75 culture flask. The culture medium was supplemented with L-ascorbic acid, penicillin and streptomycin (1 %) and 20 % foetal bovine serum to promote cell attachment. All cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere containing 5 % CO2 at 37 °C. After the initial 24 h, primary cultures were expanded in 10 % FBS supplemented medium, and the medium was changed every 3-4 d until the cultures became confluent. Cells at passage 3-4 were used for experimentation. Upon reaching 70-80 % confluence, culture flasks were thoroughly washed with warmed PBS, and the medium was replaced with fresh serum-free medium containing high glucose DMEM, P/S and ITS. Serum-free conditioned medium was collected after 48 h, centrifuged at 4500 xg for 10 min, filtered using 0.22 µm porous membrane and used immediately for experimentation or stored at – 70 °C for further analysis.  Serum-free conditioned medium was concentrated in PBS to a final volume of 500-800 µL using 5000 Da MWCO vivaspin column at 4500 xg for 20 min. Protein concentration was measured using DC Protein Assay Kit. Protein samples (100 µg/tube) were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 70 °C. Samples were alkylated by incubation with 375 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein samples were collected as dry pellets after overnight precipitation in pre-chilled acetone at -20 °C. Dry pellets containing 100 µg protein were resuspended in 100 µL of 2 M Urea with 50 mM TEAB. Only 25 µg of protein per sample was taken for further analysis. Samples were pre-digested for 6 h with 1:100 (w/w) LysC endopeptidase with 1 mM final concentration of CaCl2, followed by further dilution with 50 mM TEAB in 1 M Urea and digestion overnight in 1:20 (w/w) trypsin. A volume of 5 µL trifluoroacetic acid (10 %) was added to each tube and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min.  OMIX C18 tips were used for sample clean-up and concentration. Samples containing 0.2 % formic acid (FA) were loaded to a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column. Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % FA at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 180 min. The separated peptides were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data were collected by a Top10 method in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.6.0) for label-free protein quantification (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt human database from November 2016 to yield protein identification (false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.01). Parameters used for the search: fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal; ion mass tolerance, 4.5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 20 ppm; charge states, 2+, 3+ and 4+; Maximum missed cleavages, 2; enzyme specificity, trypsin; and minimum number of unique peptides, 2. Perseus 1.5.6.0 software was used for statistical analysis of identified proteins. All contaminants were filtered out before log10-transformation of data for further analysis. The log10-transformed intensities were normalised by subtracting the median. Data were grouped as ACs, HFPSCs, SMSCs and UCSCs and analysed using a t-test, with a minimum of three valid values in each group. Volcano plots for each comparison were generated to identify differentially expressed proteins using FDR < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), given their regenerative potential, are being investigated as a potential therapeutic tool for cartilage lesions. MSCs express several bioactive molecules which act in a paracrine fashion to modulate the tissue microenvironment. Yet, little is known about the divergence of these signalling molecules in different MSC populations. The present study investigated secretomes of stromal cells harvested from Hoffa's fat pad (HFPSCs), synovial membrane (SMSCs), umbilical cord (UCSCs) and cartilage (ACs) by quantitative liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomics. Also, multiplex protein arrays and functional assays were performed to compare the constitutive immunomodulatory capabilities of different MSCs. Proteins involved in extracellular matrix degradation and inflammation, such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), interleukin (IL)-17 and complement factors, were downregulated in UCSCs as compared to adult cell sources. Additionally, secretion of transforming growth factor (TGF)-&#x3b2;1 and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) was enhanced in UCSC supernatants. UCSCs were superior in inhibiting peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) proliferation, migration and cytokine secretion as compared to adult stromal cells. SMSCs significantly suppressed the proliferation of PBMCs only if they were primed with pro-inflammatory cytokines. Although all cell types repressed human leukocyte antigen-DR isotype (HLA-DR) surface expression and cytokine release by activated macrophages, only UCSCs significantly blocked IL-6 and IL-12 production. Furthermore, UCSCs supernatants increased aggrecan gene expression in two-dimensional chondrocyte cultures. The data demonstrated that UCSCs displayed superior anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties than stromal cells from adult tissues. This allogeneic cell source could potentially be considered as an adjuvant therapy for articular cartilage repair.

### Keywords
Lfq, Chondrocytes, Umbilical cord stromal cells, Adult stromal cells, Secretome and immunomodulation

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø 9037 Tromsø, Norway
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Inigo Martinez-Zubiaurre
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø 9037 Tromsø, Norway


