### Accession
PXD019450

### Title
TLK2-associated intellectual disability: report of six novel cases and molecular characterization of p.(Asp551Gly) and p.(Ser617Leu) variants

### Description
Introduction The Tousled-Like Kinases 1 and 2 (TLK1 and TLK2) are involved in many fun-damental processes, including DNA replication, cell cycle checkpoint recovery and chromatin remodelling. Mutations in TLK2 were recently associated with “Mental Retardation Autoso-mal Dominant 57” (MRD57), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a highly varia-ble phenotype, including mild-to-moderate intellectual disability, behavioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, epilepsy and skeletal anomalies.  Methods By whole exome sequencing and array-CGH analysis, we identified three independ-ent MRD57 cases. Two were de novo, including a likely pathogenic variant (c.1652A>G; p.(Asp551Gly)) and a 39-kb deletion encompassing TLK2, and one was familial with three sib-lings who inherited a nonsense change from an affected mother (c.1423G>T; p.(Glu475Ter)). Using spatial proteomics (BioID) and single gel electrophoresis, we investigated the proximity interaction landscape of TLK2 and analysed the effects of our missense variant and of another de novo variant reported in the Autism Sequencing Consortium Database (c.1850C>T; p.(Ser617Leu))  on TLK2 interactions, localization and activity.  Results Identified clinical phenotypes were in accordance with previously reported cases. Our molecular results demonstrated that TLK2 activity is strongly impaired by both missense mu-tations and we identified proximal interactions between TLK2 and other factors implicated in neurological disorders, including CHD7, CHD8, BRD4, NACC1 and others. Moreover, we demonstrated a more relaxed state of chromatin in lymphoblastoid cells harbouring the p.(Asp551Gly) variant compared to control cells, which confers susceptibility to DNA damage. Conclusion Our study identified novel TLK2-patients carrying pathogenic variants and pro-vides new insights into their potential role in intellectual disability.

### Sample Protocol
AD-293 cells were seeded in 15 cm plates and transiently transfected the next day with 20 µg of BirA* plasmids using PEI and 150mM NaCl as described. Medium was changed 6-8 hours post-transfection. 24 hours post-transfection, 50 µM of biotin (IBIAN Biotechnology; 2-1016-002) were added per plate. For mass spectrometry, 5x15cm plates were used per condition. 48 hours post-transfection, the cells were harvested with Trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich) and the 5 plates per condition were pooled together. Cell pellets were washed twice in cold PBS and lysed in 5 mL of cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 2mM Mg2Cl, 1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), 1mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich), 1mM EGTA (Sigma-Aldrich), 1:2000 benzonase 25 U/mL (Sigma-Aldrich), 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2&3 (Sigma-Aldrich)). 100 µL of the lysate were re-tained for Western blotting analysis. The remaining lysate was incubated with streptavidin-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare 2-1206-010) during 3 hours in an end-over-end rotator at 4ºC in order to isolate the biotinylated proteins. The beads were washed once in lysis buffer and three times in 50 nM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.3 buffer. Samples were snap-frozen and sent to the Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Core Facility at IRB Barcelona for tryptic diges-tion and analysis. Tryptic digestion was performed directly on beads by incubation with 2 ug of trypsin in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 37ºC overnight. The next morning, an additional 1 µg of trypsin was added and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 1% final con-centration. Samples were cleaned through C18 tips (polyLC C18 tips) and peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA. Samples were diluted to 20% acetonitrile, 0.25% TFA, loaded into strong cation exchange columns (SCX) and peptides were eluted in 5% NH4OH, 30% methanol. Finally, samples were evaporated to dry, reconstituted in 50 µL and diluted 1:8 with 3% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid aqueous solution for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  The nano-LC-MS/MS was set up as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 3% ACN/1% FA. Sample was loaded to a 300 µm × 5 mm PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 ana-lytical column Acclaim PEPMAP 100 75µmx50cm nanoviper C18 3µm 100A (Thermo Scien-tific) with a 90 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3 to 35% B in 60 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50 % to 85 % B in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in wa-ter, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most in-tense) ions per scan were fragmented by CID and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 400,000 and 10,000 for the survey scan and for the MS/MS scan re-spectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5,000. The spectrometer was work-ing in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmenta-tion.

### Data Protocol
We performed a twin database search with two different softwares, Thermo Proteome Discov-erer v2.3.0.480 (PD) and MaxQuant v1.6.6.0 (MQ ). The search engine nodes used were Sequest HT for PD and Andromeda for MQ. The databases used in the search was SwissProt Human (release 2019 01) including contaminants and the user proteins . We run the search against targeted and decoy databases to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, oxidation in M and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptide were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. For the quantitative analysis, contaminant identifications were removed and unique peptides (peptides that are not shared between different protein groups) were used for the quantitative analysis with SAINTexpress-spc v3.6.1 [Teo, G. et al. J Proteomics, 2013]. SAINTexpress compares the prey control spectral counts with the prey test spectral counts for all available replicates. For each available bait and for each available replicate, we took as prey count the maximum count result between PD and MQ. Once obtained this combined dataset, we ran the SAINTexpress algorithm with TLK2 samples and a number of controls samples from previous experiments in the same cell type (n=45 total). High confidence interactors were defined as those with a SAINT score of 0.7 or greater.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proximal interac-tome, Bioid, Intellectual disability, Chromatin condensation, Mrd57, Tlk2, Tousled like kinases, Autism spectrum disorder, Comet assay

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Travis H. Stracker
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain


