### Accession
PXD033180

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Bemisia tabaci (MED) saliva

### Description
The saliva from Bemisia tabaci (MED biotype) adults was collected using an artificial feeding system and analyzed using an LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The B. tabaci strain (MED, Q-biotype) used in this study was initially collected from an eggplant greenhouse on May of 2019 from Ierapetra, South Crete (Greece) and maintained on cotton plants in an insect proof cage in a growing chamber at 25 (±1) °C, 50-60% relative humidity and a 16h:8h light:dark regime. Petri dishes (55mm diameter), having two ventilation holes covered with thin mesh on the side walls, were used as feeding chamber. Approximately, two hundred newly emerged females of B. tabaci were immobilized using carbon dioxide and placed in a petri dish. The petri dish was covered with two layers of parafilm and 1 ml of artificial diet containing 30% sucrose and rifampicin (0.05 mg/ml) that was sandwiched between the two layers. The feeding chambers were placed at the conditions previously mentioned. Three replicates of artificial diet enriched with whitefly saliva (approximately 800 microL) were collected after six and twenty-four hours of whitefly feeding. Three replicates of artificial diet without whitefly saliva were also collected at the same time points and served as controls. The entire process was carried out aseptically. Whitefly saliva was kept at -80 °C until further use.  Saliva samples were lysed using 200 μl RIPA buffer and 1x HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), combined with a 30 sec during sonication (Branson Sonifier SLPe ultrasonic homogenizer, Labequip, Ontario, Canada) with an amplitude of 50% on ice. After centrifugation of the samples for 15 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C, the cell pellet was discarded. One µg equivalent of proteins wasere then reduced using 2 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, in a volume of 20 μl 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and incubated for 1 h at 55°C. After alkylation of the proteins with 2µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min protected from light, 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone were added, and the samples were incubated overnight at -20°C. The next day, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10.000 g at 4°C, the acetone was removed, and pellets were resolved in 20 μl of 200 mM TEAB. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C with an enzyme trypsin ratio of 1:50. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific).  The peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Waters nanoacquity nano-UPLC system using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm connected to a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18, 300Å, 1.7 µm, 100 µm X 100 mm analytical column (Waters, USA). From each sample, a total of 1µg of peptides were loaded on the column. Before loading, digests were dissolved in mobile phase A, containing 2% acetonitril. A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) from 0 to 45% in 90 min, followed by a steep increase to 100% mobile phase B in 10 min, was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Liquid Chromatography was followed by MS (LC-MS/MS) and was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The high-resolution mass spectrometer was set up in an MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350 – 1850 m/z, resolution 70,000) was followed by a high energy collision activated dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (100 – 2000 m/z, resolution 17,500). Peptide ions were selected for further interrogation by tandem MS as the twenty most intense peaks of a full scan mass spectrum. The normalized collision energy used was set at 28%. A dynamic exclusion list of 20 sec for the data-dependent acquisition was applied.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA version 2.1.9 [PMID 15473683], X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) [PMID 14976030] and MS-GF+ version Release (v2018.04.09) [PMID 25358478]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI (version 3.3.16)  [PMID  21337703]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [PMID 20013364] version of the the B. tabaci MED protein database holding 20,748 target sequences (version of September 2019, downloaded from http://www.whiteflygenomics.org) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (116 sequences, available at http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances;  variable modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da), Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.42 [PMID 25574629]. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
The phloem-feeding insect Bemisia tabaci is an important pest, responsible for the transmission of several crop-threatening virus species. While feeding, the insect secretes a cocktail of effectors to modulate plant defense responses. Here, we present a set of proteins that was identified in artificial diet on which B. tabaci was salivating. Subsequently we studied whether these candidate effectors can play a role in plant immune suppression. Effector G4 was the most robust suppressor of an induced-ROS response in Nicotiana benthamiana. In addition, G4 was able to suppress ROS production in Solanum lycopersicum (tomato) and Capsicum annuum (pepper). G4 localized predominantly in the ER in N. benthamiana leaves and co-localized with two identified target proteins in tomato: REF-like stress related protein 1 (RSP1) and meloidogyne-induced giant cell protein DB141 (MIPDB141). Silencing of MIPDB141 in tomato reduced whitefly fecundity up to 40%, demonstrating that the protein is involved in susceptibility to B. tabaci. Together our data demonstrate that effector G4 impairs tomato immunity to whiteflies by interfering with ROS production and via an interaction with tomato susceptibility protein MIPDB141.

### Keywords
Whitefly, Artificial diet, Bemisia, Saliva

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Department of Plants and Crops, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Wannes Dermauw

### Lab Head
Dr Wannes Dermauw
Department of Plants and Crops, Ghent University, Belgium


