### Accession
PXD013648

### Title
The equine granulocyte proteome: expression changes in autoimmune disease and after stimulation

### Description
We investigated the granulocyte proteome from healthy horses, horses with a spontaneous autoimmune disease (equine recurrent uveitis) and the reaction of granulocytes to different stimuli (IL8, PMA, LPS) on protein level. A total of 2032 proteins describing the whole granulocyte proteome were identified, including 245 proteins (12% of proteome) newly associated to in vivo expression in primary granulocytes (hypothetical proteins). Our studies provide novel information on the granulocyte proteome and contribute to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in activation and recruitment of neutrophils and the role of these cells in modulating and regulating autoimmune diseases. The data presented here is highly relevant for veterinary medicine and has translational quality for spontaneous autoimmune uveitis in man.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated primary granulocytes from equine whole blood through density gradient centrifugation followed by sodium chloride lysis. Granulocyte suspension from both groups (3 controls, 3 ERU) was divided into aliquots of 6 x 105 cells each. Aliquot from each animal was centrifuged and pellet was stored at -20°C. Remaining aliquots were separately stimulated for 30 minutes with interleukin-8 (IL8), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Medium control was incubated under the same conditions but without stimulating agent. After stimulation, cells were centrifuged and pellet was stored at -20°C. From each sample, 10µg total protein was digested with LysC and trypsin by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in the data-dependent mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column, eluted after 5 min and separated on the C18 analytical column (75µm IDx15cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18. 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) by a 90 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60000. After each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis was performed using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) with raw files imported, followed by automatic peak picking and retention time alignment and normalization of total peak intensities across all samples to minimize loading differences. All MS/MS spectra were exported from the Progenesis QI software as Mascot generic files (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.5.1) using the Ensembl Horse protein database (version 3.0, http://www.ensembl.org). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% when searching was performed on the concatenated mgf files with a percolator ion score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Identifications were re-imported into Progenesis QI and redundancies grouped following the rules of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms driving specific regulation of neutrophils are not completely understood to date. In order to characterize fundamental granulocyte features on protein level, we analyzed changes in proteome composition as reaction to stress from cell activation processes. For this purpose, we isolated primary granulocytes from equine whole blood through density gradient centrifugation followed by sodium chloride lysis and stimulated cells for 30 min with interleukin-8 (IL8) due to its role as a chemotactic factor for neutrophils. We additionally used phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which are primarily associated to neutrophil extracellular trap formation and release of reactive oxygen species. From mass spectrometry analysis, we identified a total of 2,032 proteins describing the whole granulocyte proteome, including 245 proteins (12% of identified proteome) newly associated to <i>in vivo</i> expression in primary equine granulocytes (hypothetical proteins). We also found distinct and different changes in protein abundance (ratio &#x2265; 2) after short stimulation of cells with various stimuli, pointing to rapid and differentiated reaction pattern. IL8 stimulation resulted in increased protein abundance of 58 proteins (3% of proteome), whereas PMA induced changed protein abundance of 207 (10 % of proteome) and LPS of 46 proteins (2% of proteome). Enrichment analyses clearly showed fundamental differences between stimuli, with primary association of IL8 stimulation to processes in immune response, receptor signaling and signal transduction. Top enrichment for PMA on the other hand pointed to vesicle mediated transport and exocytosis. Stimulation with LPS did not result in any significant enrichment. Although we detected 43% overlap of enrichment categories for IL8 and PMA stimulation, indicating that activation of neutrophils with different stimuli partly induces some similar biological processes and pathways, hierarchical clustering showed clear differences in distribution and biological relevance of clusters between the chosen stimuli. Our studies provide novel information on the granulocyte proteome and offer insights into early, differentiated granulocyte reaction to stimuli, which contribute to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in activation and recruitment of neutrophils, through inflammatory stimuli.

### Keywords
Il8, Granulocyte, Autoimmune disease

### Affiliations
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany
LMU Munich, Chair of Animal Physiology

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia A Deeg
LMU Munich, Chair of Animal Physiology


