### Accession
PXD034369

### Title
Isolation and Characterisation of EVs from Feline Plasma: A Comparative Analysis with Human Plasma Derived EVs

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanoparticles found in all biological fluids, capable of transporting biological material around the body. Extensive research into the physiological role of EVs has led to the development of the Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular Vesicles (MISEV) framework in 2018. This framework guides the standardisation of protocols in the EV field. To date, the focus has been on EVs of human origin. As comparative medicine progresses, there has been a drive to study similarities between diseases in humans and animals. To successfully research EVs in felines, we must validate the application of the MISEV guidelines in this group. EVs were isolated from the plasma of healthy humans and felines. EV characterisation was carried out according to the MISEV guidelines. Human and feline plasma showed a similar concentration of EVs, comparable expression of known EV markers and analogous particle to protein ratios. Mass spectrometry analyses showed that the proteomic signature of EVs from humans and felines were similar. Asymmetric field flow fractionation showed two distinct subpopulations of EVs isolated from human plasma, whereas only one subpopulation was isolated from feline plasma and metabolomic profiling showed similar profiles for humans and felines.  In conclusion, isolation, and characterisation of EVs from humans and felines show that MISEV2018 guidelines may also be applied to felines. Potential comparative medicine studies of EVs may provide a model for studying naturally occurring diseases in both species.

### Sample Protocol
EVs from fractions 7-10 were pooled and concentrated in triplicate. Concentrated EVs were resuspended in 20 µl PBS. A 40 µl aliquot of 8M Urea/50Mm Tris HCL was added to 20 µl of sample.  The protein samples were reduced by adding 8mM DTT, and mixing (thermomixer 1000rpm, 30°C) for 60 min and carboxylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and mixing (thermomixer 1000rpm, 30°C) for 30 min in light exclusion. The samples were then diluted with 50 mM Tris HCL to bring the urea concentration below 2M. It is important that the Urea concentration must be below 2M to prevent inhibition of trypsin. Each sample was digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin in a 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio (Promega, V5111). Digestion was terminated by adding formic acid to 1% final concentration.  Following trypsin digestion, the samples were cleaned using C18 HyperSep SpinTips (Thermo Scientific). Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen) connected to a Bruker nanoElute nano-lc chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics). Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was directly injected onto an Aurora UHPLC column (25cm x 75μm ID, C18, 1.6 μm, (Ionopticks) and was separated with an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 40 minutes at a constant temperature of 40℃. In detail, after equilibration buffer b was increased from 2-30% between 0 and 33 minutes at a flow rate of 250 µl/min , from 33-34 minutes buffer b was increased from 30-95% and from 34-40 minutes buffer b was maintained at 95% to wash the column. The mobile phases used were buffer a (lcms grade water/0.1% formic acid) and buffer b (lcms grade acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid).  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1600 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 5 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.03s. 15.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.1.0) using specific parameters for trapped ion mobility spectra data dependent acquisition (TIMS DDA). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters. Specifically, only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. The normalised protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label free quantitation (LFQ). Mass spectrometry data was analysed for similar proteins identified in both human and feline EVs using Microsoft Excel. Subsequently, the top 100 proteins identified 16,17 in EVs was also compared to the human and feline protein identifications. To assess the function of these proteins and their networks, the gene names were entered into STRING 18. The functional networks associated with the proteins identified In EVs were recorded. Common KEGG pathways were recorded to assign functional meanings to the proteomic identification.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanoparticles found in all biological fluids, capable of transporting biological material around the body. Extensive research into the physiological role of EVs has led to the development of the Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular Vesicles (MISEV) framework in 2018. This framework guides the standardisation of protocols in the EV field. To date, the focus has been on EVs of human origin. As comparative medicine progresses, there has been a drive to study similarities between diseases in humans and animals. To successfully research EVs in felines, we must validate the application of the MISEV guidelines in this group. EVs were isolated from the plasma of healthy humans and felines. EV characterisation was carried out according to the MISEV guidelines. Human and feline plasma showed a similar concentration of EVs, comparable expression of known EV markers and analogous particle to protein ratios. Mass spectrometry analyses showed that the proteomic signature of EVs from humans and felines were similar. Asymmetrical flow field flow fractionation, showed two distinct subpopulations of EVs isolated from human plasma, whereas only one subpopulation was isolated from feline plasma. Metabolomic profiling showed similar profiles for humans and felines. In conclusion, isolation, and characterisation of EVs from humans and felines show that MISEV2018 guidelines may also be applied to felines. Potential comparative medicine studies of EVs may provide a model for studying naturally occurring diseases in both humans and felines.

### Keywords
Human, Bruker timstof pro, Cat, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4, Ireland.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda McCann
University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4, Ireland.


