### Accession
PXD005400

### Title
Composition and immune environment of urinary bladder matrix scaffolds

### Description
Urinary bladder matrix (UBM) is used clinically for treatment of diabetic ulcers, abdominal wall reconstruction, soft tissue filling among other applications. Composed mainly of collagen, the material is a mix of fibrous collagen structures and sheet-forming structures characteristic of the urinary bladder matrix basal lamina. Upon application of a biomaterial in a traumatic or non-traumatic setting, there is a cascade of immune cells that react to the damaged tissue and biomaterial. Here, through the use of multicolor flow cytometry, we describe the various cells that infiltrate the UBM scaffold in subcutaneous and volumetric muscle injury model. A wide variety of immune cells are found in the UBM scaffold immune microenvironment (SIM) including F4/80 + macrophages, CD11c + dendritic cells, CD3 + T cells and CD19 + B cells. UBM induced a systemic IL-4 upregulation and a local M2-macrophage response. The recruitment and activation of these cells is dependent upon signals from the scaffold and communication between the different cell types present.

### Sample Protocol
ECM was suspended in 9 M urea (pH 8) at a concentration of 2.5 mg ECM/ml, and vortexed for 60 s. Suspended ECM was sonicated in 5 s bursts for a total of 60 s.Further sample was reduced and alkylated by DTT and IAA, digested with Lys-c (1:110 ECM initial wt:Lys-c) at 8M final urea concentration for 4 hours at 37C with agitation. The ECM digested was diluted to 2.5M urea with HEPES buffer and further digested with trypsin (1:50 ECM initial wt:trypsin) for 16 hours at 37C with agitation. Tryptic peptides were cleaned using C18 SEP-PAK columns and lyophilized. Equal amount of peptides from different ECM preparations were analyzed on Thermo Obitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with nano LC. Peptide were eluted over 120 min gradient in reverse phase chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using MaxQuant where peptide identification was done by Andromeda algorithm while label free quantification was done LFQ algoriothm.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary bladder matrix (UBM) is used clinically for management of wounds and reinforcement of surgical soft tissue repair, among other applications. UBM consists of the lamina propria and basal lamina of the porcine urinary bladder, and is decellularized as part of the process to manufacture the medical device. UBM is composed mainly of Collagen I, but also contains a wide variety of fibrillar and basement membrane collagens, glycoproteins, proteoglycans and ECM-associated factors. Upon application of the biomaterial in a traumatic or non-traumatic setting in a mouse model, there is a cascade of immune cells that respond to the damaged tissue and biomaterial. Here, through the use of multicolor flow cytometry, we describe the various cells that infiltrate the UBM scaffold in a subcutaneous and volumetric muscle injury model. A wide variety of immune cells are found in the UBM scaffold immune microenvironment (SIM) including F4/80<sup>+</sup> macrophages, CD11c<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells, CD3<sup>+</sup> T cells and CD19<sup>+</sup> B cells. A systemic IL-4 upregulation and a local M2-macrophage response were observed in the proximity of the implanted UBM. The recruitment and activation of these cells is dependent upon signals from the scaffold and communication between the different cell types present.

### Keywords
Urinary bladder, Collagen, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. ( lab head )

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer H. Elisseeff
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. ( lab head )


