### Accession
PXD004447

### Title
Mirroring the charged termini; ETD/HCD fragmentation characteristics of LysargiNase and tryptic peptides and their benefits for peptide sequencing in proteomics

### Description
A key step in proteomics is the digestion of proteins into peptides, so far largely done by using trypsin. Tryptic digestion leads to peptides that in ESI-MS attain predominantly two charges, via protonation at the free N-terminus and at the C-terminal basic residue Arginine or Lysine. These peptides can be readily sequenced and identified by collision-induced dissociation (CID) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), as the fragmentation rules are well understood. Here we explore the trypsin mirror protease, LysargiNase, which cleaves equally specifically at Arg and Lys, albeit at the N-terminal end. The resulting peptides are therefore practically tryptic-alike in length and sequence, except that the two charges are now both positioned at the N-terminus. We compare the chromatographic separation properties, gas phase fragmentation behavior and (phospho)proteome sequence coverage of tryptic and LysargiNase peptides using electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), and for comparison HCD. We find that tryptic and LysargiNase peptides fragment nearly as mirror images. For LysargiNase predominantly N-terminal peptide ions (c-ions/ETD, b-ions/HCD) are formed, whereas for trypsin C-terminal fragment ions dominate (z-ions/ETD, y-ions/HCD). Especially during ETD LysargiNase peptides fragment into low-complexity, but information rich sequence ladders. We observe that trypsin and LysargiNase chart distinct parts of the (phospho)proteome. Therefore, we conclude that the collective use LysargiNase and Trypsin will benefit a more in-depth and reliable analysis of (phospho)proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cell lysate Trypsin and LysargiNase protein digestion Sep-Pak desalting Ti4+-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment LC-MS/MS analysin in Fusion Orbitrap with HCD and ETD fragmentation. In a data-dependent manner, the most intense peptide ions with a charge of z = 2+ and fitting within a 3 s cycle were selected for either HCD or ETD fragmentation using the Top Speed setting in the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer and a dynamic exclusion time of 18 s. Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM), while fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM). For both MS and MS/MS spectra, the maximum ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms with an AGC target of 4e5 and 5e4 ions, respectively. ETD was supplemented with 30% normalized collision energy, while for HCD normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The same settings were used for the analysis of the phosphopeptide-enriched samples besides the gradient length that was reduced to 2 h. After the survey scans, the most intense precursors in 3 seconds were selected for HCD fragmentation using the Top Speed setting, with normalized collision energy set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 18 s. Fragment ions were read out in the ion trap mass analyzer at a resolution of 15,000. The MS/MS AGC target value was set to 1e4 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
WE used SEQUEST-HT peptide search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1). For the tryptic data sets, enzyme specificity was set C-terminal to Arg and Lys allowing up to two missed cleavages. The same rule was applied for LysargiNase, but cleavage specificity was set N-terminal to Arg and Lys. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a fixed modification, while oxidation on methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine (only for the phosphopeptide-enriched samples), and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 50 ppm whereas mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.05 Da and 0.6 Da for Orbitrap and ion trap detection, respectively. Percolator was used for validation of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on q values. Additional PSM filters were the Rank 1 and Search Engine Rank 1. The phosphorylation site localization of the identified phosphopeptides was performed by phosphoRS algorithm (ptmRS), also embedded in Proteome Discoverer. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as the threshold for the phosphor-residue localization.

### Publication Abstract
A key step in shotgun proteomics is the digestion of proteins into peptides amenable for mass spectrometry. Tryptic peptides can be readily sequenced and identified by collision-induced dissociation (CID) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) because the fragmentation rules are well-understood. Here, we investigate LysargiNase, a perfect trypsin mirror protease, because it cleaves equally specific at arginine and lysine residues, albeit at the N-terminal end. LysargiNase peptides are therefore practically tryptic-like in length and sequence except that following ESI, the two protons are now both positioned at the N-terminus. Here, we compare side-by-side the chromatographic separation properties, gas-phase fragmentation characteristics, and (phospho)proteome sequence coverage of tryptic (i.e., (X)<sub>n</sub>K/R) and LysargiNase (i.e., K/R(X)<sub>n</sub>) peptides using primarily electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) and, for comparison, HCD. We find that tryptic and LysargiNase peptides fragment nearly as mirror images. For LysargiNase predominantly N-terminal peptide ions (c-ions (ETD) and b-ions (HCD)) are formed, whereas for trypsin, C-terminal fragment ions dominate (z-ions (ETD) and y-ions (HCD)) in a homologous mixture of complementary ions. Especially during ETD, LysargiNase peptides fragment into low-complexity but information-rich sequence ladders. Trypsin and LysargiNase chart distinct parts of the proteome, and therefore, the combined use of these enzymes will benefit a more in-depth and reliable analysis of (phospho)proteomes.

### Keywords
Trypsin, Etd, Phosphoproteomics, Hcd, Orbitrap, Lysarginase, Fragmentation

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Dr. Ir.

### Submitter
Liana Tsiatsiani

### Lab Head
Dr Albert JR Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


