### Accession
PXD042133

### Title
Conus magus venom gland proteomics

### Description
Marine cone snails have attracted researchers from all disciplines but early life stages have received limited attention due to difficulties accessing or rearing juvenile specimens. Here, we document the culture of Conus magus from eggs through metamorphosis to reveal dramatic shifts in predatory feeding behaviour between post-metamorphic juveniles and adult specimens. Adult C. magus capture fish using a set of paralytic venom peptides combined with a hooked radular tooth used to tether envenomed fish. In contrast, early juveniles feed exclusively on polychaete worms using a unique “sting-and-stalk” foraging behaviour facilitated by short, unbarbed radular teeth and a distinct venom repertoire that induces hypoactivity in prey. Our results demonstrate how coordinated morphological, behavioural and molecular changes facilitate the shift from worm- to fish-hunting in C. magus, and showcase juvenile cone snails as a rich and unexplored source of novel venom peptides for ecological, evolutionary and biodiscovery studies.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue-based proteomic studies were carried out on the pooled VG of 20 juveniles at 14 dps and on the maternal VG (proximal, central and distal). All samples were extracted in 30% ACN/1% FA and kept at –20°C until further analysis. Predation-evoked venom samples were obtained from the egg-laying female, as previously described. Following each milking, the collecting tube was briefly centrifuged and stored at –20°C until analysis. For our analysis, venom samples from 10 independent milking events and collected over 18 months were pooled. In preparation for LC-MS/MS, each sample was reduced with triethylphosphine and alkylated with 2-iodoethanol, before digestion with proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma). This step was omitted for the juvenile venom gland extract due to limited sample available. Native and digested samples were desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Merk Millipore) and dried by vacuum centrifugation before analysis.

### Data Protocol
The CID-MS/MS spectra were searched against a database combining all translated sequences from our RNA-seq experiments and previously reported C. magus conotoxins (Supplementary Data 2) using the Paragon algorithm implemented in ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX) with the following settings: iodoethanol, trypsin digested, common conotoxin post-translational modifications, biological modifications, thorough ID. Peptides with ≥ 2 tryptic fragments at a confidence of 99 and a false discovery rate < 1% were considered genuine. The EAD-MS/MS data were searched against the same database using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: trypsin, 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications, 20 ppm peptide tolerance, 0.1 Da MS/MS tolerance, 2+ 3+ and 4+ peptide charges, with an error tolerant search included. Peptides with ≥ 2 tryptic fragments, individual peptide scores > 60 and a significance threshold < 0.05 were selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Maldi-ms, Proteomics, Conus magus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Queensland 
Institute for Molecular Bioscience - University of Queensland

### Submitter
Aymeric Rogalski

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Lewis
Institute for Molecular Bioscience - University of Queensland


