### Accession
PXD043880

### Title
The major TMEM106B dementia risk allele affects TMEM106B protein levels, fibril formation, and myelin lipid homeostasis in the ageing human hippocampus

### Description
Background: The risk for dementia increases exponentially from the seventh decade of life. Identifying and understanding the biochemical changes that sensitize the ageing brain to neurodegeneration will provide new opportunities for dementia prevention and treatment. This study aimed to determine how ageing and major genetic risk factors for dementia affect the hippocampal proteome and lipidome of neurologically-normal humans over the age of 65. The hippocampus was chosen as it is highly susceptible to atrophy with ageing and in several neurodegenerative diseases. Methods: Mass spectrometry-based proteomic and lipidomic analysis of CA1 hippocampus samples from 74 neurologically normal human donors, aged 66 – 104, was used in combination with multiple regression models and gene set enrichment analysis to identify age-dependent changes in the proteome and lipidome. ANOVA was used to test the effect of major dementia risk alleles in the TMEM106B and APOE genes on the hippocampal proteome and lipidome, adjusting for age, gender, and post-mortem interval. Fibrillar C-terminal TMEM106B fragments were isolated using sarkosyl fractionation and quantified by immunoblotting. Results: Forty proteins were associated with age at false discovery rate-corrected P<0.05, including proteins that regulate cell adhesion, the cytoskeleton, amino acid and lipid metabolism, and ribosomal subunits. TMEM106B, a regulator of lysosomal and oligodendrocyte function, was regulated with greatest effect size. The increase in TMEM106B levels with ageing was specific to carriers of the rs1990622-A allele in the TMEM106B gene that increases risk for frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and hippocampal sclerosis with ageing. Rs1990622-A was also associated with higher TMEM106B fibril content. Hippocampal lipids were not significantly affected by APOE genotype, however levels of myelin-enriched sulfatides and hexosylceramides were significantly lower, and polyunsaturated phospholipids were higher, in rs1990622-A carriers after controlling for APOE genotype. Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that TMEM106B protein abundance is increased with brain ageing in humans, establishes that dementia risk allele rs1990622-A predisposes to TMEM106B fibril formation in the hippocampus, and provides the first evidence that rs1990622-A affects brain lipid homeostasis, particularly myelin lipids. Our data suggests that TMEM106B is one of a growing list of major dementia risk genes that affect glial lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenates were prepared by placing 10-20 mg of frozen tissue into 500 L of 20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 3 mM β-glycerophosphate, and ultrasonicating for 5 min (30 s on/30 s off) at 4 °C in a Qsonica Q800R2 sonicating bath. Homogenates were cleared by centrifugation at 1000g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was stored at -80 °C in 100 µL aliquots. Total protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad).   Crude homogenate (10 µg protein) was extracted with 100 µL 4% SDS, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM NaPO4 (pH 6), 10 mM NaF, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, 60 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate, and EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The volume was made up to 150 µL using MilliQ water and samples were incubated for 10 min at 65 °C with shaking (500 rpm), then ultrasonicated for 10 min at 20 °C (15s on/15s off). Proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol/water in the ratio 1:4:1:3 (sample:methanol:chloroform:water)  [26], dried down, and reconstituted in 30 µL of 8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific), after which protein samples were diluted 8-fold in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8)/1 mM CaCl2 and digested for 16 h at 37 °C with 0.1 µg trypsin (#90058, ThermoFisher). Digestion was stopped with the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and the samples were centrifuged to pellet any undigested protein (18,000g, 10 min, 20 °C). The supernatants were transferred to new tubes and subjected to solid-phase extraction [27].

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed using quantitative proteomics software Spectronaut Pulsar X [version 12.0.20491.11.25225 (Jocelyn)]. Enzyme specificity was set to fully tryptic and semi-tryptic N-ragged (cleavage Cterminal to Lys and Arg) parameters with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The iRT profiling workflow was used for recalibration after retention time drift for accurate peak assignment.30 Interference (MS 1 and 2) correction was used, allowing for removal of interfering signals to improve quantitation; a minimum of three peptides were required for quantitation. De-isotoping was performed based on RT apex distance and m/z spacing without de-multiplexing. Each observed fragment ion was only assigned to one precursor peak list. Every search had the FDR set to 1% based on a target decoy approach. All other settings were factory default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myelin, Neurodegeneration, Tmem106b, Ageing, Proteomic, Sphingolipid, Lipidomic, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney, School of Medical Sciences
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Jun Yup LEE

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Simon Don
The University of Sydney, School of Medical Sciences


