### Accession
PXD014292

### Title
Single organelle function and organization as estimated from Arabidopsis mitochondrial proteomics

### Description
Aiming at defining the protein content and composition of a single mitochondrion of Arabidopsis thaliana, shotgun analyses were performed on purified mitochondria from cultured heterotrophic Arabidopsis cells. Based on microscopic observations on the size of mitochondria, as well as biochemical properties, such as protein concentration, average molecular mass of proteins, and the average length of the signal peptide, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were applied to calculate the copy number of each identified protein species within a single mitochondrion. Copy numbers of the individual proteins span five orders of magnitude, ranging from >40,000 for Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel 1 (VDAC1) to sub-stoichiometric copy numbers, i.e. less than a single copy per single mitochondrion, for several pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins that modify mitochondrial transcripts.  Aiming at defining the protein content and composition of a single mitochondrion of Arabidopsis thaliana, shotgun analyses were performed on purified mitochondria from cultured heterotrophic Arabidopsis cells. Based on microscopic observations on the size of mitochondria, as well as biochemical properties, such as protein concentration, average molecular mass of proteins, and the average length of the signal peptide, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were applied to calculate the copy number of each identified protein species within a single mitochondrion. Copy numbers of the individual proteins span five orders of magnitude, ranging from >40,000 for Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel 1 (VDAC1) to sub-stoichiometric copy numbers, i.e. less than a single copy per single mitochondrion, for several pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins that modify mitochondrial transcripts.  Aiming at defining the protein content and composition of a single mitochondrion of Arabidopsis thaliana, shotgun analyses were performed on purified mitochondria from cultured heterotrophic Arabidopsis cells. Based on microscopic observations on the size of mitochondria, as well as biochemical properties, such as protein concentration, average molecular mass of proteins, and the average length of the signal peptide, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were applied to calculate the copy number of each identified protein species within a single mitochondrion. Copy numbers of the individual proteins span five orders of magnitude, ranging from >40,000 for Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel 1 (VDAC1) to sub-stoichiometric copy numbers, i.e. less than a single copy per single mitochondrion, for several pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins that modify mitochondrial transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria from a heterotrophic Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture were isolated as described in Sunderhaus et al., 2006 (Sunderhaus, S., Dudkina, N.V., Jänsch, L., Klodmann, J., Heinemeyer, J., Perales, M.,Zabaleta, E., Boekema, E.J. and Braun, H.-P. (2006) Carbonic anhydrase subunits form a matrix-exposed domain attached to the membrane arm of mitochondrial complex I in plants. J. Biol. Chem., 281, 6482–6488). Shotgun MS-analysis of four independent isolations were performed. For each mitochondria isolation, a volume corresponding to 50 ug of protein (according to Bradford) was mixed with the same volume of 2x Laemmli buffer (125mM Tris HCl [pH 6.8], 4% [w/v] SDS, 10% [v/v] β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% [w/v] bromophenol blue). Solubilized proteins were purified, concentrated, and digested in a glycine-SDS gel. The resulting peptides were subsequently extracted as previously described (Thal, B., Braun, H.-P. and Eubel, H. (2018) Proteomic analysis dissects the impact of nodulation and biological nitrogen fixation on Vicia faba root nodule physiology. Plant Mol. Biol., 97, 233–251.) and resuspended in 20 μl of 5% [v/v] ACN, 0.1% [v/v] TFA. LC-MS/MS was primarily performed as described in (Thal et al., 2018) with minor differences. 1 ul of the peptide solution was loaded on the column. Peptides were eluted by a 240 min, non-linear 5–36% [v/v] acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% [v/v] formic acid over a period of 240 min at 33° C.

### Data Protocol
Aquired LC-MS/MS spectra were queried against an in-house modified TAIR10 database comprising protein models of mitochondrial and plastid DNA-encoded proteins after RNA editing using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (Cox, J. and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass  accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol., 26, 1367–1372). Editing site information was based on the PREPACT database (Lenz, H., Hein, A. and Knoop, V. (2018) Plant organelle RNA editing and its specificity factors: enhancements of analyses and new database features in PREPACT 3.0. BMC Bioinformatics, 19, 255) and a published RNAseq analysis (Bentolila, S., Oh, J., Hanson, M.R. and Bukowski, R. (2013) Comprehensive highresolution analysis of the role of an Arabidopsis gene family in RNA editing. PLoS Genet., 9, e1003584). The search parameters were set to: carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications. The specific digestion mode was set to trypsin (P) and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. FDR at the protein and PSM level was set to 1%. For maximum proteome coverage, the minimum number of unique peptides per protein group was 1. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. The iBAQ function of MaxQuant was enabled, “log fit” disabled. To increase the number of quantifiable proteins between the four replicates, we used retention time alignment and peptide identification transfer via the “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant with a match time windows of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min (Cox et al., 2014). Implementation of “match between runs” increased the number of proteins identified in all four replicates from 1,492 to 1,929.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria host vital cellular functions, including oxidative phosphorylation and co-factor biosynthesis, which are reflected in their proteome. At the cellular level plant mitochondria are organized into hundreds of discrete functional entities, which undergo dynamic fission and fusion. It is the individual organelle that operates in the living cell, yet biochemical and physiological assessments have exclusively focused on the characteristics of large populations of mitochondria. Here, we explore the protein composition of an individual average plant mitochondrion to deduce principles of functional and structural organisation. We perform proteomics on purified mitochondria from cultured heterotrophic Arabidopsis cells with intensity-based absolute quantification and scale the dataset to the single organelle based on criteria that are justified by experimental evidence and theoretical considerations. We estimate that a total of 1.4&#xa0;million protein molecules make up a single Arabidopsis mitochondrion on average. Copy numbers of the individual proteins span five orders of magnitude, ranging from &gt;40&#xa0;000 for Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel 1 to sub-stoichiometric copy numbers, i.e. less than a single copy per single mitochondrion, for several pentatricopeptide repeat proteins that modify mitochondrial transcripts. For our analysis, we consider the physical and chemical constraints of the single organelle and discuss prominent features of mitochondrial architecture, protein biogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation, metabolism, antioxidant defence, genome maintenance, gene expression, and dynamics. While assessing the limitations of our considerations, we exemplify how our understanding of biochemical function and structural organization of plant mitochondria can be connected in order to obtain global and specific insights into how organelles work.

### Keywords
Plant mitochondria

### Affiliations
Leibniz Universtät Hannover
Leibniz University Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics

### Submitter
Holger Eubel

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Braun
Leibniz University Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics


