### Accession
PXD009306

### Title
Tauopathy in the APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of familial Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Proteomics on sarkosyl-insoluble proteome of APP/PS1 and human AD brain.

### Sample Protocol
Sarkosyl-insoluble fraction prepared according to Greenberg and Davies 1990. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Labeling of tryptic peptides with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents was performed as per manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal volumes of the labeled peptides were pooled into a master mix and subjected to a modified TiO2 workflow, followed by sample desalting, fractionation by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC), and tandem mass spectrometry analysis using a Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the Mus Musculus or Homo Sapiens reference databases from swissprot and uniprot via Mascot (v2.3.02, Matrix Science) and Sequest HT search engines, respectively, using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were applied, allowing two missed cleavages for trypsin. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT-10plex labeling for Lys and N-termini. Variable modifications contained phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr, acetylation on the N-termini, oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn. To ensure high-confident identification, the Mascot percolator algorithm (q value filter set to 0.01), Mascot and Sequest HT peptide rank 1, a cut-off value of Mascot score of ≥18, and a Sequest HT∆Cn of 0.1 were used. Only high confident peptides were used for further analysis. Subsequently, the peptides were filtered against a Decoy database resulting into a false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 (FDR < 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
Despite compelling evidence that the accumulation of amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) promotes neocortical MAPT (tau) aggregation in familial and idiopathic Alzheimer's disease (AD), murine models of cerebral amyloidosis are not considered to develop tau-associated pathology. In the present study, we show that tau can accumulate spontaneously in aged transgenic APP<sub>swe</sub>/PS1<sub>&#x394;E9</sub> mice. Tau pathology is abundant around A&#x3b2; deposits, and further characterized by accumulation of Gallyas and thioflavin-S-positive inclusions, which were detected in the APP<sub>swe</sub>/PS1<sub>&#x394;E9</sub> brain at 18 months of age. Age-dependent increases in argyrophilia correlated positively with binding levels of the paired helical filament (PHF) tracer [<sup>18</sup>F]Flortaucipir, in all brain areas examined. Sarkosyl-insoluble PHFs were visualized by electron microscopy. Quantitative proteomics identified sequences of hyperphosphorylated and three-repeat tau in transgenic mice, along with signs of RNA missplicing, ribosomal dysregulation and disturbed energy metabolism. Tissue from the frontal gyrus of human subjects was used to validate these findings, revealing primarily quantitative differences between the tau pathology observed in AD patient vs. transgenic mouse tissue. As physiological levels of endogenous, 'wild-type' tau aggregate secondarily to A&#x3b2; in APP<sub>swe</sub>/PS1<sub>&#x394;E9</sub> mice, this study suggests that amyloidosis is both necessary and sufficient to drive tauopathy in experimental models of familial AD.

### Keywords
Ad, Proteomics, Tau

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Camilla Thygesen

### Lab Head
Dr Bente Finsen; Martin R. Larsen
University of Southern Denmark


