### Accession
PXD044327

### Title
Proteome and glycoproteome analysis of fibroblasts from patients with congenital disorders of glycosylation

### Description
In the biological systems, several genes are involved in protein glycosylation pathway. Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) is known to be a multisystem disorder. Pathogenic variants in the glycosylation genes lead to abnormal N- or O-linked glycosylation that causes cellular stress. We used TMT-based N-glycoproteomics and proteomics on different patient-derived CDG and control fibroblasts to characterize the alteration in glycoproteome and proteome. 12 fractions of enriched glycopeptides after size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and 12 fractions after basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for glycoproteomics and proteomics, respectively. A site-specific aberrant glycosylation was observed for several proteins such as mitochondrial, autophagy, extracellular matrix and cell adhesion proteins. By using quantitative proteomics, we observed alteration in abundances of several proteins separated the affected individuals and controls. The glycoproteomics and proteomics analysis in CDG patients provides the potential biomarkers and will increase our general understanding of its pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by scarping the cell in phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.4). Cell pellet was lysed in 8M Urea (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) using a probe sonicator. The protein amount was quantified using BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were precipitated by cold acetone and pellet resuspended in 8M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. The solubilized proteins were first reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 30 minutes and then alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. The proteins were then digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C using 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio. The peptide mixture was desalted using C18 tips and labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) as per manufacturer’s instructions. All the labelled samples were pooled and split into two aliquots. One aliquot was subjected to SEC for glycopeptide enrichment and another aliquot was fractionated by bRPLC for total proteomics. SEC was performed in isocratic run mode with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for 130 min on Superdex peptide 10/300 column (GE Healthcare). Early 12 fractions were collected starting at 10 minutes after injection and they were dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition. bRPLC was performed on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System 120 min using a gradient flow (0.5 mL/min) with solvent A (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9) and solvent B (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9, in 90% acetonitrile). Ninety-six fractions collected and were then concatenated into 12 fractions, which were dried analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer connected to Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The proteomics data were searched using Sequest search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against the Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences and the glycoproteomics data using the publicly available software pGlyco version 3 with an in-built glycan database. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide, protein and glycopeptides levels. For proteomics, quantitation of peptides across PMM2-CDG and control fibroblasts was done using TMT reporter ion intensities using “reporter ion quantifier” node. To quantify glycopeptides, reporter ion quantification was performed for glycoproteomics raw files in Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 and glycopeptide IDs obtained from pGlyco 3 were matched with quantitation on a scan-to-scan basis (MS/MS).

### Publication Abstract
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) and mitochondrial disorders are multisystem disorders with overlapping symptomatology. Pathogenic variants in the PMM2 gene lead to abnormal N-linked glycosylation. This disruption in glycosylation can induce endoplasmic reticulum stress, contributing to the disease pathology. Although impaired mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported in some CDG, cellular bioenergetics has never been evaluated in detail in PMM2-CDG. This prompted us to evaluate mitochondrial function and autophagy/mitophagy in vitro in <i>PMM2</i> patient-derived fibroblast lines of differing genotypes from our natural history study. We found secondary mitochondrial dysfunction in PMM2-CDG. This dysfunction was evidenced by decreased mitochondrial maximal and ATP-linked respiration, as well as decreased complex I function of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Our study also revealed altered autophagy in PMM2-CDG patient-derived fibroblast lines. This was marked by an increased abundance of the autophagosome marker LC3-II. Additionally, changes in the abundance and glycosylation of proteins in the autophagy and mitophagy pathways further indicated dysregulation of these cellular processes. Interestingly, serum sorbitol levels (a biomarker of disease severity) and the CDG severity score showed an inverse correlation with the abundance of the autophagosome marker LC3-II. This suggests that autophagy may act as a modulator of biochemical and clinical markers of disease severity in PMM2-CDG. Overall, our research sheds light on the complex interplay between glycosylation, mitochondrial function, and autophagy/mitophagy in PMM2-CDG. Manipulating mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations in autophagy/mitophagy pathways could offer therapeutic benefits when combined with existing treatments for PMM2-CDG.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Proteomics, Cdg, Fibroblasts, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905 United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905 United States


