### Accession
PXD002501

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Mycoplasma pneumoniae clinical isolates

### Description
The human respiratory tract pathogen M. pneumoniae is one of the best characterized minimal bacterium. Until now, two main groups of clinical isolates of this bacterium have been described (types 1 and 2), differing in the sequence of the P1 adhesin gene. Here, we have sequenced the genomes of 23 clinical isolates of M. pneumoniae. Studying SNPs, non-synonymous mutations, indels and genome rearrangements of these 23 strains and 4 previously sequenced ones, has revealed new subclasses in the two main groups, some of them being associated with the country of isolation. Integrative analysis of in vitro gene essentiality and mutation rates enabled the identification of several putative virulence factors and antigenic proteins; revealing recombination machinery, glycerol metabolism and peroxide production as key factors in the genetics and physiology of these pathogenic strains. Additionally, the transcriptomes and proteomes of two representative strains, one from each of the two main groups, have been characterized to evaluate the impact of mutations on RNA and proteins levels. This study has revealed that type 2 strains show high expression levels of CARDs toxin, a protein recently shown to be one of the major factors of inflammation. Thus, we propose that type 2 strains are likely to be more virulent than type 1 strains.

### Sample Protocol
M. pneumoniae type 1 (5954 and 5817) and type 2 (2882 and 6009) strains were grown for 96 h at 37°C. Then the medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein extracts were obtained by lysing the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M Hepes). The total protein extracts of two biological replicates were analyzed by MS. Each fraction (quantities ranging from 20 to 486 µg) was digested in solution with trypsin. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (ratio protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated upon digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermofisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min.

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and its source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer and the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and in all experiments full-MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350-2000, with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution setting of 60,000. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. In each cycle of data-dependent analysis, following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 35%. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.1 software. In addition, 20 µg of the total extract was digested and desalted and 1 µg of the resulting peptides analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min).

### Publication Abstract
The human respiratory tract pathogen M. pneumoniae is one of the best characterized minimal bacterium. Until now, two main groups of clinical isolates of this bacterium have been described (types 1 and 2), differing in the sequence of the P1 adhesin gene. Here, we have sequenced the genomes of 23 clinical isolates of M. pneumoniae. Studying SNPs, non-synonymous mutations, indels and genome rearrangements of these 23 strains and 4 previously sequenced ones, has revealed new subclasses in the two main groups, some of them being associated with the country of isolation. Integrative analysis of in vitro gene essentiality and mutation rates enabled the identification of several putative virulence factors and antigenic proteins; revealing recombination machinery, glycerol metabolism and peroxide production as possible factors in the genetics and physiology of these pathogenic strains. Additionally, the transcriptomes and proteomes of two representative strains, one from each of the two main groups, have been characterized to evaluate the impact of mutations on RNA and proteins levels. This study has revealed that type 2 strains show higher expression levels of CARDS toxin, a protein recently shown to be one of the major factors of inflammation. Thus, we propose that type 2 strains could be more toxigenic than type 1 strains of M. pneumoniae.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mycoplasma pnemoniae

### Affiliations
CRG
- EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain - Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. - Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Javier Delgado

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
- EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain - Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. - Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain


