### Accession
PXD039915

### Title
The direct effect of mycophenolate mofetil on podocytes in nephrotoxic serum nephritis

### Description
The goal of our study was to characterize glomerulus and particularly podocyte biology during MMF treatment in an immune-triggered proteinuric glomerulopathy. Therefore, nephrotoxic serum nephritis was induced in three-week old wild-type mice. On day 3, half of the mice were treated with MMF (100 mg/kgBW/d p.o.) (NTS+MMF) for one week, the other half of animals with vehicle (NTS+veh). A further group without induction and treatment served as controls (C). On day 10, we performed proteomic analysis of glomeruli.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse kidneys were perfused with Dynabeads (14013, Thermo Fisher) to isolate glomeruli as described (Takemoto et al. AJP 2002). The isolated glomeruli were resuspended in 500 µL 1x Hanks´ Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) and centrifuged at 1,500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C, afterwards the supernatant was removed. Pellets were resuspended in 50 µL SP3 buffer and again centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min at 4°C. Afterwards, chromatin was degraded in a Bioruptor®. The reaction tubes were placed in a magnetic rack to remove the Dynabeads from the samples. The supernatant was boiled at 95°C and then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 2 min at 4°C. The protein concentration was determined by a standard procedure using a BCA-kit (Smith et al. Analytical biochemistry 1985). The concentration of each sample was adjusted to 4 µg using 1x SP3 puffer. 5 mM Dithiothreitol was added, vortexed, and incubated at 55°C for 30 min. Then, 40 mM Chloroacetamide was added, vortexed, and incubated for 30 min in the dark at RT. Samples were stored at -20°C and transferred to the staff of the CECAD Proteomics Facility. A Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to analyze all samples. Loading of peptides was done with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an analytical column (50 cm—75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) packed in-house. Chromatographical separation of peptides was performed at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3–5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5–30% solvent B within 119.0 min, 30–50% solvent B within 19.0 min, 50–95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The data-dependent acquisition mode was used on the mass spectrometer. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. Isolation of the top 10 most abundant peptides was performed within a 2.1 Th window and peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. A maximum injection time of 60 milliseconds was applied, as the AGC target was set to 5e5 charges. Product ions were detected at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion of precursors was set for 25.0 seconds. Proteomics data analysis was performed using free academic software Maxquant (https://maxquant.org/maxquant/, version 1.5.3.8) with default parameters to process all mass spectrometric raw data. In short, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot MOUSE.fasta database, with a list of common contaminants included. False discovery rates (FDR) on protein and peptide spectrum matches (PSM) level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using default settings.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed by the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) (Tyanova et al.  Nature methods 2016) and the package limma in R (Ritchie et al. Nucleic Acids Research 2015; R Core Team 2022 https://www.R-project.org). A one-way ANOVA and a two-sample t-test were applied for the data set set after filtering proteins for 3 valid values in at least one group. Limma functions lmFit, eBayes and topTable were used with default settings on the filtered log2 transformed protein intensities to calculate p-values and log2 fold changes. A p-value of p< 0.05 was assumed to be significant without further correction for multiple testing. Within this, altered proteins with a log2 fold change (fc) of ≥ |0.58| (fc≥ 1.5) were categorized as relevantly altered. Proteins that reached these criteria were further analyzed. Several programs and databases were used for functional analysis (GraphPad Prism 9.0.2), Uniprot protein knowledgebase, the String Database (version 11.0) (Szklarczyk et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019), FunRich (version 3.1.3) (Pathan et al. Proteomics 2015), and ShinyGO (version 0.75) (Ge et al. Bioinformatics 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune complex-mediated glomerulopathy, Mycophenolic acid, Renal epithelial cell, Intracellular ca2+ imaging, Actin cytoskeleton, Super-resolution imaging, Glomerular filtration barrier, Multiphoton microscopy

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Street 62, 50937, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Agnes Hackl
Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Street 62, 50937, Cologne, Germany


