### Accession
PXD033704

### Title
Intracellular proteome response of the gut bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron to the metabolic switch from glucose to sucrose as the sole carbon source

### Description
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (B. thetaiotaomicron) is an essential bacterial representative of the human gut microbiome that metabolizes a wide range of dietary and mucosal polysaccharides. Here, we analyze the intracellular proteomic response of in vitro grown B. thetaiotaomicron to the metabolic switch from glucose to sucrose as the sole carbon source. To determine the effects of nutrient metabolism, we applied two LC-based quantitative proteomics approaches encompassing label free quantification (LFQ) and isobaric labeling by tandem mass tags (TMT). The obtained results were compared with respect to the number of identified and quantified proteins, peptides supporting identification and quantification, sequence coverage, reproducibility, and statistical findings. A total of 1719 and 1696 proteins were quantified, covering 35 % of the predicted B. thetaiotaomicron proteome. Both approaches provide a high degree of quantitative and qualitative data, showing that sucrose molecules are metabolized using enzymes and transport systems encoded by a specific polysaccharide utilization locus for fructan metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, protein digestion and isobaric labeling Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M GndHCl, 100 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl and 1x protease inhibitor, pH 7.5. Cells were disrupted in fifteen cycles of freeze-thawing. Cell debris were pelleted by centrifugation (21,000 g, 20 min, 4°C), washed twice with lysis buffer and remaining supernatant pooled to previous one. Reduction and alkylation was carried out with 12 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA for one hour at 25 °C and 800 rpm. 2 mg protein aliquots were desalted by ethanol precipitation, redissolved in 60 µl digestion buffer (4 M GndHCl, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7,5) and subsequently diluted to 0.5 M GndHCl using MilliQ water. For digestion, a protease to protein ratio of 1:80 with sequencing grade modified trypsin was used. After incubation at 37 °C for 20 hours, samples were adjusted to a pH of 2 - 3 with 10% TFA, desalted using the ZipTip protocol and lyophilized. Peptide samples were redissolved a) in loading solution (3 % ACN and 0.1% aqueous TFA) for label free measurements or b) labeled with TMT-6-plex. 80 µg of dried peptides were dissolved in 100 µl of 50 mM TEAB and labeled in a 4:1 TMT: peptide ratio with TMT reagents. After one hour at 25 °C and 700 rpm the reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The pooled sample was purified using a 50 mg C18 Sep-Pak 1 cc cartridge, lyophilized and dissolved in 50 µL of eluent A.  LC-MS (LFQ approach) A Dionex U3000 UHPLC system , equipped with a two-column chromatography setup coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap MS using a nanospray ion source with 1.7 kV spray voltage and 250 °C capillary temperature with a 30 µm PicoTip emitter. Peptides were concentrated onto a trapping column (C18 5 μm, 100 Å , 0.3 × 5 mm) with 30 µl/min for 5 min using 2% ACN and 0.05% aqueous TFA and separated on an analytical column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å , 75 μm × 500 mm) using a 120 min gradient from 95 % eluent A (0.1% aqueous FA) to 50 % eluent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by an increase to 90 % eluent B for 5 min and an isocratic 9 min washing step, the column was equilibrated with 5% B for 12 min. The MS acquisition program consisted of a full-scan (range: 300 – 1,800 m/z, resolution: 60,000, ACG target: 3e6, maximal injection time (IT): 50 ms) followed by acquisition of MS/MS scans of the ten most intense ions using a 2.0 m/z isolation window (resolution: 15,000, AGC target: 1e5, maximal IT: 50 ms). Ions of unassigned, +1, and >+8 charge states were excluded. For fragmentation, HCD was utilized with a NCE of 27, Dynamic exclusion (40 s) and lock mass (445.12003 m/z) were enabled. Each sample was analyzed four times by LC–MS.   2D-LC MS (isobaric labeling approach) Labeled peptides were separated by 2D liquid chromatography employing two high resolution, semi orthogonal separation: reverse phase (RP) HPLC at pH 10 in the first dimension, and ion pair reverse phase HPLC at pH 2 in the second dimension. In the first dimension, a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, equipped with an analytical Gemini-C18 column (250 mm x 3 mm, 3 µm), was used to separate labeled peptides over a gradient of eluents A (milli-Q water, 72 mM TEA adjusted to pH 10 with acetic acid) and B (ACN, 72 mM TEA, 3.5 mL acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. After injection the sample was washed with 5% eluent B for 10 minutes and then fractionated over a gradient from 5% B to 55% B in 50 minutes collecting 56 fractions of 200 µL, respectively. The fractions were lyophilized to dryness and resolved in 20 µl loading solution. The fractions obtained were pooled to seven fractions. For the second dimension of separation and on-line mass spectrometric analysis (LC-MS), a Dionex U3000 UHPLC system, equipped with a two-column chromatography setup coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap MS using a nanospray ion source with 1.7 kV spray voltage and 250 °C capillary temperature with a 30 µm PicoTip emitter. Peptides were concentrated onto a trapping column (5 μm, 100 Å , 0.3 × 5 mm) with 30 µl/min for 5 min using 2% ACN and 0.05% aqueous TFA and subsequently separated on an analytical column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å , 75 μm × 500 mm) using a 120 min gradient from 95 % eluent A (0.1% aqueous FA) to 50 % eluent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by an increase to 90 % eluent B for 5 min and an isocratic 9 min washing step; afterwards, the column was equilibrated with 5% B for 12 min. The MS acquisition program consisted of a full-scan MS (range: 300 – 1,800 m/z, resolution: 60,000, ACG target: 3e6, maximal IT: 50 ms) followed by acquisition of MS/MS scans of the ten most intense ions using a 1.5 m/z isolation window (resolution: 15,000, AGC target: 1e5, maximal IT: 50 ms). Ions of unassigned, +1, and >+8 charge states were excluded. For fragmentation, HCD was utilized with a NCE of 35, Dynamic exclusion (40 s) and lock mass (445.12003 m/z) were enabled. Each TMT pooled fraction was analyzed three times by LC–MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the UniProt reference proteome of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron vpi-5482 (4,782 entries, 01. Sept. 2020) and common contaminants (cRAP, contact/dust and laboratory contaminants; 42 entries) using Proteome Discoverer (V2.2; ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein identification and quantification were performed on the whole data set for LFQ and TMT, respectively. Briefly, the time windows for chromatographic peak alignment and matching/mapping were set at 2 min. For the SequestHT algorithm node, the precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications.  For TMT labeling, TMT-6plex (N-term and K) were set as static modifications. Additionally, for underlabeling evaluation, TMT-6plex (N-term and K) was specified as variable modification and to assess overlabeling, TMT-6plex (N-term and K) were set as static modifications and as a variable modification on histidine, serine, threonine, and tyrosine. All other parameters were the same as in the first database search described above. Percolator was used for posterior error calculation combining the results of the database searches restricted by q-value to FDR ≤ 0.01. Single peptide identifications were excluded and protein groups were assigned using strict parsimony rules. A given protein was considered as “identified” when a valid MS2 spectrum was available for at least one of the peptides belonging to that protein. The quantification value reported for a given protein is calculated as the sum of the quantification values of all unique peptides belonging to that protein whereas the peptide abundance is normalized by the median of peptide spectrum matches (PSM). Identified proteins were filtered for those that were labeled as “MasterProtein” and no contaminant. Proteins were considered quantified if they were identified by at least two peptides and one unique peptide with quantitative data in all three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron is a gram negative bacterium within the human gut microbiome that metabolizes a wide range of dietary and mucosal polysaccharides. Here, we analyze the proteome response of B. thetaiotaomicron cultivated on two different carbon sources, glucose and sucrose. Two quantitative LC-MS based proteomics approaches, encompassing label free quantification and isobaric labeling by tandem mass tags were applied. The results obtained by both workflows were compared with respect to the number of identified and quantified proteins, peptides supporting identification and quantification, sequence coverage, and reproducibility. A total of 1719 and 1696 proteins, respectively, were quantified, covering 35 % of the predicted B. thetaiotaomicron proteome. The data show that B. thetaiotaomicron widely maintains its intracellular proteome upon change of the carbohydrates and that major changes are observed solely in the machinery necessary to make use of the carbon sources provided. With respect to the central role of carbohydrates on gut health these data contribute to the understanding of how different carbohydrates contribute to shape bacterial community in the gut microbiome. All proteomics raw data have been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD033704.

### Keywords
Label free quantifications, Lfq, Carbohydrate metabolism, Isobaric labeling, Ibd, Inflammation, Tmt, Bottom up, Bacterial proteomics, High/low ph 2d-lc

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


