### Accession
PXD003024

### Title
Proteomics of Cerebrospinal Fluid: Throughput and Robustness Using a Scalable Automated Analysis Pipeline for Biomarker Discovery

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a body fluid of high clinical relevance and an important source of potential biomarkers for brain-associated damages such as traumatic brain injury, stroke, and for brain diseases like Alzheimer’s  and Parkinson's . Herein, we have implemented, evaluated and validated a scalable automated proteomic pipeline (ASAP2) for the sample preparation and proteomic analysis of CSF, enabling increased throughput and robustness for biomarker discovery. Human CSF samples were depleted from abundant proteins, and submitted to automated reduction, alkylation, protein digestion, tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling, pooling, and sample clean-up in a 96-well plate format before reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC MS/MS). First, we showed the impact on the CSF proteome coverage of applying the depletion of abundant proteins, which is usually performed on blood plasma or serum samples. Using ASAP2 to analyze 96 identical CSF samples, we determined the analytical figures of merit of our shotgun proteomic approach regarding proteome coverage consistency (i.e., 387 proteins), quantitative accuracy, and individual protein variability. We demonstrated that, as for human plasma samples, ASAP2 is efficient in analyzing large numbers of human CSF samples and is a valuable tool for biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation.   Aliquots of 400 µL of the commercial pooled CSF sample were evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were diluted in 125 µL of Buffer A containing 0.00965 mg·mL−1 β-lactoglobulin (LACB). A volume of 120 µL was filtered with 0.22 µm filter plate. Abundant plasma proteins were removed from the filtered CSF sample solutions (100 µL loaded on column), following the manufacturer instructions with slight modifications, using MARS columns and LC systems equipped with an HTC-PAL fraction collector. After immuno-depletion, samples were snap-freezed and stored. Buffer exchange was performed with Strata-X 33u Polymeric RP (30mg/1mL). Samples were subsequently evaporated and stored at -80 °C.  Non-depleted CSF samples were prepared as followed. Volumes of 100 µL CSF were evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were diluted in 125 µL of H2O containing 0.00965 mg·mL−1 LACB. A volume of 120 µL was filtered with 0.22 µm filter plate. The samples were evaporated again and stored at -80 °C before further use. Dried samples (depleted or non-depleted) were subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion, TMT 6-plex labeling, pooling  and SPE sample purification (Oasis HLB and SCX) using a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler in a 96 well-plate format. The purified pooled TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. To perform a calibration curve experiment, a volume of 6.2 µL protein extracts of E. coli, dissolved in H2O at 0, 0.33, 0.49, 0.82, 1.02 and 1.23  µg/µL respectively, was spiked in 400 µL of human CSF samples. Such sets of 6 spiked CSF samples were processed in triplicate.   RP-LC MS/MS.  LC MS/MS was performed with a linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific).The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1.  For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1500. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 35% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2), with a resolution of 15000, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms in the OT. A maximum of 10 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 seconds within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis.  Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used as data processing interface. Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (08/12/2014 release) including the LACB sequence (20194 sequences in total). Mascot (version 2.4.2, Matrix Sciences) was used as search engine. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus (+ 229.163 Da). 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine (+ 229.163 Da) was set as fixed modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da.  For the calibration curve experiment, an additional search was performed with Mascot in the UniProtKB/SwissProt database restrained to the E. coli taxonomy. Other parameters remained unchanged. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.3.2 (Proteome Software) to be further searched with X! Tandem. Both peptide and protein FDRs were fixed at 1% maximum, with a 2 unique peptide criterion to report protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a body fluid of high clinical relevance and an important source of potential biomarkers for brain-associated damages, such as traumatic brain injury and stroke, and for brain diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Herein, we have implemented, evaluated, and validated a scalable automated proteomic pipeline (ASAP(2)) for the sample preparation and proteomic analysis of CSF, enabling increased throughput and robustness for biomarker discovery. Human CSF samples were depleted from abundant proteins and subjected to automated reduction, alkylation, protein digestion, tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling, pooling, and sample cleanup in a 96-well-plate format before reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC MS/MS). We showed the impact on the CSF proteome coverage of applying the depletion of abundant proteins, which is usually performed on blood plasma or serum samples. Using ASAP(2) to analyze 96 identical CSF samples, we determined the analytical figures of merit of our shotgun proteomic approach regarding proteome coverage consistency (i.e., 387 proteins), quantitative accuracy, and individual protein variability. We demonstrated that, as for human plasma samples, ASAP(2) is efficient in analyzing large numbers of human CSF samples and is a valuable tool for biomarker discovery. The data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003024.

### Keywords
Brain, Automation, Depletion, Tandem mass tags, Isobaric labeling, Clinical proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Molecular Biomarkers Core, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Molecular Biomarkers Core, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


