### Accession
PXD022518

### Title
Nuclear Condensation of NUP98-Fusion Proteins drives leukemogenic gene expression NUP98-fusion protein drive oncogenic gene expression via nuclear/biomolecular condensation

### Description
NUP98-fusion proteins cause leukemia via unknown molecular mechanisms. All NUP98-fusion proteins share an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) featuring >35 repeats of Phenylalanine-Glycine (FG) in the NUP98 N-terminus. Conversely, C-terminal NUP98-fusion partners often have critical functions in gene control. Given these structural features we hypothesized that mechanisms of oncogenic transformation by NUP98-fusion proteins are hard-wired in their protein interactomes. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry and confocal imaging of five distinct NUP98-fusion proteins revealed that conserved interactors were enriched for proteins involved in biomolecular condensation and that they co-localized with NUP98-fusion proteins in nuclear puncta. We developed biotinylated isoxazole-mediated condensome mass spectrometry (biCon-MS) to show that NUP98-fusion proteins alter the global composition of biomolecular condensates. An artificial FG-repeat-containing fusion protein phenocopied the nuclear localization patterns of NUP98-fusion proteins and their capability to drive oncogenic gene expression programs. Thus, we propose that IDR-containing fusion proteins uniquely combine biomolecular condensation with transcriptional control to induce cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Sample Preparation and stage tip purification for AP-MS 100 µl of eluted protein complexes were used for Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) as reported by Wisniewski et al. (Nature Methods volume 6, pages359–362(2009)). To digest proteins, 1 µg trypsin (Promega, V511X) in 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. After additional washing steps with 50 mM TEAB buffer, digested peptides were eluted with 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl. Samples were acidified with 5 µl 30% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequently loaded onto in-house fabricated C18 stage tips. Desalted peptides were eluted using 0.4% formic acid with 90% acetonitrile. After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis.  biCon-MS B-isox precipitates were resuspended in 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8 and proteins reduced with a final concentration of 50 mM DTT and incubated at 60 °C for 1 hour. After cooling down to room temperature, reduced cysteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 55 mM for 30 min in the dark. Prior to tryptic digestion, urea concentration was diluted with 100 mM TEAB buffer pH 8 to 1.5 M and samples were digested with 1.25 μg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned up by acidifying the samples to a final concentration of 1% TFA prior to performing solid phase extraction using C18 SPE columns (SUM SS18V, NEST group, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted using two times 50 µl 90% Acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid, organic solvent removed in a vacuum concentrator before reconstituting in 26 µl of 5% formic acid (Suprapur, MERCK KgaA, Germany). Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) or Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA) via nanoelectrospray ion source using a liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column at a flow rate of 45 μL/min and seperated on a 75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm analytical column.  Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 9.610% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (4% to 30% solvent B within 81 min, 30% to 65% solvent B within 8 min and, 65% to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before equilibrating at 4% solvent B for 18 min). For the MS/MS experiment, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the 15 most intense precursor ions selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap (LTQ). MS1-spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using a scan range of 350 to 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. MS2-scans were acquired in parallel in the linear ion trap with AGC target settings of 5 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 2 Da and the CID normalized collision energy to 30%. The Q Exactive™ MS was operated in a Top10 DDA mode with a MS1 scan range of 375 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MS2-spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with AGC settings of 1 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and the HCD normalized collision energy to 28%. The threshold for selecting MS2 precursor ions was set to ~2,000 counts for both instruments. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed (Olsen, de Godoy et al., 2005). All samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. Xcalibur version 2.1.0 SP1/Tune2.6.0 SP3 and XCalibur version 4.1.31.9 Tune 2.9.2926 were used to operate the LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Q Exactive MS instrument, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis with SearchGUI / PeptideShaker (Figure 1 and Figure 2) We used msconvert56 from the ProteoWizard56 toolkit to convert raw data files to mgf format. These mgf files were then processed with SearchGUI (version 3.2.20)57 with default parameters and the xtandem, myrimatch, ms_amanda, msgf, omssa, comet and tide search engines switched on. SearchGUI was applied against the human Swiss-Prot58 database (01.2017) extended with the Strep-HA-tag, Strep-Tactin and trypsin protein sequences. As post-translational modifications, we configured fixed carbomidomethylation of Cysteine and variable oxidation of Methionine. The decoy database was generated within SearchGUI by reversing all sequences of the database described previously. Results were then analyzed with PeptideShaker (version 1.16.15)59.  MS data analysis with Proteome Discoverer (Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6) Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. RAW data was recalibrated prior to Sequest HT searches using full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.06 (20,456 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to one miscleavage site. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, acetylation (+42.010565 Da) of lysine and protein N-terminus and phosphorylation (+79.966331 Da) of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The ptmRS node was used for additional validation of posttranslational modifications. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1, ptmRS scores of ≥75 and protein groups including ≥2 peptides. For calculation of protein amounts, the Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled. Precursor abundance was calculated using intensity of peptide features including only unique peptide groups and excluding phosphorylated and acetylated peptides. To equalize total abundance between different runs, protein abundance values were normalized using the total peptide amount approach. No computational missing value imputation was applied to fill gaps. For statistical analysis a nested (paired) approach was applied using pairwise ratio calculation and background-based ANOVA statistical testing. Pairwise ratio calculation was chosen to make the analysis less sensitive towards missing values. Background-based ANOVA uses the background population of ratios for all peptides and proteins in order to determine whether any given single peptide or protein is significantly changing relative to that background (as stated in the manual of Proteome Discoverer 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Adjusted p-values are calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Volcano plots were generated from the normalized protein abundances with the R-package DEP60. We used default parameters with the exception of the vsn normalization and as imputation function MinProb with q=0.01, Significant differences in the enrichment of proteins were called based on the adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 and a log2 fold change of >1 or <-1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Bicon-ms, Ap-ms, Condensate, Nup98, Fusion protein

### Affiliations
Institute for Medical Biochemistry, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, 1210, Austria
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Grebien
Institute for Medical Biochemistry, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, 1210, Austria


