### Accession
PXD014247

### Title
GRASP Proximity Labeling

### Description
The goal of the project is to identify interactors of GRASP, a golgi-associated protein, to elucidate the mechanism of unconventional secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Half of the beads and affinity purified proteins were resuspended in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma, C4706), and free thiols were alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma, 22790) at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins on beads were quantified by 280 nm absorbance on a Nanodrop (Thermo). Subsequently, approximately 250 μg of bound proteins were trypsinized on-bead with 2.5 μg of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (ThermoFisher, 90057) dissolved in 50 mM acetic acid, and incubated at room temperature overnight, for at 20 - 24 h, on a rotisserie. After digestion, trypsinized peptides were harvested by centrifuging beads at low speed (3,000 x g) for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a clean Lo-bind centrifuge tube (Eppendorf), the beads were then washed with an additional 100-200 μl 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged again, and the supernatant was combined with the initial fraction.  Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (pH < 3) and desalted by SOLA C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (ThermoFisher, 60109-001), and then dried down in a speed-vac. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C, and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in a bath sonicator for 5 min to a concentration of 0.2 μg/μL before MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the raw spectral data using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) to identify and quantify proteins. We relied on default software settings and searched against ~80,000 human proteins from Uniprot. We processed the “proteinGroups” output file for downstream analyses in R (version 3.4.0). First, we filtered out proteins annotated as “Reverse,” “Only identified by site,” or “Potential contaminant.” To remove poorly quantified proteins, we required quantification in at least two replicates in one condition. In addition, we omitted proteins that had a single observation in one condition that is greater than the mean of two or more observations in the other condition. We then log2- transformed the intensity data derived from label-free quantification by MaxQuant. Missing values were imputed using a hybrid imputation approach, “MLE” setting for values missing at random and “MinProb” for those missing not at random (imputeLCMD package). Finally, Welch's two-sample unpaired t-test was performed to evaluate the statistical significance of the change in biotinylated proteins between WT and G2A.

### Publication Abstract
There is great interest in understanding the cellular mechanisms controlling autophagy, a tightly regulated catabolic and stress-response pathway. Prior work has uncovered links between autophagy and the Golgi reassembly stacking protein of 55&#x2005;kDa (GRASP55), but their precise interrelationship remains unclear. Intriguingly, both autophagy and GRASP55 have been functionally and spatially linked to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)---Golgi interface, broaching this compartment as a site where GRASP55 and autophagy may intersect. Here, we uncover that loss of GRASP55 enhances LC3 puncta formation, indicating that GRASP55 restricts autophagosome formation. Additionally, using proximity-dependent biotinylation, we identify a GRASP55 proximal interactome highly associated with the ER-Golgi interface. Both nutrient starvation and loss of GRASP55 are associated with coalescence of early secretory pathway markers. In light of these findings, we propose that GRASP55 regulates spatial organization of the ER-Golgi interface, which suppresses early autophagosome formation.

### Keywords
Unconventional secretion, Autophagy, Afinity purification-mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Professor and Chair, Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Yu-Hsiu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Jayanta Debnath
Professor and Chair, Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco


