### Accession
PXD042367

### Title
A framework for ultra-low input spatial tissue proteomics

### Description
Spatial tissue proteomics combining microscopy-based cell phenotyping with ultrasensitive mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics is an emerging and powerful concept for the study of cell function and heterogeneity in health and disease. However, optimized workflows that preserve morphological information for image-based phenotype discovery and maximize proteome coverage of few or even single cells from laser microdissected archival tissue, are currently lacking. Here, we report a robust and scalable workflow for the proteomic analysis of ultra-low input formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) material. Benchmarking in the murine liver resulted in up to 2,000 quantified proteins from single hepatocyte contours and nearly 5,000 proteins from 50-cell regions with high quantitative reproducibility. Applied to human tonsil, we profiled 146 microregions including spatially defined T and B lymphocyte niches and quantified cell-type specific markers, cytokines, immune cell regulators and transcription factors. These rich data also highlighted proteome dynamics in spatially defined zones of activated germinal centers, illuminating sites undergoing active B-cell proliferation and somatic hypermutation. Our results demonstrate the power of spatially-resolved proteomics for tissue phenotyping by integrating high-content imaging, laser microdissection, and ultrasensitive mass spectrometry. This approach has broad implications for a wide range of biomedical applications, including early disease profiling, drug target discovery and biomarker research.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide clean-up with C-18 tips Evotip (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) based peptide clean-up was performed as recommended by the manufacturer. Briefly, 20 ul of buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA) was added to each C-18 tip (EV2013, Evotip Pure, Evosep) and centrifuged at 700 rpm for 1 minute. Then, 20ul of buffer A (99.9% water, 0.1% FA) was added from the top of each C-18 tip, activated in isopropanol for 20 seconds and centrifuged again at 700 rpm for 1 minute. Digested tissue samples were then loaded onto Evotips, washed once with 20ul buffer A and finally eluted with 20ul buffer B to a 96-well plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AB1300), and vacuum dried (15min at 60°C). Samples were stored at −20 °C until liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) analysis. For LC-MS analysis, 4.2 µl of MS loading buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water) was added, the plate was vortexed for 10 seconds and centrifuged for 1 minute at 700g. 4 µl were finally injected into the mass spectrometer.  Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC – MS) analysis LC-MS analysis was performed with an EASYnLC-1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadruple time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF SCP and timsTOF Pro2, Bruker Daltonik) with a nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonik). The autosampler was configured to pick samples from 384- and 96-well plates.  Peptides were loaded on a 20-cm home-packed HPLC column (75-µm inner diameter packed with 1.9-µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ silica beads, Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 7-30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 90% ACN in LC-MS grade water) in 14 minutes, followed by an increase to 60% for 1 minute and a 1.5-minute wash in 90% buffer B at 250 nl min-1. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water. The total gradient length was 21 minutes. A column oven was used to keep the column temperature constant at 40°C.  For dia-PASEF analysis, we used a dia-PASEF method with 8 dia-PASEF scans separated into 3 ion mobility windows per scan covering a 400-1000 m/z range by 25 Th windows and an ion mobility range from 0.64 to 1.37 Vs cm-2. The mass spectrometer was operated in high sensitivity mode, with an accumulation and ramp time at 100 ms, capillary voltage set to 1750V and the collision energy as a linear ramp from 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 . The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of ion mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 V s cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 V s cm-2.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data analysis We used DIA-NN27 (version 1.8.1) for dia-PASEF raw file analysis and spectral library generation.   Spectral library generation For spectral library generation to analyze dia-PASEF data, human and mouse FASTA files were downloaded from Uniprot (2022 release, UP000000589_10090 Mus Musculus, UP000005640_9606, downloaded on April 10th and April 8th 2022 respectively). DIA-NN in silico predicted libraries were generated by providing the human or mouse FASTA file and frequently found contaminants 47 (mouse + mouse tissue contaminants, or human + universal contaminants). Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction were enabled for the appropriate mass range of 300-1200 m/z. N-terminal M excision was enabled and cysteine carbamidomethylation was enabled as a fixed modification. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed, and the precursor charge set to 2 -4. For the generation of project-specific refined libraries, in-silico-generated mouse and human libraries were used to search 20-50 raw files of high-sample amounts, such that the optimal total ion current was reached (see Fig. 2 and 3). The refined murine liver library consisted of 68,006 precursors, 61,554 elution groups and 8,225 protein groups. The refined human tonsil library consisted of 47,999 precursors, 44,675 elution groups and 8,137 protein groups.   Search of dia-PASEF raw files with refined libraries DIA-NN was operated in the default mode with minor adjustments. Briefly, MS1 and MS2 accuracies were set to 15.0, scan windows to 0 (assignment by DIA-NN), isotopologues were enabled, no MBR, heuristic protein inference and no shared spectra. Proteins were inferred from genes, neural network classifier was set to single-pass mode, quantification strategy as ‘Robust LC (high precision)’. Cross-run normalization was set to ‘RT-dependent’, library generation as ‘smart profiling’, speed and Ram usage as ‘optimal results’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Tissue profiling

### Affiliations
Spatial Proteomics Max Delbrück Center  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin, Germany
Max Delbrück Center

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Fabian Coscia
Spatial Proteomics Max Delbrück Center  Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin, Germany


