### Accession
PXD036119

### Title
Proteomics analysis of differentially expressed proteins in lung cancer H157 cells after overexpression of AACT with data‐independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
H157 cells transfected with vector and overexpressed AACT plasmids were treated and used for MS detection. The MS data were acquired using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer coupled with an EASY-NLC 1200 liquid phase LC-MS system. DIA raw data files were analyzed by DIA-NN software. The differentially expressed proteins were screened in this quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
H157 cells transfected with vector and overexpressed AACT plasmids were collected and quickly frozen with liquid nitrogen. The samples were further detected by SpecAlly Life Technology Co., LTD (Wuhan, China). The proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated with reaction solution containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl with pH 8.5, 10 mM trichloroethyl phosphate, and 40 mM chloroacetamide by one-step at 60 ℃ for 1 h, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 ℃. The digestion reaction was stopped by trifluoroacetic acid, and the digested peptides were desalted and evaporated.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer coupled with an EASY-NLC 1200 liquid phase LC-MS system. Peptide samples were aspirated by an autosampler and bound to a C18 analytical column for separation. The mobile phases A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phases B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN acetonitrile (ACN) were used to establish the analytical gradient. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometry data was collected with DIA model, and each cycle included one MS1 scan (Max IT was 30 ms, scan range from 350 to 1250 m/z) and 40 MS2 scans with variable windows (Max IT = 50 ms), and the collision energy was set to 30. DIA raw data files were analyzed by DIA-NN software (V 1.8). The human proteome reference database in Uniprot (2021-03-12, containing 20381 protein sequences) was used for search analysis. The spectrum libraries were obtained via the deep learning algorithm in DIA-NN and MBR function, and the spectrum libraries were used to extract the original DIA data to obtain protein quantitative information. The final results were screened by 1% FDR for parent ion and protein levels. The quantitative information of the proteome after screening was used for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenesis mechanism of lung cancer is very complex, with high incidence and mortality. Serpin family A member 3 (SERPINA3) expression levels were reduced in the sera of patients with lung cancer and may be a candidate diagnostic and prognostic survival biomarker in lung cancer, as previously reported. However, the detailed biological functions of SERPINA3 in the pathogenesis of lung cancer remain unknown. In the present study, it was aimed to explore the effects of SERPINA3 on the occurrence of lung cancer. SERPINA3 expression was assessed using bioinformatics database analysis and experimental detection. Then, the biological effects of SERPINA3 were investigated in a cell culture system and a xenograft model of human lung cancer. The potential regulatory mechanism of SERPINA3 in lung cancer was explored by data&#x2011;independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA&#x2011;MS) detection and further validated by western blotting (WB). The results indicated that SERPINA3 expression levels were significantly downregulated in lung cancer tissues and cell lines. At the cellular level, it was revealed that overexpressed SERPINA3 inhibited cell growth, proliferation, migration and invasion and promoted the apoptosis of lung cancer cells. Moreover, overexpressed SERPINA3 enhanced the sensitivity of lung cancer cells to osimertinib. <i>In&#xa0;vivo</i>, a xenograft model of human lung cancer was established with BALB/c nude mice. After the injection of A549 cells, the tumor growth of the tumor&#x2011;bearing mice in the SERPINA3&#x2011;overexpressing group increased more slowly, and the tumor volume was smaller than that in the empty&#x2011;vector group. Mechanistically, a total of 65 differentially expressed proteins were identified. It was found that the speckle&#x2011;type POZ protein (SPOP) was significantly upregulated in SERPINA3&#x2011;overexpressing H157 cells using DIA&#x2011;MS detection and analysis. WB validation showed that SPOP expression increased, and NF&#x2011;kappaB (NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B) p65 was inhibited in cell lines and tumor tissues of mice when SERPINA3 was overexpressed. The present findings suggest that SERPINA3 is involved in the development of lung cancer and has an antineoplastic role in lung cancer.

### Keywords
Overexpression, Lung cancer, Proteomics, Dia, Aact

### Affiliations
Hubei Normal University

### Submitter
Yanxia  Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Yanxia Jin
Hubei Normal University


