### Accession
PXD025765

### Title
HDX-MS Analysis of RORg:RORE:SRC3 Complexes

### Description
The retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor γ (RORγ) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that both underpins metabolic and immune functions and provides vantage to manipulate those processes pharmacologically. Despite its importance, our understanding of the ligand-dependent activities of RORγ is far from complete and developing a detailed structural model for RORγ pharmacology could provide a path towards the development of safe and efficacious therapeutics targeting the receptor. Herein, we examine the ligand-dependent assembly of recombinant RORγ:coregulator complexes on cognate DNA response elements using structural proteomics and small angle x-ray scattering. These studies reveal that the RORγ DNA binding domain can bind multiple different sequences of DNA, and that coregulatory proteins may be able to ‘sense’ the ligand- and DNA-bound status of RORγ. Overall, the efforts described herein will illuminate important aspects of RORγ activity and drug development that could lead to more efficacious treatments targeting this important receptor.

### Sample Protocol
RORγ:RORE complex purification. Synthetic dsDNA oligos were designed based on sequences of well-characterized and functionally relevant RORγ response elements. The sense and anti-sense oligos were synthesized, annealed, and HPLC purified (Integrated DNA Technologies). The lyophilized DNA was resuspended in molecular biology grade water to a concentration of 150 μM based on absorbance at 260 nm. To form RORγ:RORE complexes, 100 μL  of RORE was added to 33 μL  of 4X HBS (200 mM HEPES pH 7.5 at RT, 2M NaCl). The 30 μM HisSUMO-RORγ samples were thawed at room temperature, mixed, centrifugated (20,000 RCF for 3 minutes at 20°C), and added to the salt normalized RORE solution where the final concentration of RORE was an approximate 1.5 molar excess to RORγ. HisSUMO-RORγ:RORE complexes were formation occurs over a 30 minute incubation at RT and was confirmed by DNA retardation gel electrophoresis and analytical size exclusion chromatography. The HisSUMO solubility tag was cleaved enzymatically by addition of 10 μL of 20 μM His-tagged SUMO protease and incubating for 10 minutes at RT. RORγ:ROREs solutions were purified and buffer exchanged using size exclusion chromatography using an AKTA Pure™ operating at room temperature. The solutions were manually injected onto a Superdex 200 10/300 (General Electric) pre-equilibrated with HEPES buffered saline (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5 at RT, 150 mM NaCl, 50 μM TCEP, 2% glycerol), eluted with an isocratic pump operating at 1 mL/min, and 200 μL fractions were collected in polypropylene 96 well plates. Fractions containing the RORγ:RORE of interest were pooled (typically 1.6 mL) and kept on ice. The yield was determined based on UV-Vis spectroscopy where the extinction coefficient of the DNA at 260 nm was used to determine concentration. The total complex recovery estimates typically range from 70-80%. To prepare the samples for XL- and HDX-MS, the samples were concentrated to ~10 μM using 0.5 mL Amicon Ultra™ spin filtration devices with 50 kDa molecular weight cut off. To prepare the samples for HT-SAXS, dithiothreitol was added to 5 mM and the sample was concentrated to ~1.0-2.0 mg/mL (30-40 uM) using a separate spin filtration device. The spin column flow through was used as the buffer blank control for SAXS measurements. The samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.   Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry: Peptide Identification: Typical HDX-MS peptide identification was performed using a previously described automated liquid handling robot coupled to an agilent 1260 HPLC and either a Q Exactive (QE) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). or a Fusion Lumos (Lumos) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Briefly, 25 μL of 2 μM RORγ2 in HBST buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, 2% glycerol) was mixed with 25 μL of quench buffer (5M urea, 25 mM TCEP, 1.0% TFA) and immediately injected for in-line immobilized pepsin or NepII digestion. Following digestion, peptides were desalted on a trap column (1 x 10 mm C8 HypersilGold, Thermo) and separated on an analytical column (1 x 50 mm C18 HypersilGold, Thermo) using a linear 60 minute linear gradient of 5–40% solvent B (solvent A is 0.3% formic acid and solvent B is 0.3% formic acid 95% acetonitrile). On the QE, master scans were collected at 70,000 K resolution at 400 m/z. Product ion spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode such that the top 10 most abundant ions selected for the product ion analysis by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) between survey scan events. Following MS2 acquisition, the precursor ion was excluded for 16 s. The resulting MS/MS data files were submitted to Mascot (Matrix Science) for peptide identification. Peptides included in the HDX analysis peptide set had a MASCOT score greater than 20 and the MS/MS spectra were verified by manual inspection. The MASCOT search was repeated against a decoy (reverse) sequence and ambiguous identifications were ruled out and not included in the HDX peptide set.

### Data Protocol
HDX-MS analysis: Unless otherwise stated, sample handling and peptide separation were conducted at 4°C. For differential HDX, 50 μL aliquots of 9 μM RORγ:RORE complexes were thawed. Next, 5 l of sample was diluted into 20 l D2O buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP) and incubated for various time points (0, 10, 30, 60, 300, 900, and 3600 s) at 4°C. The deuterium exchange was then slowed by mixing with 25 l of cold (4°C) 5 M urea, 25 mM TCEP, and 1% TFA. Quenched samples were immediately injected into the HDX platform. Upon injection, samples were passed through an immobilized pepsin column (2 mm × 2 cm) at 50 l min−1 and the resulting peptides were captured on a 2 mm × 1 cm C8 trap column (Agilent) and desalted for 2.5 minutes. The protease column was housed in a chamber that maintained temperature at 18°C. Peptides were separated across a 2.1 mm × 5 cm C18 column (1.9 l Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher) with a linear gradient of 4-40 % CH3CN and 0.3 % formic acid, over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometric data were acquired using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher). The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This was accomplished determining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra and using the conventional formula described elsewhere [29]. Corrections for back-exchange were determined empirically using a Dmax control. Briefly, this sample was generated by mixing 5 μL of protein sample with 20 μL of deuterated buffer and incubated at 37 °C overnight before being queued to for subsequent quenching, and injection.  Data Rendering: The HDX data from all overlapping peptides were consolidated to individual amino acid values using a residue averaging approach. Briefly, for each residue, the deuterium incorporation values and peptide lengths from all overlapping peptides were assembled. A weighting function was applied where shorter peptides were weighted more heavily and longer peptides were weighted less. Each of the weighted deuterium incorporation values were then averaged to produce a single value for each amino acid. The initial two residues of each peptide, as well as prolines, were omitted from the calculations. This approach is similar to that previously described [30]. HDX analyses were performed in triplicate, with single preparations of each purified protein/complex. Statistical significance for the differential HDX data is determined by t-test for each time point and is integrated into the HDX Workbench software[31].

### Publication Abstract
The retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor &#x3b3; (ROR&#x3b3;) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor of the nuclear receptor super family that underpins metabolic activity, immune function, and cancer progression. Despite being a valuable drug target in health and disease, our understanding of the ligand-dependent activities of ROR&#x3b3; is far from complete. Like most nuclear receptors, ROR&#x3b3; must recruit coregulatory protein to enact the ROR&#x3b3; target gene program. To date, a majority of structural studies have been focused exclusively on the ROR&#x3b3; ligand-binding domain and the ligand-dependent recruitment of small peptide segments of coregulators. Herein, we examine the ligand-dependent assembly of full length ROR&#x3b3;:coregulator complexes on cognate DNA response elements using structural proteomics and small angle x-ray scattering. The results from our studies suggest that ROR&#x3b3; becomes elongated upon DNA recognition, preventing long range interdomain crosstalk. We also determined that the DNA binding domain adopts a sequence-specific conformation, and that coregulatory protein may be able to 'sense' the ligand- and DNA-bound status of ROR&#x3b3;. We propose a model where ligand-dependent coregulator recruitment may be influenced by the sequence of the DNA to which ROR&#x3b3; is bound. Overall, the efforts described herein will illuminate important aspects of full length ROR&#x3b3; and monomeric orphan nuclear receptor target gene regulation through DNA-dependent conformational changes.

### Keywords
Protein-dna interaction, Rorg, Protein-protein interaction, Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, Src3, Rorg response elements

### Affiliations
TSRI
Department of Molecular Medicine The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Timothy Strutzenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick R. Griffin
Department of Molecular Medicine The Scripps Research Institute


