### Accession
PXD002386

### Title
Characterization of receptor-associated protein complex assembly in Interleukin (IL)-2- and IL-15-activated T-lymphocytes

### Description
Despite extensive investigation, it remains a paradox that IL-2 and IL-15 can differentially modulate the immune response using the same signaling receptors. In our previous work, we dissected the phosphotyrosine-driven signaling cascades triggered by both cytokines in Kit225 T-cells unveiling subtle differences that may contribute to their functional dichotomy. In the present study, we aimed to decipher the receptor complex assembly in IL-2- and IL-15-activated T-lymphocytes that is fine tune orchestrated by site-specific phosphorylation events. Comparing the cytokine-induced interactome of the interleukin receptor beta and gamma subunits shared by the two cytokines, we defined the components of the early IL-2 and IL-15 receptor-associated complex discovering novel constituents such as FAM59A and SOCS2. Additionally, phosphopeptide-directed analysis allowed us to detect several cytokine-dependent and –independent phosphorylation events within the activated receptor complex including novel phosphorylated sites located in the cytoplasmic region of IL-2Rβ. We proved that the distinct phosphorylations induced by the cytokines serve for recruiting different types of effectors to the initial receptor/ligand complex. Whereas IL-2Rβ pS431 binds to clathrins, which are involved in the receptor internalization and subsequent signal attenuation, IL-2Rγ pY325 and pY357 attract phosphatases, adaptor proteins, kinases as well as the newly identified member of the interleukin receptor complex SOCS2. Overall our study sheds new light into the initial molecular mechanisms triggered by IL-2 and IL-15 and constitutes a further step towards a better understanding of the early signaling aspects of the two closely-related cytokines in T-lymphocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For depicting the interactome of IL-2RB and IL-2RG we performed two different triple SILAC experiments in duplicate. Protein was extracted from control (Arg0/Lys0), IL-2-treated (Arg6/Lys4) and IL-15-treated (Arg10/Lys8) T-cells and mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio. Then, we performed two distinct immunoprecipitations using an antibody that specifically recognizes the beta or gamma subunit of the IL-2 receptor. In both cases, immune complexes were fractionated in a SDS-PAGE, proteins were in gel digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were either directly analysed by LC-MS/MS or enriched in phosphopeptides using TiO2 beads prior MS analysis.
For pulldown assays, immobilized streptavidin beads were loaded with biotinylated non-modified peptides and phosphorylated version of the same peptide while SILAC-labeled cells (Arg0/Lys0 and Arg10/Lys8) were lysed and pre-cleared. Equal amounts of pre-cleared lysate proteins were incubated with the respective immobilized peptide and fter extensive washing, beads loaded with the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated version of the same peptide were combined (1:1) and attached proteins were on-bead digested with LysC and trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted and fractionated with C18 stage tips and run by LC-MS/MS. We performed two independent biological replicates for each of the four different pull down assays, swapping the SILAC labels for replicate experiments.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software and further statistical analysis were done in the Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
It remains a paradox that IL-2 and IL-15 can differentially modulate the immune response using the same signaling receptors. We have previously dissected the phosphotyrosine-driven signaling cascades triggered by both cytokines in Kit225 T-cells, unveiling subtle differences that may contribute to their functional dichotomy. In this study, we aimed to decipher the receptor complex assembly in IL-2- and IL-15-activated T-lymphocytes that is highly orchestrated by site-specific phosphorylation events. Comparing the cytokine-induced interactome of the interleukin receptor beta and gamma subunits shared by the two cytokines, we defined the components of the early IL-2 and IL-15 receptor-associated complex discovering novel constituents. Additionally, phosphopeptide-directed analysis allowed us to detect several cytokine-dependent and -independent phosphorylation events within the activated receptor complex including novel phosphorylated sites located in the cytoplasmic region of IL-2 receptor &#x3b2; subunit (IL-2R&#x3b2;). We proved that the distinct phosphorylations induced by the cytokines serve for recruiting different types of effectors to the initial receptor/ligand complex. Overall, our study sheds new light into the initial molecular events triggered by IL-2 and IL-15 and constitutes a further step toward a better understanding of the early signaling aspects of the two closely related cytokines in T-lymphocytes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Interactome, Receptor complex assembly, Il-15, Il-2

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Irina Kratchmarova
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark


