### Accession
PXD030061

### Title
AP-BNPAGE YAP1 complexes separation

### Description
YAP1 complexes separation with affinity purification (AP) coupled to BNPAGE

### Sample Protocol
For affinity purification coupled with Blue Native separation, fifteen 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% cell confluency confluent, treated with 1 µg/ml tetracycline for 24 h were harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen.  The frozen pellet was lysed with the following buffer (HNN lysis buffer): 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1mM PMSF, 1.2 µM Avidin (IBA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma), using 800 µl of lysis buffer for each lysed cell plate. The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) and digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with 50ml crosslinked Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA) for 1 h on a rotation shaker. Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), bound proteins were incubated for 30 minutes and eluted with 50 ml of 2.5 mM biotin in HNN buffer (Thermo). 40 µl of eluted protein was supplemented with 12 µl of native sample loading buffer and loaded on Native PAGE 3-12% Bis Tris precast protein gels (Invitrogen) for native separation, according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Different from instructions, the cathode chamber was only filled with Light Blue Cathode Buffer. Native PAGE gel was running for 3 hours at 4 °C with three step gradient (150V-180V-200V) voltage. Once the run was finished, proteins were stained with Simple Blue Safe Stain (Invitrogen) and proteolyzed following Protease MAX Surfactant (Promega) in gel digestion protocol. To excise 64 protein bands with the same size from a native gel separation (necessary for quantitative proteomics data), a custom device constituted by 100 parallel blades spaced 1 mm from one another was used. Briefly, protein bands were distained, shrunk, reduced (25 mM DTT) and alkylated (55 mm iodoacetamide) before proteolysis. Digestion was performed in 50 µl digestion solution (0.5µg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade), 0.1 µg of LysC (Wako), 0.01% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate). After overnight digestions, peptides extracted in solution were collected, while gel pieces were covered with 50% acetonitrile solution for 30 minutes to improve the yield peptide extraction. Peptide solutions generated from the proteolysis and from the treatment of gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile solution were dried and resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control. MS ANALYSIS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-class system (Waters). Peptides were separated on ACQUITY UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 40 min gradient from 8% to 30% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1500 m/z) at 60,000 resolution, 15 ms injection time and 3e6 AGC target, followed by twelve FTMS/MS scans at 60,000 resolution, 110ms injection time and 1e5 AGC target. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 28%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with single analysis of YAP1 SH tagged purification, the eluate was separated with blue native gel and fractionated in 64 protein bands. Three independent biological replicates of YAP1 purification were proteolyzed and peptides were fractionated using High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein identified in fractionation samples were filtered using SAINT express, as described above, to obtain a list of deep high confidence interactors (57 proteins). Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine54 against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 10.10.18) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides, maximum one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modification and “match between runs” option. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance were set, respectively, to 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da. False discovery rate of <1% was used at the protein level to infer the protein presence. The protein abundance was determined from the intensity of top two unique peptides for each protein. Protein intensity of YAP1 interactors (high confidence interactors list from fractionated YAP1 interactome, Figure 2) and phosphosite intensity of YAP1 and YAP1 interactors were extracted from the protein and peptide matrices. LFQ protein intensity was normalized using iRT peptide intensity; phospho peptides were filtered based on phospho localization probability score (filter peptides with score > 0.8 in at least one fraction; filter fractions with score >0.5) and the intensity was normalized using YAP1 protein abundance (only YAP1 phospho-peptides) and for iRT peptide intensity. Missing values were imputed with the average of two neighbor fractions. Phospho-peptides and proteins profile were normalized for the maximum value identified in the fractionation, then split based on identified peaks using gaussian smoothing function (minimum normalized intensity 0.2 and width 2 for proteins; minimum normalized intensity 0.3 and width 2 for phospho-peptides). In the analysis of interactors, YAP1 was excluded as the protein is identified in all fractions and interacts with all protein groups identified in the separation. Hierarchical clusters based on the distance of peak correlation were performed for interactors and phospho-sites to generate coelution groups. The combination of phospho-peptides and interactors co-migration groups was based on the fraction with peak apex. Precision rate for protein-protein interactions identified with observed cluster was calculated for each coelution group with the ratio between identified protein-protein interactions and protein-protein interactions annotated in BioGRID (version 3.5.176)13. In the ratio calculation of BioGRID annotated interactions, YAP1 interactions are not considered. The same calculation was performed for 1000 random clusters generated from YAP1 identified interactors (24 proteins), including always YAP1 and with the same group size of the observed clusters. Two generated distributions were assayed with Shapiro test to check normality and with two sided t test. GO cell compartment ratio (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ 56) was calculated with the ratio between proteins involved in cell junctions, cytoplasm, cytosol, apical plasma membrane, nucleus cell compartments, over all proteins identified for each coelution group. GO cell compartment enrichment was calculated for each coelution over the GO cell compartment ratio calculated for YAP1 identified interactors (24 proteins). The same calculation was performed with 1000 random clusters generated above. Two generated distributions were assayed with Shapiro test to check normality and with two sides t test.The layout of protein-protein interaction coelution groups (Figures 3c.) was generated using Cytoscape (v3.6.0)57

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yap1 ap-bnpage

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


