### Accession
PXD038024

### Title
Multiomics analysis of a DNAH5-mutated PCD organoid model revealed the key role of the TGF-β/BMP and Notch pathways in epithelial differentiation and the immune response in DNAH5-mutated patients

### Description
Dynein axonemal heavy chain 5 (DNAH5) is the most mutated gene in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), leading to abnormal cilia ultrastructure and function. Few studies have revealed the genetic characteristics and pathogenetic mechanisms of PCD caused by DNAH5 mutation. Here, we established a child PCD airway organoid directly from the bronchoscopic biopsy of a patient with DNAH5 mutation. We found abnormal ciliary function and a decreased immune response caused by DNAH5 mutation through proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic analysis was subjected to LC‒MS/MS analysis with a standard protocol. In brief, the organoids were washed in PBS twice and then sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). To remove the remaining debris, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein sample was processed after trypsin digestion and purification by a C18 SPE column. The peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB. Each channel of peptide was labelled with its respective TMT reagent (Thermo Scientific). The tryptic peptides were first dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water). Peptides were separated with gradient solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, the separated peptides were analysed in a Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. The data were analysed using GO annotation (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and KEGG Pathway 563 annotation (KEGG online service tool KAAS mapper).

### Publication Abstract
Dynein axonemal heavy chain 5 (DNAH5) is the most mutated gene in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), leading to abnormal cilia ultrastructure and function. Few studies have revealed the genetic characteristics and pathogenetic mechanisms of PCD caused by DNAH5 mutation. Here, we established a child PCD airway organoid directly from the bronchoscopic biopsy of a patient with the DNAH5 mutation. The motile cilia in the organoid were observed and could be stably maintained for an extended time. We further found abnormal ciliary function and a decreased immune response caused by the DNAH5 mutation through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) and proteomic analyses. Additionally, the directed induction of the ciliated cells, regulated by TGF-&#x3b2;/BMP and the Notch pathway, also increased the expression of inflammatory cytokines. Taken together, these results demonstrated that the combination of multiomics analysis and organoid modelling could reveal the close connection between the immune response and the DNAH5 gene.

### Keywords
Multiomics analysis, Immune response, Primary ciliary dyskinesia, Dnah5, Airway organoid

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology and Immunology, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Wenhao Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hanmin Liu
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology and Immunology, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


