### Accession
PXD031080

### Title
HDX analysis of PI3K oncogenic mutants

### Description
We used Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS) to examine the dynamic structural changes caused by oncogenic mutations. We performed HDX-MS comparing the full-length complex against the catalytic core which suggest that addition of pY leads to mixed two state population where the state 1 consists of iSH2 bound p110α and the state 2 consists of p110α where the iSH2 is completely disengaged.Therefore, we propose that the non-kinase domain mutations push the equilibrium towards state 2 leading to enhanced enzyme activity.We also propose that the kinase domain mutations lead to the re-orientation of the c-terminal tail leading to exposure of the activation loop and enhanced membrane binding.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS samples were made in HDX buffers containing 10 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, and 2 mM TCEP by the addition of protein (final 10 pM) and pY peptide (1 uM)/ blank followed by addition of 94% D2O buffer (final Deuterium level at 69%). For HDX-MS measuring protein-lipid interactions, the activated protein-pY mixture was allowed to preincubate with the lipid for 2 mins before addition of D2O buffer. Five time points on exchange for WT vs mutant basal analysis ( 3, 30, 300 and 3000s) and two time points on exchange for PI3K vs lipid analysis (3,300 s) at 20 °C were followed by addition of a quench buffer (final concentration 0.8% formic acid, 0.5 M guanidine-HCl). Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored for no more than 1 week at −80 °C until mass analysis. See manuscript for details on each individual experiment.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system kept in a cold box at 2ºC. The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Porosyme 2-3131-00) and the peptides were collected onto a VanGuard Precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7um particle, 100 x 1mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5%- 36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Impact QTOF (Bruker), and peptide identification was done by running tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments run in data-dependent acquisition mode. The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: >4% change in exchange, >0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test. Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Publication Abstract
PIK3CA encoding the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p110&#x3b1; catalytic subunit is frequently mutated in cancer, with mutations occurring widely throughout the primary sequence. The full set of mechanisms underlying how PI3Ks are activated by all oncogenic mutations on membranes are unclear. Using a synergy of biochemical assays and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), we reveal unique regulatory mechanisms underlying PI3K activation. Engagement of p110&#x3b1; on membranes leads to disengagement of the ABD of p110&#x3b1; from the catalytic core, and the C2 domain from the iSH2 domain of the p85 regulatory subunit. PI3K activation also requires reorientation of the p110&#x3b1; C-terminus, with mutations that alter the inhibited conformation of the C-terminus increasing membrane binding. Mutations at the C-terminus (M1043I/L, H1047R, G1049R, and N1068KLKR) activate p110&#x3b1; through distinct mechanisms, with this having important implications for mutant selective inhibitor development. This work reveals unique mechanisms underlying how PI3K is activated by oncogenic mutations, and explains how double mutants can synergistically increase PI3K activity.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pi3k, P110a

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


