### Accession
PXD007223

### Title
Proteome of ATGL knock-out A549 cells compared to A549 wild type cells

### Description
Comparison of ATGL-KO and ATGL-WT A549  cell proteomes

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed (N=4 per group) in lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris (pH=8), 1% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA, sonicated and spun down (10,000 g, 5min). 200 µg of protein taken from the supernatant was diluted to final SDS concentration of <0.1% with 8M urea in 100 mM Tris (UB), transferred to 3 kDa cutoff filters where 3 consequent washing steps with UB were performed. Samples were digested first with 2 µg of LyC at 550 rpm and 30 °C for 3h then overnight with 4 µg of trypsin at 550 rpm and 30 °C. Peptides were collected as a flow-throught after 45 min centrifugation and combined with the 50 µl (500 mM NaCl) of consequent membrane wash. Resulting peptide solution was acidified by adding 1-3 µl of 10 % formic acid (final formic acid concentration 0.1%). Chromatography was performed on nano-HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific system, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a C18 PepMap100 enrichment column (5 µm, 5 x 0.3 mm) and a Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 nanocolumn (2 µm, 50 x 0.075 mm). 2 µl of sample (2 µg) were injected and concentrated on the enrichment column for 6 min using 5 µl/min isocratic flow of 0.1 % formic acid in water. The column was then switched in the nanoflow circuit, and the sample was loaded on the nanocolumn at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Separation was carried out using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile: 0-6 min: 4 % B; 6-150 min: 4-25 % B; 150-155 min: 25-95 % B, 155-165 min: 95 % B; 165.01-180 min: re-equilibration at 4 % B. The sample was ionized in the nanospray source equipped with nanospray tips (PicoTipTM Stock# FS360-75-15-D-20, Coating: 1P-4P, 15+/- 1 µm Emitter, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). It was analysed in a Bruker maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operated in positive ion mode, applying alternating full scan (m/z 200 to 2000) and MS/MS by selecting top 17 most intense peaks.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant by searching the public Uniprot database with taxonomy homo sapiens (downloaded on 2015-07-10, 146661 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 4.5 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 20 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR. In addition a label free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant (REF: Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP. 2014;13(9):2513-2526. doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Match between runs feature was employed in aligment window of 20 minutes and matching time window of 1 min. For statistical analysis Perseus was used to filter data for reverse and contaminants and at least 4 valid values in at least one group. Data were further on log2 transformed and missing values imputed from normal distribution(total matrix). A Student t-test (ATGL-KO vs. ATGL-WT), with permutation based FDR set to 1% and S0 to 2, was used to determine significancy. ATGL-WT: (n = 4 biological replicates - individual singe cell derived clones, transfected with control plasmid); ATGL-KO:  (n = 4 biological replicates - individual single cell derived clones transfected with CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid to achieve ATGL-KO)

### Publication Abstract
Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) catalyzes the rate limiting step in triacylglycerol breakdown in adipocytes but is expressed in most tissues. The enzyme was shown to be lost in many human tumors, and its loss may play a role in early stages of cancer development. Here, we report that loss of ATGL supports a more-aggressive cancer phenotype in a model system in which ATGL was deleted in A549 lung cancer cells by CRISPR/Cas9. We observed that loss of ATGL led to triacylglycerol accumulation in lipid droplets and higher levels of cellular phospholipid and bioactive lipid species (lyso- and ether-phospholipids). Label-free quantitative proteomics revealed elevated expression of the pro-oncogene SRC kinase in ATGL depleted cells, which was also found on mRNA level and confirmed on protein level by Western blot. Consistently, higher expression of phosphorylated (active) SRC (Y416 phospho-SRC) was observed in ATGL-KO cells. Cells depleted of ATGL migrated faster, which was dependent on SRC kinase activity. We propose that loss of ATGL may thus increase cancer aggressiveness by activation of pro-oncogenic signaling via SRC kinase and increased levels of bioactive lipids.

### Keywords
Human, A549, Atgl, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.


