### Accession
PXD017189

### Title
Chloroplast glutamyl endopeptidase (CGEP) comparative proteomics

### Description
Chloroplast glutamyl endopeptidase (CGEP), a stromal S9D peptidase, was found to be a member of the peptidase network that governs chloroplast proteostasis. Using the PICS technique, CGEP was found to degrade proteins smaller than 25 kDa, cleaving the C-terminal of glutamate. Comparative proteomics showed that the null mutant (cgep) altered protein accumulation levels in starch metabolism, stromal protein folding machinery, and ribosomal proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and null mutant Arabidopsis thaliana rosettes, ecotype Columbia-0, were ground at low temperature and the proteome was extracted and run on an acrylamide gel. 3 biological replicates were performed for each genotype, resulting in 6 lanes and 2 gels. Each lane was cut into 11 consecutive sections, upon which tryptic digestion was performed. Peptide extracts for each gel band were analyzed via nano-LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were searched against the predicted Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10) including a set of typical contaminants. Proteins with two or more matched spectra were considered. Protein abundances were quantified according to the number of matched adjusted spectral counts (adjSPC). Database search was performed with Mascot, precursor ion tolerance window set at +/- 6ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidase, Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Stroma, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States
Cornell University

### Submitter
William Comstock

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States


