### Accession
PXD039926

### Title
Identification of SMIM26 interacting proteins

### Description
The SILAC IP proteins were digested by FAST and peptides were used to analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The SILAC IP proteins were dissolved in 2% SDS lysis buffer and tryptic digested through filteraided sample preparation (FASP) method.

### Data Protocol
We use the protein discover to search the library and spectronaut to analysis the DIA datas.

### Publication Abstract
Human microproteins encoded by long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) have been increasingly discovered, however, complete functional characterization of these emerging proteins is scattered. Here, we show that LINC00493-encoded SMIM26, an understudied microprotein localized in mitochondria, is tendentiously downregulated in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and correlated with poor overall survival. LINC00493 is recognized by RNA-binding protein PABPC4 and transferred to ribosomes for translation of a 95-amino-acid protein SMIM26. SMIM26, but not LINC00493, suppresses ccRCC growth and metastatic lung colonization by interacting with acylglycerol kinase (AGK) and glutathione transport regulator SLC25A11 via its N-terminus. This interaction increases the mitochondrial localization of AGK and subsequently inhibits AGK-mediated AKT phosphorylation. Moreover, the formation of the SMIM26-AGK-SCL25A11 complex maintains mitochondrial glutathione import and respiratory efficiency, which is abrogated by AGK overexpression or SLC25A11 knockdown. This study functionally characterizes the LINC00493-encoded microprotein SMIM26 and&#xa0;establishes its anti-metastatic role in ccRCC, and therefore illuminates the importance of hidden proteins in human cancers.

### Keywords
Silac ip

### Affiliations
JiNan University
JiNan

### Submitter
Kun Meng

### Lab Head
Dr meng k
JiNan


