### Accession
PXD031384

### Title
Selective inhibitors of JAK1 targeting a subtype-restricted allosteric cysteine

### Description
The JAK family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases includes four subtypes (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2) and is responsible for signal transduction downstream of diverse cytokine receptors. JAK inhibitors have emerged as important therapies for immuno(onc)ological disorders, but their use is limited by undesirable side effects presumed to arise from poor subtype selectivity, a common challenge for inhibitors targeting the ATP-binding pocket of kinases. Here, we describe the chemical proteomic discovery of a druggable allosteric cysteine present in the non-catalytic pseudokinase domain of JAK1 (C817) and TYK2 (C838), but absent from JAK2 or JAK3. Electrophilic compounds selectively engaging this site block JAK1-dependent transphosphorylation and cytokine signaling, while appearing to act largely as “silent” ligands for TYK2. Importantly, the allosteric JAK1 inhibitors do not impair JAK2-dependent cytokine signaling and are inactive in cells expressing a C817A JAK1 mutant. Our findings thus reveal an allosteric approach for inhibiting JAK1 with unprecedented subtype selectivity.

### Sample Protocol
Human PBMCs were treated in situ (3 h) or lysate from human PBMCs or mouse splenocytes were treated in vitro (1 h) with DMSO or VVD-118313 (0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 µM), and then samples were processed for MS-ABPP according to the described Methods.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to MS1/MS3/MS3 files as necessary using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2). Files were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm (publicly available at http://fields.scripps.edu/downloads.php) using a reverse concatenated, non-redundant variant of the Human UniProt database (release 2016) or Mouse UniProt database (release 2017). Cysteine residues were searched with a static modification for carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) and a dynamic modification for IA-DTB labeling (+398.25292 Da) (maximum 2 differential modifications per peptide). N-termini and lysine residues were also searched with a static modification corresponding to the respective TMT tag (+229.1629 Da). Peptides were required to be at least 6 amino acids long, to be fully tryptic (K or R cleavage sites), and to have a maximum of 2 mis-cleavage sites. ProLuCID data was filtered through DTASelect (version 2.0) to achieve a peptide false-positive rate below 1%. The MS3-based peptide quantification was performed with reporter ion mass tolerance set to 20 ppm with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2).

### Publication Abstract
The Janus tyrosine kinase (JAK) family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases includes four isoforms (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2) and is responsible for signal transduction downstream of diverse cytokine receptors. JAK inhibitors have emerged as important therapies for immun(onc)ological disorders, but their use is limited by undesirable side effects presumed to arise from poor isoform selectivity, a common challenge for inhibitors targeting the ATP-binding pocket of kinases. Here we describe the chemical proteomic discovery of a druggable allosteric cysteine present in the non-catalytic pseudokinase domain of JAK1 (C817) and TYK2 (C838), but absent from JAK2 or JAK3. Electrophilic compounds selectively engaging this site block JAK1-dependent trans-phosphorylation and cytokine signaling, while appearing to act largely as 'silent' ligands for TYK2. Importantly, the allosteric JAK1 inhibitors do not impair JAK2-dependent cytokine signaling and are inactive in cells expressing a C817A JAK1 mutant. Our findings thus reveal an allosteric approach for inhibiting JAK1 with unprecedented isoform selectivity.

### Keywords
Allosteric, Cysteine, Jak1 inhibitor, Kinase, Splenocyte, Pbmc, Abpp

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

### Submitter
Madeline Kavanagh

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


