### Accession
PXD038902

### Title
PAXIP1 and STAG2 converge to maintain 3D genome archi-tecture and facilitate promoter/enhancer contacts to enable stress hormone-dependent transcription

### Description
How steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) orchestrate transcriptional activity remains only partly understood. Upon activation, SHRs bind the genome and recruit their co-regulators, crucial to induce gene expression. However, it remains unknown which components of the SHR-recruited coregulator complex are essential to drive transcription following hormonal stimuli.  Through a FACS-based genome-wide CRISPR screen, we comprehensively dissected the Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) co-regulatory complex involved in gene-target regulation. We describe a novel functional cross-talk between PAXIP1 and the cohesin subunit STAG2 that is critical for regulation of gene expression by GR. Without altering the GR cistrome, PAXIP1 and STAG2 depletion alter the GR transcriptome, by impairing the recruitment of 3D-genome organization proteins to the GR complex. Importantly, we demonstrate that PAXIP1 is required for stability of cohesin on the genome, its localization to GR-occupied sites, and maintenance of enhancer-promoter interactions. Moreover, in lung cancer, where GR acts as tumor suppressor, PAXIP1/STAG2 loss enhances GR-mediated tumor suppressor activity by modifying local chromatin interactions. All together, we introduce PAXIP1 and STAG2 as novel co-regulators of GR, required to maintain 3D-genome architecture and drive the GR transcriptional programme following hormonal stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
RIME was performed as previously described 24. In brief, cells were treated for two hours with 1mg/mL hydrocortisone. Subsequently, cells were fixed and crosslinked with 1% for-maldehyde (15714, Electron Microscopy Sciences) for exactly ten minutes, quenched with glycine (2.5 M) and washed three times with PBS. Cells were collected in 1xPBS supple-mented with complete, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (PI tablets, 5056489001, Roche) on ice. Cells were lysed as previously described (Mohammed et al., 2016), and cell lysates were sonicated for six cycles (30 sec on/30 sec off) using using the Bioruptor® Pico (B01060001, Diagenode). Per RIME, 50 µl of magnetic Protein A beads (10008D, Thermo Fisher Scientific) beads were conjugated with either 15 µl anti-GR (12041, Cell Signaling Technology) or 10 ug anti-PAXIP1 (abcam ref), rotating overnight at 4 °C.   For mass spectrometry, peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously de-scribed27, with the following exceptions. For GR RIMEs in NT vs PAXIP1-KO cells, peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly onto the analytical column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 120-min gradient, containing a 104-min stepped increase from 6% to 32% solvent B, followed by a 16-min wash at 90% solvent B. For GR RIMEs in NT vs STAG2-KO cells, peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded di-rectly onto the analytical column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Sol-vent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 90-min gradient, containing a 74-min stepped increase from 6% to 32% solvent B, followed by a 16-min wash at 90% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (GR RIMEs in NT vs PAXIP1-KO cells: version 2.0.1.0; GR RIMEs in NT vs STAG2-KO cells:version 1.6.17.0)66 using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot Human database (GR RIMEs in NT vs PAXIP1-KO cells: 20,395 entries, release 2021_04; GR RIMEs in NT vs STAG2-KO cells: 20,379 entries, release 2021_01) complemented with a list of common contami-nants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (GR RIMEs in NT vs PAXIP1-KO cells: ver-sion 1.6.15.0; GR RIMEs in NT vs STAG2-KO cells: version 1.6.14.0), after which proteins were filtered for at least 3 out of 4 valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
How steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) regulate transcriptional activity remains partly understood. Upon activation, SHRs bind the genome together with a co-regulator repertoire, crucial to induce gene expression. However, it remains unknown which components of the SHR-recruited co-regulator complex are essential to drive transcription following hormonal stimuli. Through a FACS-based genome-wide CRISPR screen, we functionally dissected the Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) complex. We describe a functional cross-talk between PAXIP1 and the cohesin subunit STAG2, critical for regulation of gene expression by GR. Without altering the GR cistrome, PAXIP1 and STAG2 depletion alter the GR transcriptome, by impairing the recruitment of 3D-genome organization proteins to the GR complex. Importantly, we demonstrate that PAXIP1 is required for stability of cohesin on chromatin, its localization to GR-occupied sites, and maintenance of enhancer-promoter interactions. In lung cancer, where GR acts as tumor suppressor, PAXIP1/STAG2 loss enhances GR-mediated tumor suppressor activity by modifying local chromatin interactions. All together, we introduce PAXIP1 and STAG2 as novel co-regulators of GR, required to maintain 3D-genome architecture and drive the GR transcriptional programme following hormonal stimuli.

### Keywords
Lc-msms; paxip1; stag2; rime;glucocorticoid receptor;

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Re-search, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Re-search, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands


