### Accession
PXD007896

### Title
Comprehensive proteomics identification of IFN-λ3-regulated anti-viral proteins in HBV-transfected cells

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes both acute and chronic liver inflammation. Approximately 600,000 CHB patients each year die of HBV-related diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer. Therefore, CHB remains a global health concern. Although there have been anti-HBV agents for treating CHB, they have some limitations including viral-drug resistance and adverse effects. Type III IFN or IFN-λ is promising to use as anti-HBV agents because of its anti-viral activities like type I IFNs. In addition, the expression of its receptor, IFNLR1, is limited only in epithelial cells including hepatocytes. Thus, treatment with IFN-lambda results in less side effects compared to IFN-alpha treatment. IFN-lambdas have been shown to inhibit the replication of several viruses including IAV, DENV, EMCV, HIV, HCV, and HBV; however, there have been no studies on the effects of IFN-λ3, the highest activity among other subtypes, on HBV replication. Therefore, this study aims to determine antiviral activities of IFN-λ3 against HBV replication and to investigate its molecular mechanism responsible for suppressing HBV propagation. The results showed that HBV transcripts and amount of intracellular HBV DNA were decreased in HepG2.2.15 cells, stable HBV-transfected hepatoblastoma cell line, treated with IFN-λ3 in a dose-dependent manner. This indicated that IFN-λ3 could inhibit HBV replication. Next, we performed quantitative proteomics to investigate the proteome changes in HepG2.2.15 treated with IFN-λ3. The proteins that changed their expressions were involved in several biological processes such as defense to viral infection, immune responses, cell-cell adhesion, transcription, translation, and metabolism. We further confirmed the proteomics results by immunoblotting assay. Consistent with MS data, it found that the expression of OAS3, SAMHD1 and STAT1 were increased as a result of IFN-λ3 stimulation. These results indicated that proteomics results were reproducible and reliable. Finally, we proposed 3 possible mechanisms involved in suppressing HBV replication including i.) IFN-λ3 induced anti-viral proteins affecting many steps in HBV life cycle ii.) IFN-λ3 promoted antigen processing and antigen presentation and iii.) IFN-λ3 rescued RIG-I signaling to promote both type I and type III IFN production.

### Sample Protocol
The stably HBV-transfected HepG2.2.15 cells were stimulated with or without 100 ng/ml of IFN-λ3 for 24 hours. After collecting cells, these cells were lysed in 5% SDC and digested with trypsin. The equal amount of tryptic peptides from both groups were subsequently performed dimethyl labeling. The light reagents were applied into control group while the treated group were labeled with heavy reagents. Then, the two labeled peptides were combined, fractionated by high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The peptides were eluted in 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 70 min followed by 40-95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 20 min at a flow rate of about 300 nl/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 35%. An MS scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
Using Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1 (Thermo), the MS raw data files were searched against a composite database containing the forward and reversed peptide sequences of the Human Swiss-Prot Database (20,219 proteins, June 2017) and the Hepatitis B Virus Swiss-Prot Database (225 proteins, June 2017). The search parameters were set for the following fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as light and heavy dimethylation of N-termini and lysine (+28.031300, and +36.075670 Da). For variable modifications, the search parameters were set as follows: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da) with a maximum of four modifications and two missed cleavages allowed per peptide. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. A target–decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate of the identified peptides to less than 1%. The online resource Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, v6.8) was employed to classify the proteins regulated by IFN-λ3 into functional categories using all proteins identified by MS as background. HBV life-cycle mapping and network analysis of protein interactions among the proteins whose expressions changed significantly with IFN-λ3 treatment was performed by manual curation from literature with assistance from KEGG pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon lambda (IFN-&#x3bb;) is a relatively unexplored, yet promising antiviral agent. IFN-&#x3bb; has recently been tested in clinical trials of chronic hepatitis B virus infection (CHB), with the advantage that side effects may be limited compared with IFN-&#x3b1;, as IFN-&#x3bb; receptors are found only in epithelial cells. To date, IFN-&#x3bb;'s downstream signaling pathway remains largely unelucidated, particularly via proteomics methods. Here, we report that IFN-&#x3bb;3 inhibits HBV replication in HepG2.2.15 cells, reducing levels of both HBV transcripts and intracellular HBV DNA. Quantitative proteomic analysis of HBV-transfected cells was performed following 24-hour IFN-&#x3bb;3 treatment, with parallel IFN-&#x3b1;2a and PBS treatments for comparison using a dimethyl labeling method. The depth of the study allowed us to map the induction of antiviral proteins to multiple points of the viral life cycle, as well as facilitating the identification of antiviral proteins not previously known to be elicited upon HBV infection (<i>e.g.</i> IFITM3, XRN2, and NT5C3A). This study also shows up-regulation of many effectors involved in antigen processing/presentation indicating that this cytokine exerted immunomodulatory effects through several essential molecules for these processes. Interestingly, the 2 subunits of the immunoproteasome cap (PSME1 and PSME2) were up-regulated whereas cap components of the constitutive proteasome were down-regulated upon both IFN treatments, suggesting coordinated modulation toward the antigen processing/presentation mode. Furthermore, in addition to confirming canonical activation of interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) transcription through the JAK-STAT pathway, we reveal that IFN-&#x3bb;3 restored levels of RIG-I and RIG-G, proteins known to be suppressed by HBV. Enrichment analysis demonstrated that several biological processes including RNA metabolism, translation, and ER-targeting were differentially regulated upon treatment with IFN-&#x3bb;3 <i>versus</i> IFN-&#x3b1;2a. Our proteomic data suggests that IFN-&#x3bb;3 regulates an array of cellular processes to control HBV replication.

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus, Ifn-λ3, Lc-ms/ms, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Chulalongkorn University Systems Bilogy center, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Trairak Pisitkut
Chulalongkorn University Systems Bilogy center, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand


