### Accession
PXD036300

### Title
Copper impairs hepatic selenoprotein P release

### Description
Selenoprotein P is a hepatokine which is essential for maintaining systemic selenium homeostasis and is used as serum biomarker for the selenium status in humans. In addition to selenium, also copper homeostasis is mainly regulated by the liver coordinating systemic distribution of copper bound to ceruloplasmin or excreting surplus copper into the bile. Circulating selenium and copper concentrations are most often negatively correlating, e.g. during aging copper levels are increasing while selenium levels are decreasing. Based on these results, we addressed the question of how both trace elements interfere with each other using the liver-derived cell line HepG2. We observed that copper treatment resulted in a substantial increase of intracellular selenium concentrations. In parallel, extracellular SELENOP concentrations were drastically reduced while SELENOP accumulated within the cells. The same observation was made when using primary murine hepatocytes. Indeed, SELENOP was one of the proteins most strongly downregulated by copper in an untargeted secretome approach. Accumulation of hepatic copper is a characteristic of Wilson’s disease. Accordingly, SELENOP levels were decreasing in the serum of LPP rats, a model of Wilson’s disease starting at disease onset. Also, Wilson’s disease patients showed reduced serum SELENOP concentrations when circulating copper concentrations were low. This positive correlation between copper and ceruloplasmin and SELENOP was also observed in a GWAS analysis of EPIC-Potsdam samples identifying SNP rs11708215 as a modulating factor. Our data indicate that under conditions of a suboptimal selenium supply combined with a high copper intake a functional selenium deficit can become even worse because peripheral tissues such as the brain depend on SELENOP for their selenium supply.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 5% SDS in water and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In short, proteins were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa Microcon Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (25 mM TEAB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer for 30 min. Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific, estimated ratio 1:20) at 37°C overnight and two additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two times two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides were purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Spin Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. Samples were desalted (Pierce peptide desalting spin columns, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and dried prior to reconstitution in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Samples were analysed three times on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% FA over 90 min. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120000 resolution, m/z 400-1400 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode using CID spectra of the 20 most intense precursor ions in each MS scan, recorded in the ion trap at collision energy setting of 35. Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.2 m/z isolation window, charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s and 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic datasets were processed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.14.10. Data were searched against reference proteome of Homo Sapiens (UP000005640; June 28, 2022) downloaded from Uniprot. MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of contaminants. Protein identification was done using these MaxQuant parameters as follows: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm; maximum of 2 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide z = 7; minimal length of peptide 7, maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; methylthio (C) as fixed and acetylation (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to 5. Trypsin with no cleavage restriction was set as a protease. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 0.5 Da, taking the 8 most abundant peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). Match between runs was enabled. FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was 0.01 and only proteins with at least one identified unique peptide were considered further. Proteins were quantified using MaxLFQ function with at least one peptide ratio required for pair-wise comparisons of protein abundance between samples. Proteins identified as contaminants were removed before any further interpretation of data.

### Publication Abstract
Selenium homeostasis depends on hepatic biosynthesis of selenoprotein P (SELENOP) and SELENOP-mediated transport from the liver to e.g. the brain. In addition, the liver maintains copper homeostasis. Selenium and copper metabolism are inversely regulated, as increasing copper and decreasing selenium levels are observed in blood during aging and inflammation. Here we show that copper treatment increased intracellular selenium and SELENOP in hepatocytes and decreased extracellular SELENOP levels. Hepatic accumulation of copper is a characteristic of Wilson's disease. Accordingly, SELENOP levels were low in serum of Wilson's disease patients and Wilson's rats. Mechanistically, drugs targeting protein transport in the Golgi complex mimicked some of the effects observed, indicating a disrupting effect of excessive copper on intracellular SELENOP transport resulting in its accumulation in the late Golgi. Our data suggest that hepatic copper levels determine SELENOP release from the liver and may affect selenium transport to peripheral organs such as the brain.

### Keywords
Wilson’s disease, Secretome, Selenium, Copper, Selenoprotein p

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg, Institute of Biomedicine, Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology

### Submitter
Anetta Hartlova

### Lab Head
Dr Anetta Härtlova
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


