### Accession
PXD038525

### Title
Proteomics data reveals Wnt signaling involvement in the hippocampal-dependent behavioral impairment in THRSP-overexpressing ADHD mouse model

### Description
Despite the predominance and high heritability of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), its etiology remains elusive. Preclinical and clinical evidence partly points to impaired limbic system function, particularly that of the hippocampus (HPC). Children diagnosed with ADHD often struggle with deficits in executive function, temporal processing, and visuospatial memory, the defining hallmarks of the predominantly inattentive presentation (ADHD-PI), thought to be subserved by the HPC brain region. However, the specific genes/proteins involved and how they shape the hippocampal makeup to influence ADHD behavior are poorly understood. As an exploratory tool, hippocampal tissues from a mouse model overexpressing thyroid hormone-responsive protein (THRSP), with defining characteristics of ADHD-PI presentation, were utilized for proteomic analyses. Results revealed differential expressions of proteins involved in Wnt signaling. Compared to THRSP knockout (KO), THRSP OE mice have impaired attention and memory concomitant to dysregulated Wnt signaling affecting hippocampal cell proliferation (BrdU) and neurogenic markers expressions (i.e., NEU-N, GFAP), markers of neural stem cell (NSC) activity. Also, exposure to a combination of enriched environment and treadmill exercise improves behavioral deficits in THRSP OE mice and improves Wnt signaling and NSC activity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from mouse HPC brain tissues with Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer and quantified using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay. 100 µg of each sample were resolved in Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under reducing conditions and stained with Instant Blue Coomassie protein stain. Each lane was divided into 10 segments that were individually processed to perform in-gel protein digestions. Briefly, stained gel fragments were cut into small pieces, washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), and dehydrated with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The reduction was performed by incubating samples with 20 mm Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 55 mm iodoacetamide for 45 min at dark. After washing and dehydration with acetonitrile, gel pieces were covered with 12.5 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mm NH4HCO3 and digestion was run overnight at 37 °C. Peptide extraction was carried out by incubation at 37 °C with 10% formic acid (FA) and further incubation with 50% ACN in 0.1% FA, and 80% ACN in 0.1% FA. Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at −20 °C until further use.  Peptides were resuspended in solvent A (0.1% FA) and loaded into an analytical column and separated with a linear grade 5-35% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 95 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS spectra were recorded on Q-exactive plus, hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap MS coupled with Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. The standard mass spectrometric condition of the spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250℃. The full scans were acquired in a range of 400-1400 m/z with 70,000 resolutions and the normalized collision energy was 27% and 17,500 resolutions for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was operated with a single survey MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans in a dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Collected MS/MS raw data were converted into mzXML files through engine-based PEAKS Studio. Protein identification was carried out using the UniProt-MusMusculus database, setting precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. Oxidized methionine was considered as variable amino acid modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Peptide and protein identifications were further filtered to < 1%FDR as measured by a concatenated target-decoy database search strategy. For relative protein quantitation samples were analyzed using Power Law Global Error Model (PLGEM) (http://www.bioconductor.org) package within the R program (version 3.4.2). PLGEM can control datasets to distinguish statistically significant DEPs and calculate expression level change by p-value and signal-to-noise (STN). Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was performed using all significantly changed proteins. GO biological processes and enriched pathways analyses were performed using GENEONTOLOGY/PANTHER classification systems (v.17) 57, 58, 59. We used the upregulated and downregulated DEPs from THRSP KO and OE mice relative to WT to analyze GO biological processes. In contrast, the total DEPs (upregulated and downregulated) were used for GO enrichment analysis. To investigate the biological relevance of the DEPs identified, protein-protein interaction networks were generated using STRING (v.11.5) 60. Graphical representation of protein networks was restricted to high confidence interactions with score interaction threshold of 0.9, while excluding non-interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) often struggle with impaired executive function, temporal processing, and visuospatial memory, hallmarks of the predominantly inattentive presentation (ADHD-PI), subserved by the hippocampus. However, the specific genes/proteins involved and how they shape hippocampal structures to influence ADHD behavior remain poorly understood. As an exploratory tool, hippocampal dentate gyri tissues from thyroid hormone-responsive protein overexpressing (THRSP OE) mice with defining characteristics of ADHD-PI were utilized in proteomics. Integrated proteomics and network analysis revealed an altered protein network involved in Wnt signaling. Compared with THRSP knockout (KO) mice, THRSP OE mice showed impaired attention and memory, accompanied by dysregulated Wnt signaling affecting hippocampal dentate gyrus cell proliferation and expression of markers for neural stem cell (NSC) activity. Also, combined exposure to an enriched environment and treadmill exercise could improve behavioral deficits in THRSP OE mice and Wnt signaling and NSC activity. These findings show new markers specific to the ADHD-PI presentation, converging with the ancient and evolutionary Wnt signaling pathways crucial for cell fate determination, migration, polarity, and neural patterning during neurodevelopment. These findings from THRSP OE mice support the role of Wnt signaling in neurological disorders, particularly ADHD-PI presentation.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Lc-ms/ms, Thrsp

### Affiliations
SNU
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea

### Submitter
Jiyeon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene C. Yi
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea


