### Accession
PXD017376

### Title
Identification of cellular proteins binding to the 3’UTR of Programmed Cell Death 4 mRNA

### Description
The aim of the project is to identify RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that interact with the 3’ untranslated region (3’UTR) of the programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) mRNA. PDCD4 is an inflammatory tumor suppressor gene. The translation of PDCD4 mRNA is regulated by multiple RBPs. The aim is to identify RBPs which are critical for regulating PDCD4 mRNA translation by binding to its 3’UTR. For this purpose, a biotinylated PDCD4 3’UTR RNA was incubated with cytoplasmic lysate from MCF7 human breast carcinoma cells and the RNA-protein complexes pulled down by streptavidin affinity chromatography. The proteins were then eluted and resolved by SDS-PAGE. One particular protein band, migrating close to 55 KDa marker was cut out and submitted for proteomic analysis by in gel digestion and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were resuspended in S10 cell lysis buffer [ 10mM HEPES pH 7.4, 15mM KCl, 1mM PMSF and 1mM DTT] and lysed by passing through 26 gauge needled on ice. After centrifugation at 10000 g for 20 min at 4˚C the supernatant was collected and used for the binding reaction. 10µg of 3’-biotinylated PDCD4 3’UTR RNA were incubated with 500μg of MCF7 S10 lysate in binding buffer [10mM HEPES pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT0, 0.15 μg/ml yeast tRNA and 100 u/ml RNase Inhibitor] for 4h at 4˚C followed by binding reaction with 50µl of high capacity streptavidin agarose bead (Thermo scientific ) for 2h at 4˚C.  The beads were washed four times with binding buffer containing 200 mM NaCl. The captured proteins were eluted by addition of 500 μl elution buffer containing 1M NaCl [10mM HEPES pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT and 1M NaCl]. The eluted proteins were resolved in 10% SDS-PAGE after concentrating through 3kDa cut off centrifugal concentrator (Milipore). The gel was stained with fluorescence-based SYPRO ruby stain (Invitrogen). Excised protein bands following SDS-PAGE were digested in gel with trypsin and ran on LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Full MS in the mass range between m/z 375 and m/z 1700 was performed on an Orbitrap Mass analyzer, followed by CID-based MS/MS, performed in the scan range of m/z 100 and m/z 2000. Mascot Distiller software was used to identify the peptides with GG modification, in which the peptide mass tolerance threshold was set to 10ppm, and the maximum fragment mass tolerance was set between 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression plays a critical role in controlling the inflammatory response. An uncontrolled inflammatory response results in chronic inflammation, often leading to tumorigenesis. Programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) is a proinflammatory tumor-suppressor gene which helps to prevent the transition from chronic inflammation to cancer. PDCD4 mRNA translation is regulated by an interplay between the oncogenic microRNA miR-21 and the RNA-binding protein (RBP) human antigen R (HuR) in response to lipopolysaccharide stimulation, but the role of other regulatory factors remains unknown. Here, we report that the RBP lupus antigen (La) interacts with the 3'-untranslated region of PDCD4 mRNA and prevents miR-21-mediated translation repression. While lipopolysaccharide causes nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation of HuR, it enhances cellular La expression. Remarkably, La and HuR were found to bind cooperatively to the PDCD4 mRNA and mitigate miR-21-mediated translation repression. The cooperative action of La and HuR reduced cell proliferation and enhanced apoptosis, reversing the pro-oncogenic function of miR-21. Together, these observations demonstrate a cooperative interplay between two RBPs, triggered differentially by the same stimulus, which exerts a synergistic effect on PDCD4 expression and thereby helps maintain a balance between inflammation and tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
3’ untranslated region, Rna-protein interaction, Rna-binding protein, Programmed cell death 4, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IISER Kolkata Department of Biological Sciences Mohanpur, Dist. Nadia West Bengal, India
Instem

### Submitter
Chhaya Patole

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Partho Sarothi Ray
IISER Kolkata Department of Biological Sciences Mohanpur, Dist. Nadia West Bengal, India


