### Accession
PXD031402

### Title
Biosynthesis of polycyclopropanated high energy biofuels

### Description
Cyclopropanes-functionalized hydrocarbons are excellent fuels. however, their synthesis is challenging and harmful for the environment. In this work we produced polycyclopropanated fatty acids in bacteria. These molecules can be easily converted into renewable fuels for high energy applications such as shipping, long-haul transport, aviation, and rocketry. We explored the chemical diversity encoded in the genome of thousands of bacteria to identify and repurpose naturally occurring cyclopropanated molecules. We identified a set of candidate iterative Polyketide Synthases (iPKSs) predicted to produce polycyclopropanated fatty acids (POP-FAs), expressed these PKSs in Streptomyces coelicolor and produced the POP-FAs. We determined the structure of the molecules and increased their production 22-fold. Polycyclopropanated fatty acid methyl esters (POP-FAMEs) were obtained by methyl esterifying the POP-FAs. Finally, we calculated the enthalpy of combustion of several POP fuel candidates to assess their potential as replacement for fossil fuels in energy demanding applications. Our research shows that POP-FAMEs and other polyketide derived POPs have the energetic properties for energy demanding applications for which sustainable alternatives are scarce.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from E. coli were extracted using a previously described chloroform/methanol precipitation method (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bfx6jpre). The cell pellets (~10 OD/mL) were resuspended in 400 μl of methanol and briefly vortexed, followed by sequential additions of 100 μl of chloroform and 300 μl of water with short intervals of vortexing in between.extracted proteins were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 20% methanol, and protein concentration was determined by the DC assay (BioRad). Protein reduction was accomplished using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin:total protein ratio.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptide samples were analyzed on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system coupled to an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF mass spectrometer for discovery proteomics (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bgbqjsmw).The acquired data were exported as mgf files and searched against the latest E. coli (strain K12) protein database containing heterogeous protein sequences with Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 4.3.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The normalized spectra count of identified proteins were exported for relative quantitative analysis

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polyketide synthase, Sustainability, Rocket fuel, Pop- fame, Biofuels, Polycyclopropanated fatty acid methyl esters

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


