### Accession
PXD038327

### Title
CSE1L and NUP37 proximity labeling in MCF10A cells expressing chimeric ErbB1:ErbB2 receptors

### Description
This project uses an MCF10A clone (B2B1) expressing chimeric synthetic receptors for ErbB1 (EGFR) and ErbB2 (HER2) along with BirA*-fused inducible alleles of CSE1L or NUP37.  Cells were cultured with reconstituted basement membrane, BirA* alleles induced with doxycycline, ErbB receptors dimerized with a synthetic small molecule, and biotinylation was performed for 24 hours.  Lysates underwent a two-step biotin affinity purification before gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry on selected gel fragments.

### Sample Protocol
Four 15-cm plates of B2B1 cells stably expressing inducible BirA*-CSE1L or BirA*-NUP37 were prepared as overlay cultures, induced with 1 µg/ml doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) on Day 5, heterodimerized with 0.5 µM AP21967 (Takara, 635057) on Day 6, and labeled with 50 µM biotin (Sigma, B4639) on Day 7 for 24 hours before lysis in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 5 mM EDTA) plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors (10 µg/ml aprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 µg/ml pepstatin, 1 mM PMSF, 200 µM Na3VO4).  Clarified lysate (3 ml) was mixed with 8 ml IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS [pH 7.2], 10 mM sodium phosphate [pH 7.4], 50 mM NaCl) and immunoprecipitated with 500 µl anti-biotin agarose (ImmuneChem, ICP0615) overnight at 4ºC.  Immunoprecipitates were washed four times with PBS plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors and eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid followed by re-equilibration to pH 7 with 1 M NaOH.  The eluate was re-purified with 50 µl streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher, PI88816) for two hours at room temperature, washed three times with TBS + 0.1% Tween 20 plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and boiled in Laemmli sample buffer.  Samples were electrophoresed on a 10% polyacrylamide gel and fragments excised to avoid nonspecific bands at 57, 41, 27, and 16 kDa before mass spectrometry.  Gel fragments were transferred to a siliconized tube, washed in 200 µl 50% methanol, dehydrated in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 30 µl 10 mM dithiolthreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, and reduced at room temperature for 0.5 h.  Samples were alkylated in 30 µl 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 minutes, dehydrated in 100 µl acetonitrile, rehydrated in 100 µl 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, and then dehydrated again in 100 µL acetonitrile before drying completely by vacuum centrifugation.  Gel fragments were rehydrated in 20 ng/µl trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 30 minutes.  Excess enzyme solution was removed, 20 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added, and the sample was digested overnight at 37ºC.  Digested peptides were extracted in 100 µl 50% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid and evaporated to 15 µl for MS analysis on a Thermo Electron Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer system with an Easy Spray ion source connected to a Thermo 75 µm x 15 cm C18 Easy Spray column.  A 4 µl or 7 µl equivalent of the extract was injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M acetic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/minute over one hour.  The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9 kV.  The digest was analyzed by acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (20 HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against Uniprot Human.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Mcf-10a, Breast, Bira, Egfr, Her2

### Affiliations
University of Virginia

### Submitter
Kevin Janes

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Allyn Janes
University of Virginia


