### Accession
PXD019858

### Title
Validation of itaconate modification on model proteins

### Description
This dataset was generated to confirm that +130 and +146 Da adducts observed in LPS-stimulated macrophages were produced by the itaconate metabolite. To this end, model proteins (bovine serum albumin and human KEAP1) were reacted in vitro with itaconate, and the correspondent adducts were analyzed by LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant proteins were reacted with 5 or 50mM itaconate, or with control buffer. Proteins were digested in parallel with trypsin, GluC, and elastase. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using x!tandem for conventional search, and with SAMPEI for unbiased chemoproteomics analysis

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have revealed diverse amino acid, post-translational, and noncanonical modifications of proteins in diverse organisms and tissues. However, their unbiased detection and analysis remain hindered by technical limitations. Here, we present a spectral alignment method for the identification of protein modifications using high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics. Termed SAMPEI for spectral alignment-based modified peptide identification, this open-source algorithm is designed for the discovery of functional protein and peptide signaling modifications, without prior knowledge of their identities. Using synthetic standards and controlled chemical labeling experiments, we demonstrate its high specificity and sensitivity for the discovery of substoichiometric protein modifications in complex cellular extracts. SAMPEI mapping of mouse macrophage differentiation revealed diverse post-translational protein modifications, including distinct forms of cysteine itaconatylation. SAMPEI's robust parametrization and versatility are expected to facilitate the discovery of biological modifications of diverse macromolecules. SAMPEI is implemented as a Python package and is available open-source from BioConda and GitHub (https://github.com/FenyoLab/SAMPEI).

### Keywords
Itaconate chemoproteomics mass spectrometry sampei adduct cysteine

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10021, USA.

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10021, USA.


