### Accession
PXD046591

### Title
Galactan polymerization in mycobacteria requires cell wall components

### Description
Galactan polymer is a prominent component of the mycobacterial cell wall core. Its biogenesis starts at the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane by a build-up of the linker disaccharide [rhamnosyl (Rha) – N-acetyl-glucosaminyl (GlcNAc) phosphate] on the decaprenyl-phosphate carrier. This decaprenyl-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha intermediate is extended by two bifunctional galactosyl transferases, GlfT1 and GlfT2 and then is translocated to the periplasmic space by an ABC transporter Wzm-Wzt. Cell wall core synthesis is then finalized by the action of an array of arabinosyl transferases, mycolyl transferase and ligases that catalyse an attachment of the arabinogalactan polymer to peptidoglycan through the linker region. Earlier studies proposed that galactan polymerization takes place in a specific region of the mycobacterial cell envelope, the so-called PMf domain (plasma membrane free of cell wall components) or intracellular membrane domain (IMD), which localises to the polar region of mycobacterium based on visualization of the GlfT2 enzyme fused with fluorescent tags. In this work, we examined the activity of the galactan-producing cellular machine in the enzyme fractions (cell envelope and plasma membrane) from Mycobacterium smegmatis in the cell-free system using radioactively labelled substrate (UDP-[14C]-Galactose). We found that despite a high abundance of GlfT2 in both these fractions, galactan is produced only in the reaction mixtures containing the cell envelope fraction. Our findings open the discussion about the regulation of GlfT2 with two plausible alternatives: (i) posttranslational modifications and (ii) interactions with other proteins forming an active complex.

### Sample Protocol
To the samples (100 µg of proteins per sample) from differential centrifugation, urea was added to a 6.4 M final concentration they were reduced by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 60 °C). Subsequently, samples were alkylated in the presence of 15 mM iodoacetamide (20 min, room temperature in dark). The modification reaction was quenched by addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol. For protein digestion, 4 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was used, and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid; peptides were purified by microtip C18 SPE and dried in the ConcentratorPlus (Eppendorf).  Samples (25 µg of proteins per sample) from the sucrose density gradient were filled up with 100 mM TrisHCl pH 7.8 to the final volume of 100 µl. Reduction and alkylation were performed as mentioned in previous paragraph. Next, SP3 protein cleanup protocol with Sera-Mag Carboxylate SpeedBeads (Cytiva) was used as described in literature. Washed magnetic beads were added to samples in the ratio 10 µg of beads to 1 µg protein. For protein digestion, 1 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was used and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. For LC-MS analysis, 1 µg of peptides per sample was loaded onto a nanotrap cartridge (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particle size, Dionex) and separated with an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 500 mm, 3 μm particle size, Dionex) mounted into Nanospray Flex ion source for subcellular fractions from differential centrifugation and EASY-Spray C18 analytical column having integrated nanospray emitter (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) mounted into EASY-Spray ion source for fractions from sucrose gradient. The peptides were separated using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, CA, USA) in 120 min gradient 3-43% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Spectral datasets were collected by Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, MA, USA) operating in the data-dependent mode using Top15 strategy for filtering precursor ions. Precursors were measured with a resolution 120,000, and fragments were obtained by the HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 25 and a resolution 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.17) with built-in Andromeda search engine. The specific parameters for searching were: carbamidomethylation (C) as permanent modification and oxidation (M) as variable modifications, up to 2 tryptic miscleavages, 20 ppm mass tolerance for precursors (before recalibration) and fragments and 4.5 ppm for precursors (after recalibration), and active match between runs feature. Proteins were quantified using iBAQ indices (spectral counting-based quantification). The search was performed against protein databases Mycolicibacterium smegmatis (ATCC 700084 / mc2155):  uniprotkb_proteome_UP000000757_2023_10_20 (6,602 sequences, UniProt, downloaded 20.10.2023).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glft1, M. smegmatis, Cell envelope, Proteome, Enzyme fraction

### Affiliations
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Baráth
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: Mycolicibacterium smegmatis
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: ltq orbitrap elite

