### Accession
PXD016833

### Title
Plasmodium condensin core subunits (SMC2/SMC4) mediate atypical mitosis and are essential for parasite proliferation and transmission

### Description
Condensin is a multi-subunit protein complex regulating chromosome condensation and segregation during cell division. In Plasmodium spp., the causative agent of malaria, cell division is atypical and the role of condensin is unclear. Here we examine the role of SMC2 and SMC4, the core subunits of condensin, during endomitosis in schizogony and endoreduplication in male gametogenesis. During early schizogony SMC2/SMC4 localize to a distinct focus, identified as the centromeres by NDC80 fluorescence and ChIP-seq analyses, but do not form condensin I or II complexes. In mature schizonts and during male gametogenesis there is a diffuse SMC2/SMC4 distribution on chromosomes and in the nucleus, and both condensin I and II complexes form at these stages. Knockdown of smc2 and smc4 gene expression revealed essential roles in parasite proliferation and transmission. The condensin core subunits (SMC2/SMC4) form different complexes and may have distinct functions at various stages of the parasite life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Schizonts, following 8 hours and 24 hours respectively in in vitro culture, and male gametocytes 6 min post activation were used to prepare cell lysates. Purified parasite pellets were crosslinked using formaldehyde (10 min incubation with 1% formaldehyde, 22   followed by 5 min incubation in 0.125M glycine solution and 3 washes with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH7.5). Immunoprecipitation was performed using crosslinked protein and a GFP-Trap®_A Kit (Chromotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins bound to the GFP-Trap®_A beads were digested using trypsin and the peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, to prepare samples for LC-MS/MS, wash buffer was removed and ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to beads at room temperature. We added 10 mM TCEP (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation was performed for 5 min at 70º C. Samples were digested using 1 µg Trypsin per 100 µg protein at room temperature overnight followed by 1% TFA addition to bring the pH into the range of 3-4 before mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
.raw data files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) and imported into Scaffold (version 4.10.0).

### Publication Abstract
Condensin is a multi-subunit protein complex regulating chromosome condensation and segregation during cell division. In Plasmodium spp., the causative agent of malaria, cell division is atypical and the role of condensin is unclear. Here we examine the role of SMC2 and SMC4, the core subunits of condensin, during endomitosis in schizogony and endoreduplication in male gametogenesis. During early schizogony, SMC2/SMC4 localize to a distinct focus, identified as the centromeres by NDC80 fluorescence and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses, but do not form condensin I or II complexes. In mature schizonts and during male gametogenesis, there is a diffuse SMC2/SMC4 distribution on chromosomes and in the nucleus, and both condensin I and condensin II complexes form at these stages. Knockdown of smc2 and smc4 gene expression reveals essential roles in parasite proliferation and transmission. The&#xa0;condensin core subunits (SMC2/SMC4) form different complexes and may have distinct functions at various stages of the parasite life cycle.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Scm4, Scm2, Plasmodium berghei, Malaria, Parasite, Warwick-rtp, Condensin

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Rita Tewari
School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK


