### Accession
PXD025201

### Title
Proteome of mouse brain and liver tissues

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis for protein quantification of mouse brain and liver tissues

### Sample Protocol
Wet brain or liver tissue was homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8.0) with 1x protease inhibitor (EDTA-free, Roche) by using an automated homogenizer (Bertin Technologies). The temperature of cooling unit chamber was controlled at 4 °C during homogenization. After centrifugation at 16,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatant fraction was collected and adjusted to 2.0 mg/mL with BCA assay. 100 μg of each sample was aliquoted for subsequent protein digestion. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 min, followed by 15 mM iodoacetamide alkylation in the dark for another 30 min. Then samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach 1 M urea concentration followed by Lys-C digestion (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Wako) with a final enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:100 (w/w) at 25 °C for 6 h, and trypsin digestion (Sequencing Grade, Promega) with a final enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 for 12 h at 25 °C. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% formic acid (FA). Next, the sample was desalted with a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters), dried by a vacuum centrifuge, and then resuspended in 0.1% FA before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with C18 analytical column. Mobile phases A and B consist of 0.1% FA in water and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN, respectively. A 150 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was used. Mobile phases B was increased to 11% at 10 min, 30% at 100 min, 45% at 125 min, 100% at 140 min and held for 10 min. Data was collected in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with HCD fragmentation at TopN mode. The resolution was set at 120,000 for MS1 and 30,000 for MS2 with 54 ms maximum injection time. All resulted spectra were searched against UniProt mouse database (August 2020, 17,020 entries) using MaxQuant. The parameters for searching are as follow: a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions; ±0.02 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. The identified peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate of 1%. The maximum number of modifications was allowed per peptide was three. Quantitation results were obtained from two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Huihui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Xie
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China


