### Accession
PXD008034

### Title
Proteome analysis of Escherichia coli ptsN-null strain under different nitrogen regimes

### Description
The carbohydrate-uptake phosphorelay PTS system plays a key role in metabolic regulation in Bacteria controlling the utilization of secondary carbon sources. Some Bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, encode a paralogue system named PTSNtr (nitrogen related PTS). PTSNtr is composed of EINtr (ptsP), NPr (ptsO), and EIIANtr (ptsN). These proteins act as a phosphorely system transfering phosphoryl from phosphoenolpyruvate to EINtr, NPr and them to EIIANtr. PTSNtr is not involved in carbohydrate uptake and it may be dedicated to play regulatory functions. The phosphorylation state of the EINtr is regulated by allosteric binding of glutamine and 2-oxoglutarate, metabolites whose intracellular levels reflect the nitrogen levels. Despite the denomination and nitrogen-sensory properties no major effect of PTSNtr on nitrogen regulation has been described in E. coli. Here we show that an E. coli ∆ptsN has impaired growth in minimal medium. Proteome analysis of the ∆ptsN strain under different nitrogen regimes revealed that ptsN is not involved in the regulation of the canonical nitrogen starvation response. The proteomic data support that ptsN is required for proper balance between RpoS and sigma 70 activities such that, in the absence of ptsN, RpoS-depended genes are preferentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis 15 µg of each protein sample were independently suspended in 50 µl of ammonium bicarbonate 100 mM pH 8.0, the sample was reduced with 1 µl of DTT 1 mM for 45 min. Modified trypsin (Promega) was added to a 1:50 ratio and incubated overnight at 37oC in a wet chamber. Protein digestion was quenched with TFA 3% (v/v). The sample was cleaned using C18 STAGE-TIPs as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid.  Each protein sample was run in using 3 µl injections. Peptide separation was performed on a nano-HPLC (EASY nLC1000, Thermo) using a reverse phase column of 25 cm, 75 µm of internal diameter and 2 µm particles. Peptides were eluted in 120 minutes runs using a linear gradient of 2 to 30% of organic solvent (100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nl.min-1

### Data Protocol
data was processed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008), using the following parameters: variable modifications methionine oxidation; N-acetylation of N-terminal; and conversion of glutamine and glutamate to pyro-glutamate. The first search was performed using 20 ppm error and the main search 6 ppm; maximum of two missed cleavages. Protein and peptide FDR threshold of 0.01; ; Min Unique Peptides: 1; Min Peptide Lenght: 7; Second peptides option ON; Match between runs ON, with Time Window of 2 min; Label-free quantitation ON, with minimal ratio count 2; iBAQ ON with log fit ON. Proteins were identified using an Uniprot E. coli K12 database from June 2014 (4,315 entries). Additional searches including tyrosine uridylylation and adenylylation as variable modifications were perfomed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pii, Proteome, Nitrogen, Ntr, Pts

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, UFPR, Curitiba, PR, Brazil
Dept. of Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte

### Submitter
Gustavo De Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Luciano Huergo
Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, UFPR, Curitiba, PR, Brazil


