### Accession
PXD029535

### Title
tRNA Biogenesis and Specific Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Regulate Senescence Stability Under the Control of mTOR

### Description
Oncogenes or chemotherapy treatments trigger the induction of suppressive pathways such as apoptosis or senescence. Senescence was initially defined as a definitive arrest of cell proliferation but recent results have shown that this mechanism is also associated with cancer progression and chemotherapy resistance. Senescence is therefore much more heterogeneous than initially thought. How this response varies is not really understood, it has been proposed that its outcome relies on the secretome of senescent cells and on the maintenance of their epigenetic marks. Using experimental models of senescence escape, we now described that the stability of this suppression relies on specific tRNAs and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Following chemotherapy treatment, the DNA binding of the type III RNA polymerase was reduced to prevent tRNA transcription and induce a complete cell cycle arrest. By contrast, during senescence escape, specific tRNAs such as tRNA-Leu-CAA and tRNA-Tyr-GTA were upregulated. Reducing tRNA transcription appears necessary to control the strength of senescence since RNA pol III inhibition through BRF1 depletion maintained senescence and blocked cell persistence. mTOR inhibition also prevented CIS escape in association with a reduction of tRNA-Leu-CAA and tRNA-Tyr-GTA expression. Further confirming the role of the tRNA-Leu-CAA and tRNA-Tyr-GTA, their corresponding tRNA ligases, YARS and LARS, were necessary for senescence escape. This effect was specific since the CARS ligase had no effect on persistence. YARS and LARS inactivation reduced cell emergence and proteomic analysis indicated that this effect was associated with the down-regulation of E2F1 target genes. Overall, these findings highlight a new regulation of tRNA biology during senescence and suggest that specific tRNAs and ligases contribute to the strength and heterogeneity of this suppression. !

### Sample Protocol
Cells were analyzed using a DIA method. Each sample (5 µg) was analyzed using the LC– MS equipment and LC gradient described above, using a SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating the whole gradient cycle, which consisted of the acquisition of 35 TOF MS/MS scans of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows (25 m/z isolation width, 1 m/z overlap, high sensitivity mode) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range, with a previous MS scan for each cycle. The accumulation time was 50 ms for the MS scan (from 400 to 1250 m/z) and 100 ms for the product ion scan (230 to 1500 m/z), thus making a 3.5 s total cycle time.

### Data Protocol
The targeted data extraction of the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView using the MS/ MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp. PeakView processed the data using the spectral library created from the shotgun data. Up to ten peptides per protein and seven fragments per peptide were selected, based on signal intensity; any shared and modified peptides were excluded from the extraction. The retention times from the peptides that were selected for each protein were realigned in each run according to iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, Schlieren/Zürich, Switzerland) spiked in each sample and eluting along the whole time axis; the extracted ion chromatograms were generated for each selected fragment ion. PeakView computed a score and an FDR for each assigned peptide using chromatographic and spectra components; only peptides with an FDR of less than 5% were used for protein quantitation. The peak areas for peptides were obtained by summing the peak areas of the corresponding fragment ions; protein quantitation was calculated by summing the peak areas of the corresponding peptides. MarkerView (version 1.2, Sciex) was used for signal normalization, and differential abundance was tested by applying a T-test at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Senescence, Er stress, Trna, P21, Mtor

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie et Immunologie Nantes Angers (CRCINA), INSERM U1232, Paul Papin ICO Cancer Center, Université d’Angers, France.
Oncoproteomics

### Submitter
Catherine Guette

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Coqueret
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie et Immunologie Nantes Angers (CRCINA), INSERM U1232, Paul Papin ICO Cancer Center, Université d’Angers, France.


