### Accession
PXD043808

### Title
The transcription factor AP2XI-2 is a key negative regulator of Toxoplasma gondii merogony

### Description
Commitment to and completion of sexual development are essential for Toxoplasma gondii to produce oocysts in the intestine of the feline host. Understanding of the molecular mechanism responsible for sexual commitment is extremely limited due to the lack of model systems. Here, we show that the transcription factors AP2XI-2 and AP2XII-1 associated with the epigenetic repressors MORC/HDAC3 complex are constitutively expressed in both tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages but not in the merozoite stage. Depletion of AP2XI-2 or AP2XII-1 elicits the expression of genes specific to merozoites, but they play different roles in the merogony process. Depletion of AP2XI-2 in type II Pru strain induced parasites to undergo merogony and produce mature merozoites in alkaline medium but not in neutral medium, whereas the AP2XII-1 depleted Pru strain underwent several rounds of schizogony and produced merozoites in neutral medium and more markedly under alkaline conditions. Furthermore, we show that two AP2XI-2 interacting proteins are also involved in repressing merozoite programming. Overall, these findings indicate that the merozoite primed pre-sexual commitment is controlled by an intricate regulatory network and that AP2XI-2 or AP2XII-1 depleted parasites can be used as a model to study the merogony in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation, Pru::AP2XI-2-mAID-6HA or PruΔku80Δhxgprt tachyzoites cultured in an alkaline medium for 3 days were collected, syringe filtered, and lysed as described above. The parasites lysate was incubated with mouse monoclonal anti-HA-tag magnetic beads on a rocking platform at 4 ℃ overnight. After washing, the bound proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads using an elution buffer. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. After the excision of eight horizontal gel slices per lane, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. The peptides separated by liquid phase chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis using Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) mode detection.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were searched using the Mascot tool against the protein database containing T. gondii ME49-translated open reading frames from ToxoDB (https://toxodb.org)50. The output was filtered by FDR 1% at spectral level (PSM level FDR ≤ 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii; transcription factors; ap2xi-2; merogony; pre-sexual development

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.

### Submitter
JinLei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jinlei Wang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.


