### Accession
PXD027655

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with translating RPAC reporter mRNAs (FGH17)

### Description
To discover new regulators of Regulatory Particle Assembly Chaperone (RPAC) translation, we identified RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) with increased recruitment to translating WT FGH17 mRNAs compared to non-translatable FGH17-40ntΔ mRNAs in vivo. To this end, we first treated yeast cells with rapamycin to stimulate translation of FGH17 mRNAs. Ribosomes were locked on mRNAs using cycloheximide and UV-crosslinking covalently linked the RNA and any bound proteins together. We next used anti-FLAG beads to immunoprecipitate translated FGH17 protein, as well as any translating FGH17-mRNA complexes where locked ribosomes had already synthesized one or both N-terminal FLAG tags. As FGH17-40ntΔ mRNAs are not translated, these samples should only immunoprecipitate proteins that bind non-specifically to the anti-FLAG beads. Based on the prediction that potential regulators of RPAC translation would be UV crosslinked to FGH17 mRNA within the 5’ UTR and upstream of locked translating ribosomes, we used RNases to specifically elute these potential regulators. We then identified the proteins in the RNase elution by tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Yeasts expressing WT FGH17 or FGH17-40ntΔ mRNAs were treted with rapamycin for 1.5h before addition of cycloheximide to lock ribosomes on mRNAs. Cells were UV-treated to bind protein to RNA before protein extraction using bead beating. Immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag magnetic beads was perform to recover translating FGH17 mRNAs with protein bound to it. Proteins bound to FGH17 mRNAs were eluted using RNase treatment. Smples were digested with trypsin, desalted and dried prior to TMT-labeilling. The mixture was then desalted with ultra microspin column silica C18 and the eluent from C18 column was dried. LC separations were performed with a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano liquid chromatography instrument. Peptides were separated with a 180 min segmented gradient. Peptides eluted from the column were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer. All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine. A maximum missed cleavage for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-10plex tags on N termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966 Da). Data were searched against a complete UniProt S. cerevisiae (Reviewed 6, 721 entry downloaded at Feb 2018). Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates with a 1% FDR were determined using the forward- decoy strategy modelling true and false matches. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Reporter ion abundances were corrected for isotopic impurities based on the manufacturer’s data sheets. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS2 spectra to be used. The S/N value of each reporter ions from each PSM were used to represent the abundance of the identified peptides. The summed abundance of quantified peptides was used for protein quantitation.  The total peptide amount was used for the normalisation. Protein ratios were calculated from medians of summed sample abundances of replicate groups. Standard deviation was calculated from all biological replicate values. The standard deviation of all biological replicates lower than 25% were used for further analyses. To determine the significant differences between different treatments, two-way ANOVA t-test is used for statistical significance analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteasome assembly chaperone translation

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitinylation, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK

### Submitter
Adrien Rousseau

### Lab Head
Dr Adrien Rousseau
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitinylation, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


