### Accession
PXD039035

### Title
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics of CD4 T cell-mediated postsynaptic dendritic cells (DC)

### Description
We aimed to characterize the proteome remodeling in DCs induced upon antigen presentation. To do so, we used an in vitro antigen presentation model to generate postsynaptic (psDC) or nonsynaptic (nsDC) DCs similarly to previously reported (Alcaraz-Serna et al., 2021). Bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs), which had been activated with LPS and pulsed (psDC) or not (nsDC) with the ovalbumin peptide OVA323-339, were co-cultured with resting CD4+ T cells from OT-II mice to allow cognate antigen-dependent immune synapse formation (psDC) or not (nsDC). DCs were then purified for proteomic analysis by using mass spectrometry based on multiplexed isotopic labeling peptides approach.

### Sample Protocol
BMDCs for the generation of psDC were generated similarly to previously reported (Alcaraz-Serna et al., 2021)). OT-II CD4+ T cells were purified from spleen and lymph nodes using the EasySep™ Mouse CD4+ T Cell Isolation Kit following manufacturer’s instructions plus an addition of biotinylated anti-CD25 antibody to the isolation antibody cocktail.  OT-II CD4+ T cells were added at a 1:2 (DC:T cell) ratio and were cocultured overnight. After coculture, DCs were purified by negative selection using the EasySep™ Mouse CD90.2 Positive Selection Kit II. Protein extracts were obtained from cell pellets using Tris-HCl 100 mM pH6.8 with 10 mM DTT, 2% SDS and boiled 5 min. Proteins were on-filter digested using the FASP technology (Expedeon) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a 1:40 (w/w) trypsin: protein ratio at 37 ºC overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were subjected to stable isotope labelling using tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The differentially tagged samples were then pooled, desalted on Waters Oasis HLB C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and dried-down. Labeled peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS scans were matched against a concatenated protein database containing mouse sequences (September 2020 release) and the corresponding inverted sequences. For database searching, parameters were as follows: trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites; 800 ppm and 0.02 Da precursor and fragment mass tolerance, respectively. TMT modification at N-terminus and Lys and carbamidomethylation at Cys were selected as fixed modifications, whereas oxidation at Met, Pro, Trp, His, and Asp, dioxidation at Met, Pro and Trp, and trioxidation at Trp were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the probability ratio method after a 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance postfiltering (Martinez-Bartolome, S., et al. (2008); Navarro, P. and J. Vazquez (2009)). A 1% FDR criterion was used to ascertain true identification. Quantitative information was extracted from the intensity of TMT reporter ions. The quantitative analysis of protein abundance was performed using iSanXoT software (https://github.com/CNIC-Proteomics/iSanXoT), (ref ), based on the Weighted Scan, Peptide and Protein (WSPP) statistical model (Trevisan et al. (2018)).

### Publication Abstract
Antigen cognate dendritic cell (DC)-T cell synaptic interactions drive activation of T cells and instruct DCs. Upon receiving CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell help, post-synaptic DCs (psDCs) are licensed to generate CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that enable psDCs licensing remain unclear. Here, we describe that antigen presentation induces an upregulation of MHC-I protein molecules and increased lipid peroxidation on psDCs in vitro and in vivo. We also show that these events mediate DC licensing. In addition, psDC adoptive transfer enhances pathogen-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T responses and protects mice from infection in a CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell-dependent manner. Conversely, depletion of psDCs in vivo abrogates antigen-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses during immunization. Together, our data show that psDCs enable CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses in vivo during vaccination and reveal crucial molecular events underlying psDC licensing.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Cd4 t cell-mediated postsynaptic dendritic cells (dc)

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid (Spain)
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez Cobos
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid (Spain)


