### Accession
PXD034331

### Title
DDX17 helicase promotes resolution of R-loop-mediated transcription-replication conflicts in human cells

### Description
R-loops are three-stranded nucleic acid structures composed of an RNA:DNA hybrid and displaced DNA strand. These structures can halt DNA replication when formed co- transcriptionally in the opposite orientation to replication fork progression. Recent studies have shown that replication forks stalled by co-transcription R-loops can be restarted by a mechanism involving fork cleavage by MUS81 endonuclease, followed by reactivation of transcription, and fork religation by the DNA ligase IV (LIG4)/XRCC4 complex. However, how R-loops are eliminated to allow the sequential restart of transcription and replication in this pathway remains elusive. Here, we identified the human DDX17 helicase as a factor that associates with R-loops and counteracts R-loop-mediated replication stress to preserve genome stability. We show that DDX17 unwinds RNA:DNA hybrids in vitro and promotes MUS81-dependent restart of R-loop-stalled forks in human cells in a manner dependent on its helicase activity. Loss of DDX17 helicase induces accumulation of R-loops and the formation of R-loop-dependent anaphase bridges and micronuclei. These findings establish DDX17 as a component of the MUS81-LIG4 pathway for resolution of R-loop-mediated transcription- replication conflicts, which may be involved in R-loop unwinding.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and MS analyses were performed in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry [Biotechnology and Biomedicine Centre of the Academy of Sciences and Charles University (Biocev), Vestec, Czech Republic] as follows. Pull-down samples were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate containing 2% sodium deoxycholate. Cystines were reduced with 5 mM final concentration of tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10 mM final concentration of S-methyl- methanethiosulfonate (10 min, RT). Samples were cleaved on beads (final volume 100 µl) with 1µg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. After digestion, samples were centrifuged and supernatants were collected and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% (w/v). Sodium deoxycholate was removed by extraction to ethylacetate (Masuda, 2008 #44). Peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) according to Rappsilber et al. (Rappsilber, 2007 #45). Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with a Mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 10 5  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The  MS2 ion count target was set to 10 4 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, 2014 #47).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (Cox, 2014 #48). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Human database (downloaded from Uniprot on September 2017, containing 20 142 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms as described (Cox, 2014 #48). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.2.3 software (Tyanova, 2016 #46).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna replication stress; r-loop; helicase; genomic instability; transcription

### Affiliations
BIOCEV, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague
Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Pavel Talacko

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Janscak
Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


