### Accession
PXD002640

### Title
Protein complex map of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The functions of the majority of trypanosomatid-specific proteins are unknown, hindering our understanding of the biology and pathogenesis of Trypanosomatida. While protein-protein interactions are highly informative about protein function, a global map of protein interactions and complexes is still lacking for these important human parasites. Here, benefiting from in-depth biochemical fractionation, we systematically examined the protein complexes of more than 3354 protein groups in procyclic life stage of Trypanosoma brucei, the protozoan parasite responsible for human African trypanosomiasis. Using a rigorous methodology, our analysis led to identification of 128 high-confidence complexes encompassing 716 protein groups, including 635 protein groups that had no available experimental annotation. These complexes correlate well with known pathways as well as for proteins co-expressed across the T. brucei life cycle, and provide potential functions for a large number of previously uncharacterized proteins. We validated the functions of several novel proteins associated with the RNA-editing machinery, identifying candidates potentially involved in the life stage specific post-transcriptional regulation in T. brucei. Our data provide an unprecedented view of the protein complex map of T. brucei, and serve as a reliable resource for further characterization of trypanosomatid proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell protein extract preparation: Late log phase T. brucei procyclic form 1.7A cells (~2 x 107 cells/ml) were grown in 225 cm2 flasks to obtain 4×109 cells. The cells were precipitated by centrifugation at 6000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and washed once with ice-cold glucose-supplemented PBS (6mM glucose). The cells were then resuspended in 500 µl lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 1 µg/ml pepstatin, 1 mM DTT, 1% triton X-100 and 1 x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] and incubated on a tube rotator for 15 min at 4°C. The lysate was treated with 40 Us of RNase-free DNase I (Roche) for 1 h on ice and cleared twice by centrifugation at 16,000x g for 15 min at 4°C.  Cytosolic and mitochondrial protein extract preparation: Cell pellets were obtained and washed with ice-cold glucose-supplemented PBS as above, resuspended in 30 ml DTE buffer [1 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 1 mM EDTA] containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and lysed using a 40 ml sterile tight-fitting dounce-homogenizer on ice. The lysate was immediately made isotonic by adding a 2 M sucrose stock solution to a final concentration of 250 mM, and the mitochondria were precipitated at 15,800 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The mitochondrial pellet was treated with 0.3 mM CaCl2 and 40 Us of RNase-free DNase I (Roche) in 4.6 ml STM buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 250 mM sucrose and 2 mM MgCl2] for 1 hr on ice and precipitated again. The mitochondrial lysate was prepared in 500 µl lysis buffer as described above for whole cells. The supernatant obtained upon collecting mitochondria at 15,800 x g, represents a crude preparation of the cytosol. This was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C to eliminate small organelle contamination.  Glycerol gradient fractionation and protein identification: Whole cell and mitochondrial extracts were resolved on 10-30% linear glycerol gradients [40 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 20 mM Mg(OAc)2, 100 mM KCl, and 2 mM EDTA] at 178,000x g for 6 hr at 4 °C, and fractionated into 46-48 fractions (250 ml each). Cytosolic and mitochondrial extracts were resolved on a dual-column liquid chromatography setup, comprising of tandem cationic (S) – anionic (Q) exchange columns (UNOsphere, Biorad). The buffer system comprised of a low salt buffer A [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 10 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl and 1 mM DTT] and a high salt buffer B [buffer A + 950 mM KCl], which were prepared fresh and filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane. The chromatography was performed using Beckman System Gold 126 Solvent Module, programmed to elute proteins on a multi-step gradient with increasing proportions of buffer B: (1, equilibration) 0% buffer B from 0-15 min; (2, salt gradient) 0-50% buffer B from 15-65 min; (3, high salt) 50% buffer B from 65-75 min; (4, high salt wash) 50-100% buffer B for 75-85 min; (5, restoration) 100% buffer B for 85-90 min; and (6, re-equilibration) 0% buffer B from 90-120 min. All extracts were also filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane prior to loading. The flow-rate was maintained at 400 μl/min, and approximately 40 fractions (800 μl each) were collected every 2 min. The fractions were analyzed using an Agilent 1100 series capillary LC system and a ThermoScientific LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer. The proteins in fractions were digested with trypsin (Sigma, T6567) overnight at 37°C and then 6 µl of formic acid was added to each digest. The samples were then vacuum-concentrated to a volume of approximately 25 µl and injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Electrospray ionization was performed with no sheath gas using an ion max source fitted with a 34 gauge metal needle. Samples were applied at 20 µl/min to a trap cartridge (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, California, USA) and then switched onto a 0.5×250 mm Zorbax SB-C18 column (Agilent) using a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid and a 7–30% acetonitrile gradient over 95 min, with a 10 µl/min flow rate.  IEX separations and high-resolution mass spectrometry: Ion exchange high performance liquid chromatography (IEX) was also used to separate protein complexes. Whole cell cytosolic samples and mitochondrial samples were each separated into roughly 20 fractions for non-flow HPLC mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo). High resolution profile mode survey scans and HCD MS2 scans were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Low-resolution data was processed with SEQUEST (T. brucei protein database, average parent ion tolerance of 2.5 Da, monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance of 1.0 Da, tryptic cleavage, static C+57 and variable M+16 modifications). Peptide and protein FDRs were estimated using target/decoy strategy. Protein abundances were estimated using MS2 intensity-weighted spectral counting.   High resolution data was analyzed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8). Parameters were similar to above except that default except paretn ion and fragment ion tolerances were used. Protein abundance estimates were sums of integrated peptide feature intensities.</br></br>The instrument encountered an issue during the run of fraction 21 for the mitochondrial glycerol gradient experiment. That fraction was discarded from the follow up analysis. There are 47 files for SAL1328.

### Publication Abstract
The functions of the majority of trypanosomatid-specific proteins are unknown, hindering our understanding of the biology and pathogenesis of Trypanosomatida. While protein-protein interactions are highly informative about protein function, a global map of protein interactions and complexes is still lacking for these important human parasites. Here, benefiting from in-depth biochemical fractionation, we systematically interrogated the co-complex interactions of more than 3354 protein groups in procyclic life stage of Trypanosoma brucei, the protozoan parasite responsible for human African trypanosomiasis. Using a rigorous methodology, our analysis led to identification of 128 high-confidence complexes encompassing 716 protein groups, including 635 protein groups that lacked experimental annotation. These complexes correlate well with known pathways as well as for proteins co-expressed across the T. brucei life cycle, and provide potential functions for a large number of previously uncharacterized proteins. We validated the functions of several novel proteins associated with the RNA-editing machinery, identifying a candidate potentially involved in the mitochondrial post-transcriptional regulation of T. brucei. Our data provide an unprecedented view of the protein complex map of T. brucei, and serve as a reliable resource for further characterization of trypanosomatid proteins. The presented results in this study are available at: www.TrypsNetDB.org.

### Keywords
Trypanosomatids, Protein complex map, Biochemical fractionation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
McGill University
Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Road, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Montreal, Quebec H9X3V9, Canada

### Submitter
Reza Salavati

### Lab Head
Dr Reza Salavati
Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Road, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Montreal, Quebec H9X3V9, Canada


