### Accession
PXD037024

### Title
Identification of circGlis3 binding proteins in MIN6 cells by LC-MS

### Description
To identify the potential circGlis3 binding proteins, we extracted the total protein from MIN6 cells and performed RNA Pull-down assay. Then RNA-interacting proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
After trypsin digestion, Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (75 um i.d. x 150mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100Å, nanoViper), The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 50% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) over 40 min, and climbing to 90% in 5 min, then holding at 90% for the 5 min. All at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed on Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 27; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 1E5 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 m/z. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed with MASCOT software by searching Uniprot_Aedis Aegypti.  Searching Parameters are as follows: Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications Oxidation (M) Enzyme Trypsin Maximum Missed Cleavages 1 Peptide Mass Tolerance 20ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.6Da Mass values Monoisotopic Significance threshold 0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Circglis3, Rna binding proteins, Min6 cells

### Affiliations
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

### Submitter
Li Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Kang
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China


