### Accession
PXD022760

### Title
Blood exposure induces global changes in gene expression and protein secretion of B. pertussis

### Description
This project was focused on transcriptome and secretome of pathogenic bacteria B. pertussis, which were cultivated on solid plates (charcoal agar) with/without blood and subsequently sub-cultured in liquid media. As a standard, Bordetella spp. strain are grown on agar plates supplemented with blood. The main aim of this project was to determine how the cells respond to blood exposure and how the blood treatment impacts on the gene expression profiles in cell inoculated from plates and subcultured in a blood-less medium.  Gene expression profiles were analyzed by RNA-seq and proteins secreted by B. pertussis cells grown in liquid media were determined by LC-MS/MS technique. Our results indicate that B. pertussis cells exposed to blood secreted significantly higher amounts of several virulence factors including type III secretion system (T3SS), bifunctional hemolysin/adenylate cyclase CyaA and adhesin FhaS, compared to cells inoculated from plates without blood. Differences in secretion of T3SS needle complex, effector protein BopC and anti-sigma factor BtrA were at least an order of magnitude higher compared to the differences on the transcriptional level, suggesting that post-transcriptional regulation and/or regulation of the protein secretion plays an important role in modulating the function of T3SS in B. pertussis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cultures of B. pertussis were pelleted by centrifugation (10,000g, 4 °C, 10 min) to separate cell pellets and culture supernatants. For the next analysis of proteins, we used only culture supernatants. The supernatants were filtered through 0.22 μm filters and precipitated with 10% (w/v) TCA overnight at 4 °C. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation (14,000 g, 4 °C, 20 min), washed with 80% acetone (w/v) and finally dissolved in TEAB digestion buffer (100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate). Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteines were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethyl acetate (Masuda et al, 2008) and peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 column.   nLC-MS 2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid . Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 4% to 35% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2  ion count target was set to 104  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.5.3.8), (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Bordetella pertusis database (downloaded from Uniprot on November 2016, containing 3 258 entries, Proteome ID UP000002676_257313). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.2.3 software (Tyanova et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial pathogens sense specific cues associated with different host niches and integrate these signals to appropriately adjust the global gene expression. <i>Bordetella pertussis</i> is a Gram-negative, strictly human pathogen of the respiratory tract and the etiological agent of whooping cough (pertussis). Though <i>B. pertussis</i> does not cause invasive infections, previous results indicated that this reemerging pathogen responds to blood exposure. Here, omics RNA-seq and LC-MS/MS techniques were applied to determine the blood-responsive regulon of <i>B. pertussis</i>. These analyses revealed that direct contact with blood rewired global gene expression profiles in <i>B. pertussis</i> as the expression of almost 20% of all genes was significantly modulated. However, upon loss of contact with blood, the majority of blood-specific effects vanished, with the exception of several genes encoding the T3SS-secreted substrates. For the first time, the T3SS regulator BtrA was identified in culture supernatants of <i>B. pertussis</i>. Furthermore, proteomic analysis identified BP2259 protein as a novel secreted T3SS substrate, which is required for T3SS functionality. Collectively, presented data indicate that contact with blood represents an important cue for <i>B. pertussis</i> cells.

### Keywords
Virulence factors, Bordetella pertussis, Blood, Lfq ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i.
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.

### Submitter
Denisa Petrackova

### Lab Head
Dr Branislav Vecerek, PhD
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i.


