### Accession
PXD021286

### Title
Linkage-specific ubiquitin chain formation depends on a lysine hydrocarbon ruler

### Description
Virtually all aspects of cell biology are regulated by a ubiquitin code where distinct ubiquitin chain architectures guide the binding events and itineraries of modified substrates. Various combinations of E2 and E3 enzymes accomplish chain formation by forging isopeptide bonds between the C-terminus of their transiently-linked donor ubiquitin and a specific nucleophilic amino acid on the acceptor ubiquitin, yet it is unknown whether the fundamental feature of most acceptors - the lysine side-chain - affects catalysis. Here, use of synthetic ubiquitins with non-natural acceptor site replacements reveals that the aliphatic side-chain specifying reactive amine geometry is a determinant of the ubiquitin code, through unanticipated and complex reliance of many distinct ubiquitin carrying enzymes on a canonical acceptor lysine.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS measurements Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm reversed phase column (75 μm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Column temperature was maintained at 60°C using a homemade column oven. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was directly coupled online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source, and peptides were separated with a binary buffer system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted with a gradient starting at 7% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) FA, 80% (v/v) ACN) and stepwise increased to 14% in 4 min and 26% in 22 min. After each gradient, buffer B concentration was increase to 95% in 2 min and maintained at this concentration for 6 min. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in targeted scan mode in which every full scan with resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z (3 x 106 ions accumulated with a maximum injection time of 20 ms) was followed by 20 multiplexed selected ion monitoring (SIM) scans employing multiplexing degree of four. Light (endogenous) and heavy counterpart peptides were always simultaneously recorded in the same scan. Each SIM scan covered a range of m/z 150–2000 with resolution 120,000 (5 x 104 ions accumulated with a maximum injection time of 65 ms, 1.4 m/z isolation window and 0.4 m/z isolation offset).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw MS data were processed using Skyline which is an open source software project57,58. Graphical displays of chromatographic traces were manually inspected for proper peak picking of MS1 filtered endogenous peptides based on co-eluting SIL peptides. All quantification was done on the precursor ion level, based on area. Only the most abundant peak of the isotope cluster was used for quantitation. Bioinformatics analysis in this study were performed with Microsoft Excel and data visualized using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software). We first subtracted the background signal detected in “No acceptor” sample for each chain peptide from the corresponding signals of every other samples. Next, each chain peptide was normalized to the first tryptic peptide of the N-terminaly modified UBA (M1Nle) sequence: ‘NleQIFVK’. Because this peptide was used for normalization, K6-linked diUB was not measured in our protocol. Finally, fold changes of each chain peptide (relative to WT) are calculated and shown in figures: Fig. 4c,d Extended Data Fig. 6a,b and Extended Data Equations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried


