### Accession
PXD042464

### Title
DipM controls multiple autolysins and mediates a regulatory feedback loop promoting cell constriction in Caulobacter crescentus

### Description
Proteins containing a catalytically inactive LytM-type endopeptidase domain are important regulators of cell wall-degrading enzymes in bacteria. Here, we study their representative DipM, a factor mediating proper cell division in Caulobacter crescentus. We show that the LytM domain of DipM interacts with mul-tiple autolysins, including the lytic transglycosylases SdpA and SdpB, the amidase AmiC and the putative carboxypeptidase CrbA, and stimulates the activities of SdpA and AmiC. Its crystal structure displays a conserved groove, which is predicted to represent the dock¬ing site for autolysins by model¬ing studies. Mutations in this groove indeed abolish the function of DipM in vivo and its interaction with AmiC and SdpA in vitro. Notably, DipM and its regulatory targets SdpA and SdpB stimulate each other’s recruitment to the division site, establishing a self-reinforcing cycle that gradually increases autolytic activity as cyto¬kinesis progresses. DipM thus acts at the intersection of different peptidoglycan-remodeling pathways and coordinates their activities to ensure proper cell constriction and daughter cell separation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation (12,000 ×g, 4°C, 10 min), washed with wash buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2), pelleted and stored at -80°C. For further processing, the pellets were resuspended in 10 ml of a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 20 % (v/v) glycer¬ol, 10 mg/ml lysozyme, 5 μg/ml DNase I, 100 μg/ml PMSF and 0.5% (for DipM and SdpA) or 1% (remain¬ing proteins) of Triton X-100. The suspensions were then incubated for 30 min on ice and disrupted by three passages through a French press. The lysate was centrifuged (13,000 ×g, 4°C, 5 min) to remove intact cells and cell debris, and the supernatant was incubated with magnetic affinity beads carrying anti-FLAG (Sigma-Aldrich) or anti-GFP (Chromotek, Germany) antibodies for 2 h at 4°C in a rotator. The beads were then collected by centrifugation (4,000 ×g, 4°C) and resuspended in 700 µl of 100 mM ammonium¬bicarbonate. After vigorous agitation, they were washed three times in 100 mM ammonium¬bicarbonate using a magnetic separator. After removal of the supernatant of the last wash, the beads were resus¬pended in 100 µl of elution buffer 1 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium¬bicarbonate, 5 µg/ml trypsin) and incubated for 30 min in a thermomixer (27°C, 1200 rpm). After collection of the beads in a magnetic separator, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The beads were resus¬pended in 40 µl of elution buffer 2 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, 1 mM tris[2-carboxy¬ethyl]phos¬phine) and collected again. Subsequently, the supernatant was combined with the previous eluate, and the elution with elution buffer 2 was repeated one more time. The pooled fractions were left overnight at room temperature. On the following day, 40 µl of iodoacetamide (5 mg/ml) were added, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min in the dark. After the addition of 150 µl of 5% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the mix was passed through C-18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus), previously conditioned with acetonitrile and equilibrated with buffer A (0.1% [v/v] TFA in water). The column was then washed three times with 150 µl of buffer C (5% [v/v] acetonitrile, 95% [v/v] water and 0.1% [v/v] TFA). The peptides were eluted by washing the column three times with 100 µl of buffer B (50% [v/v] acetonitrile, 49.9% water [v/v] and 0.1% [v/v] TFA). The combined eluates were then dried under vacu¬um, and peptides were suspended in LC buffer (0.15% [v/v] formic acid, 2% [v/v] acetonitrile) by 20 pulses of ultra¬soni¬cation (amplitude 20, cycle 0.5) and shaking for 5 min at 1,400 rpm and 25°C.  LC-MS analysis of the peptide samples was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and the eluted by a linear acetonitrile gradient (2-35% solvent B) over 60 or 90 min (solvent A: 0.15% [v/v] formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.15% formic acid [v/v] in acetonitrile). The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min. The spray voltage was set to 2.5 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 300°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum at a theoretical m/z 200 after accumulation of 3×106 ions in the Orbitrap. Based on the survey scan, up to 10 of the most intense ions were subjected to fragmentation using high collision dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. Fragment spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms for both MS survey and MS/MS scans. To in¬crease the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data were analyzed using Mascot (v 2.5, Matrix Science). Search results were loaded into Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) to extract total spectrum counts for further analysis. The peptide count data were loaded in Perseus95  (version 1.5.8.5) to generate volcano plots. In brief, one unit was added to all the counts to eliminate the zeroes and then log2 was applied to all data. Columns were classified according to whether they belonged to the sample or negative control, and volcano plots were generated using the default settings. The resulting data on enrichment (difference to negative control) and significance (-log10 of p value) were exported to Microsoft Excel 2019 (Dataset S1), where they were re-plotted to generate the figures.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidoglycan, Lytic transglycosylase, Amidase, Bacteria, Autolysin, Bacterial cell division, Cell wall

### Affiliations
MPI Marburg
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany


