### Accession
PXD044310

### Title
Interactome analysis of elongating RNAPII after induction of DNA damage by IP-MS/MS

### Description
Endogenous aldehydes induce inter-strand crosslinks (ICL) and DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC). While DNA-repair and aldehyde-clearance systems cope with cellular toxicity, deficiencies in these mechanisms cause genome-instability disorders. The FA-pathway, defective in Fanconi anemia (FA), specifically removes ICL. In contrast, SPRTN, compromised in Ruijs-Aalfs syndrome, eliminates DPC during replication. However, AMeDS patients lacking aldehyde-detoxification display combined features of FA and Cockayne syndrome, associated with transcription-coupled repair (TCR) deficiency, suggesting a novel repair mechanism for aldehyde-induced DNA lesions in active genes. In this report, we demonstrate efficient resolution of aldehyde-induced transcription-blocking lesions by TCR. Mass-spectrometry and DPC-seq identify the TCR complex and additional factors involved in DPC removal and formaldehyde-induced damage tolerance. Notably, TFIIS-dependent cleavage of stalled-RNAPII transcripts exclusively protects against formaldehyde-induced damage. A mouse-model lacking both aldehyde-clearance and TCR pathways confirms endogenous DPC accumulation in transcribed regions. These findings highlight the importance of DPC removal in preventing transcription-roadblocks and contribute to understanding disorders related to aldehyde clearance and TCR deficiencies.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched proteins using anti-RPB1-phospho-Ser2-CTD antibodies (ab5095, abcam) or anti-TFIIS antibodies (302-239A, Bethyl laboratories) were digested after alkylation using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, the immunopricipitates were dissolved in SDS buffer (0.1M Tris pH8.5; 2% SDS; 100 mM DTT), boil for 5 min. The proteins were diluted in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris pH8.5, and loaded onto 30 kDa Vivacon 500 Centrifugal Units (Sartorius). The buffer was replaced by washing with the urea buffer, the proteins were alkylated with 50 mM Iodoacetamide for 20 min at 25°C in the dark. Then, proteins were digested with Lys-C (FUJIFILM) and trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were purified using C18 tips (AMR). The peptides from the immunopricipitates were analyzed by LC-MS using a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano LC system (Dionex Co., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) using a nano HPLC capillary column, 150 mm × 75 m i.d (Nikkyo Technos Co., Japan) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Reversed-phase chromatography was performed with a linear gradient (0 min, 5% B; 75 min, 35% B) of solvent A (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at an estimated flow rate of 300 nL/min. A precursor ion scan was carried out using a 400–1600 mass to charge ratio (m/z) prior to MS/MS analysis. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 0.8 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30%, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All experiments were performed in the data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically isolate and fragment top10 multiply-charged precursors (+2, +3, +4 and +5) according to their intensities. Former target ions were dynamically for 15 seconds excluded and all experiments were acquired using positive polarity mode. Full scan resolution was set to 70,000 and the mass range was set to m/z 350-1400. Full scan ion target value was 3×106 allowing a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragment scans was acquired with optimal setting for parallel acquisition using 1.6 m/z isolation window and normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1). A UniProt database against human proteome (Proteome ID UP000005640) was used to search for precursor ion and MS/MS spectra using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N termini were searched as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and Lys-C, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for searching with a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. LFQ intensities were analyzed with the statistical software package Perseus (version 1.6.0.7). The logarithmized LFQ intensities of the compared conditions were filtered to have two valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were imputed by creating a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation down-shit of the mean.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human hela cells ip-ms/ms rnapii dna damage

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (RIEM), Nagoya University

### Submitter
Yasuyoshi Oka

### Lab Head
Dr Tomoo Ogi
Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (RIEM), Nagoya University


