### Accession
PXD016049

### Title
Neutrophil Defensins (Alpha-Defensins)

### Description
In the HPLC high-resolution ESI-MS profiles of Gingival Crevicular Fluid, four proteins, with exp. monoisotopic ion [M+H]+ at 3440.54 ± 0.06 m/z, 3369.50± 0.06 m/z, 3484.51 ± 0.06 m/z and 3707.77 ± 0.06, eluting between 24.5-26.6 minutes, were detected. The monoisotopic mass values and the manual inspection of the high-resolution MS/MS spectra of the ions at [M+5H]+5 at  689.31,  675.10, 698.11 and 742.76 m/z, and of the ions at [M+4H]+4 at  843.63, 872.39 m/z allowed to establish that the four proteins were alpha defensins 1, 2, 3 and 4.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection:  Collection time was established between 9.00 a.m. and 12.00 a.m. Before collection, oral cavity was washed to remove pre-secreted saliva. GCF collection was performed by inserting three pre-weighted sterile blotting paper cones (28 mm, ISO n. 20, Dentalica, Milano, Italy) in the physiological grooves of three selected sites (three paper cones for each site). Each site was isolated with cotton rolls and the tooth to be sampled was dried with warm air for 20 sec. After 2 min cones were removed, weighted, and washed one time with 100 μL of 0.2% Formic Acid (FA) aqueous solution. After centrifugation, the acidic washings were pooled and the resultant solution stored at -80 °C until the analysis. Structural characterization of Alpha-defensins by RP-HPLC High-resolution ESI-MS and MS/MS experiments: The characterization of proteoforms of Alpha-defensins was performed by a top-down proteomic approach on the intact native proteins present in the acidic soluble fraction of WS. The experiments were carried out by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano/Micro System HPLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA). The injection volume was 20 μL. The column was a Zorbax 300SB-C8 (3.5 µm particle diameter; 1.0 x 150 mm), and eluents were: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and (eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile-water 80/20. The gradient was: 0-2 min 5% B, 2-40 min from 5% to 70% B (linear), 40-45 min from 70% to 99% B, at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 60000 (at 400 m/z). The acquisition range was from 350 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 1.4  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. Protein sequences were validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the ProteinProspector website (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). The presence of disulfide bridges in α-defensins 1-4 was considered in the computation of the theoretical m/z values of b and y fragment ions. The relative abundance of the proteins was determined by measuring the area of RP-HPLC low-resolution ESI-MS eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) peaks, considered when the S/N ratio was at least 5. This value is linearly proportional to the peptide concentration and it can be used to monitor relative abundances, under constant analytical conditions. To determine reliable XIC peak area, the choice of m/z values of the protein of interest is relevant, in particular in crowded chromatographic where ESI spectra belonging to other proteins might share ions with the same m/z value. The window for all these values was in a range of ±0.5 m/z. In order to minimize errors associated with sample dilution, the XIC peak value of each protein/peptide analyzed was correct with respect to the XIC peak value of the leucine encephalin internal standard.

### Publication Abstract
Gingival Crevicular Fluid (GCF), a plasma-derived exudate present in the gingival crevice was collected from deciduous, exfoliating and permanent teeth from 20 children (60 samples) with the aim to characterize and quantify by a mass spectrometry based top-down proteomic approach, the peptide/proteins in the fluid and verify possible variations occurring during the exfoliating process. The results obtained confirmed the presence in GCF of &#x3b1;-Defensins 1-4, Thymosin &#x3b2;4 and Thymosin &#x3b2;10, as described in previous works and revealed the presence of other interesting peptides never described before in GCF such as specific fragments of &#x3b1;-1-antitrypsin, &#x3b1;-1-antichymotrypsin; fragments of Thymosin &#x3b2;4 and Thymosin &#x3b2;10; Fibrinopeptide A and its fragments and Fibrinopeptide B; S100A8 and S100A9, LVV Hemorphin-7 (hemoglobin chain &#x3b2; fragment), as well as some other peptides deriving from &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; subunits of hemoglobin. Statistical analysis evidenced different levels in 5 proteins/peptides in the three groups. Our study demonstrate that an in-depth analysis of a biological fluid like GCF, present in small amount, can provide useful information for the understanding of different biological processes like teeth eruption. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016010 and PXD016049. SIGNIFICANCE: GCF due to his site-specific nature has a great potential in containing factors that are specific for action at a given site and might have diagnostic value to detect qualitative and quantitative variations of proteins/peptides composition linked to physiological or pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Top-down, Proteomics, Gingival crevicular fluid

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry Institute, Medicine Faculty, Catholic University of Rome
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS Rome Italy
Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italia. Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italia.

### Submitter
Federica Iavarone

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Iavarone
Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italia. Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italia.


