### Accession
PXD032758

### Title
Analysis of impact of clinical mutations in WDR34 by GFP-trap proteomics.

### Description
The primary cilium is a sensory organelle, receiving signals from the external environment and relaying them into the cell. Mutations in proteins required for transport in the primary cilium lead to ciliopathies, a group of genetic disorders that commonly lead to the malformation of organs such as the kidney, liver and eyes and skeletal deformation. Motor proteins dynein-2 and kinesin-2 mediate retrograde and anterograde transport in the cilium. WDR34, a dynein-2 intermediate chain, is required for the maintenance of cilia function. Here, we investigated WDR34 mutations, some as compound mutations with other dynein-2 or IFT proteins, identified in Jeune syndrome, Short-Rib Polydactyly Syndrome or Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia patients by stably expressing the mutant proteins in WDR34 knockout cells. WDR34 mutations led to different spectrums of phenotypes. Here, we have used quantitative proteomics demonstrated changes in dynein-2 assembly.

### Sample Protocol
RPE1 cells stably expressing GFP-WDR34 or mutants thereof were washed with PBS and incubated with crosslinker solution (1 mM DSP, Thermo Fisher Scientific #22585) for 30 min on ice. The reaction was quenched by adding 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 15 min. Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal and protease inhibitors (539137, Millipore). Subsequently, cells were incubated on ice for 30 min and then lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cell lysates were added to equilibrated GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) and incubated overnight on a rotor at 4 °C. Next, the beads were washed three times by centrifuging at 2500 g for 5 min at 4 °C with 1 ml of washing buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis including Nano LC mass spectrometry and primary data analysis was done as described in Vuolo et al (2018). Dynein-2 protein abundances were normalized to the abundance of GFP in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ciliopathy, Dynein-2, Epithelial cells, Cilia, Wdr34

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
David Stephens

### Lab Head
Dr David Stephens
University of Bristol


