### Accession
PXD024521

### Title
Targeting Pancreatic Cancer by TAK-981, a SUMOylation Inhibitor that Activates the Immune System and Blocks Tumor Cell Cycle Progression

### Description
The 5-year survival rate of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is lower than 8%. PDAC has the characteristics of high-density stroma and a distinctive immunosuppressive microenvironment and is profoundly resistant to all forms of chemo and immunotherapy. SUMOylation is a reversible post-translational modification required for cell cycle progression. We found that SUMOylation is increased in PDAC patient samples compared to primary pancreatic tissue. TAK-981, a novel highly selective and potent small molecule inhibitor of the SUMO activation enzyme E1 (SAE), selectively decreased SUMOylation in PDAC cells at the nanomolar range, thereby causing a G2/M cell cycle arrest, mitotic failure and chromosomal segregation defects. In vivo TAK-981 efficiently limited the tumor burden in the KPC3 syngeneic mouse model without evidence of general toxicity. Interestingly, we found that TAK-981 modulates the immune system, up-regulating CD8+ T cells,  NK cells and down-regulating B cells in peripheral blood, spleen, lymph nodes. Treatment of mouse primary T cells ex vivo with TAK-981 activated STAT1, the key transcription factor induced by interferon signaling. Our findings indicate that inhibition of the SUMO pathway might be a potential clinical strategy to target PDAC by inhibiting tumor cell division and activating anti-tumor immunity.

### Sample Protocol
His10-SUMO2 purification for identification of SUMO2/3 target protein  His10-SUMO2 conjugates were purified essentially as described previously [31]. In brief, PANC-1, MiaPaCa2 cells expressing His10-SUMO2 were washed, scraped, and collected in ice-cold PBS. For total lysates, a small aliquot of cells was kept separately and lysed in 2% SDS, 1% N-P40, 50 mM TRIS pH 7.5, and 150 mM NaCl. The remaining parts of the cell pellets were lysed in 6 M guanidine-HCl pH 8.0 (6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, pH 8.0). The samples were snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C until further processing. For SUMO purification, cell lysates were first thawed at room temperature and sonicated for 5 s, using a sonicator (Misonix Sonicator 3000, EW-04711-81) at 30 W to homogenize lysates. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and lysates were equalized. Prewashed Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen, 30210) were added to the lysates and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Ni-NTA beads were washed with wash buffer 1–4, respectively; Wash buffer 1: 6 M Guanidine-HCL, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 2: 8 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 3: 8 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2% Triton X-100. Wash buffer 4: 8 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% Triton X-100. For samples used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis, 0.2% Triton X-100 was included in Wash 1 and 0.1% Triton X-100 was included in Wash 2. Wash 3, and Wash 4 did not contain Triton X-100. Purified proteins were twice eluted in one bead volume of 7 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, and 500 mM imidazole pH 7.0.  Proteomics sample preparation and mass spectrometry His10-SUMO2 purified samples were concentrated using a 100 kDa cutoff filter and diluted with ammonium bicarbonate to an end concentration of 50 mM. Samples were reduced with DTT in two steps, first to 1 mM DTT and subsequently to 6 mM DTT. In between the reduction steps, samples were alkylated using 5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were first digested with Lys-C (Promega, VA1170) in a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio for 5 h. Peptides were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate before trypsin (Promega, V5111) digestion. Trypsin digestion was carried out at a 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio, overnight and in the dark at RT. After digestion, peptides were acidified with 2% TFA and then desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reversed phase StageTips. Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile (ACN), vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. All analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Separation of peptides was achieved using a 15 cm analytical column with an inner diameter of 75 µm, packed in-house with 1.9 C18-AQ beads. For the identification of SUMOylated proteins, peptides were analyzed over a 120 min gradient from 2 to 95% ACN in 0.1% FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using a top 7 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3E6 and a resolution of 70,000. The higher-collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem MS/MS were acquired using a target value of 1E5, a resolution of 35000 and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum injection times for MS1 and MS2 were 50 and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of SUMOylated proteins in pancreatic cell lines, three experimental conditions were performed in biological triplicate and each sample was measured with two technical repeats, which resulted in a total of 18 MS runs. All RAW data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.14 according to (Tyanova et a.. 2016) with standard setting with the following modifications. and its integrated search engine Andromeda. The search was performed against an in silico digested reference proteome for Homo sapiens obtained from Uniprot.org (October 16th 2020). Database searches were performed with trypsin and  allowing three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification and the variable modifications of oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were allowed with a maximum number of 3 modifications per peptide. Label Free Quantification was performed not enabling the Fast LFQ algorithm.. Match-between-runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Pancreatic cancer, Tak-981

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands


