### Accession
PXD005542

### Title
The papain-like cysteine proteinases NbCysP6 and NbCysP7 are highly processive enzymes with substrate specificities complementary to Nicotiana benthamiana cathepsin B

### Description
The tobacco-related plant Nicotiana benthamiana is gaining interest as a versatile host for the production of monoclonal antibodies and other protein therapeutics. However, the susceptibility of plant-derived recombinant proteins to endogenous proteolytic enzymes limits their use as biopharmaceuticals. We have now identified two previously uncharacterized N. benthamiana proteases with high antibody-degrading activity, the papain-like cysteine proteinases NbCysP6 and NbCysP7. Both enzymes are capable of hydrolysing a wide range of synthetic substrates, although only NbCysP6 tolerates basic amino acids in its specificity-determining S2 subsite. The overlapping substrate specificities of NbCysP6 and NbCysP7 are also documented by the closely related properties of their other subsites as deduced from the action of the enzymes on proteome-derived peptide libraries. Notable differences were observed to the substrate preferences of N. benthamiana cathepsin B, another antibody-degrading papain-like cysteine proteinase. The complementary activities of NbCysP6, NbCysP7 and N. benthamiana cathepsin B indicate synergistic roles of these proteases in the turnover of recombinant and endogenous proteins in planta, thus representing a paradigm for the shaping of plant proteomes by the combined action of papain-like cysteine proteinases.

### Sample Protocol
Comparative specificity profiling of N. benthamiana PLCPs was performed using an improved version of the Proteomic Identification of Protease Cleavage Sites (PICS) procedure as reported previously [16, 36]. Briefly, proteome-derived peptide libraries were prepared by digestion of E. coli or HEK293 lysates with trypsin or GluC. These peptide samples (300 µg) were incubated with the enzyme to be tested (0.6-3 µg) in 100 mM sodium acetate (pH 4.5: NbCathB; pH 5.0: NbCysP6, NbCysP7, NbCP14) containing 5 mM DTT for up to 16 h at room temperature. Protease-treated and control samples differentially labelled with either natural (12COH2) or heavy formaldehyde (13COD2) were then combined and analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Semi-specific peptides that were enriched >4-fold in the protease-treated samples were considered as cleavage products. The corresponding prime and non-prime sequences were reconstructed bioinformatically through database searches. Sequences containing a P1 amino acid matching the specificity of the protease used for library generation were excluded prior to cleavage site analysis via iceLogo.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data was converted to the mzXML format, using msconvert with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) was used. The E. coli proteome database (strain K12, reference proteome) was used as described previously , consisting of 4304 protein entries and 8608 randomized sequences, derived from the original E. coli proteome entries. The decoy sequences were generated with the software DB toolkit. X! Tandem parameters included: precursor mass error of ± 10 ppm (Q-Exactive) or +- 100 ppm (QSTAR), fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Q-Exactive) or +- 0.15 Da (QSTAR), semi-tryptic or semi-GluC with up to one missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da); lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 36.08 Da, respectively); no variable modifications. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95 %. For relative peptide quantification, XPRESS was used. Mass tolerance for quantification was 0.05 Da (Q-Exactive) or 0.1 Da (Q-STAR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome-derived peptide library, Specificity, Protease

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615


