### Accession
PXD022348

### Title
Mapping of m6A and Its Regulatory Targets in Prostate Cancer Reveals a METTL3-low Induction of Therapy Resistance

### Description
Genomic and transcriptomic alterations are insufficient to explain the variance in protein expression seen in cancer. Recent evidence has highlighted the role of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in the regulation of mRNA expression, stability and translation, supporting a potential role for post-transcriptional regulation mediated by m6A in cancer. Here we explore prostate cancer as an exemplar cancer and generate the first prostate m6A maps, and further examined how low levels of N6-adenosine-methyltransferase (METTL3) associates with advanced prostate cancer and results in altered expression at the level of transcription, translation, and protein. In particular extracellular matrix proteins have a high number of m6A sites and show significant changes in expression with METTL3 knock-down. We also discovered the upregulation of a hepatocyte nuclear factor-driven gene signature that is associated with therapy resistance in prostate cancer. Significantly, METTL3 knock-down rendered the cells resistant to androgen receptor antagonists, implicating changes in m6A as a mechanism for therapy resistance in metastatic prostate cancer.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP cells were transduced with doxycycline inducible shRNAs. Cells were treated with 200 ng/mL doxycycline for 96 hours. Cells were scraped directly in lysis buffer (8M urea in 100mM TRIS/HCl pH 8. Cells were lysed in 8M urea/100mM Tris pH8 / protease inhibitors with sonication for 1 minute on ice with 10seconds intervals. The supernatant was reduced, alkylated and precipitated overnight. The pellet was re-suspended in 8M urea/50mM Tris pH8 and protein concentration was determinate with Qubit Protein Assay (Invitrogen). 10µg protein were digested with LysC 2hours at 37C followed by Trypsin at room temperature overnight.  800ng of digests were loaded in random order onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a home packed analytical Nano-column (Reprosil Pur C18-AQ, 1.9µm, 120A, 0.075 mm i.d. x 500mm length) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 180min at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant [maxq] (version 1.6.1.0) against the Swissprot Homo Sapiens database [uniprot] (release Februrary 2019). The initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and that of the fragment peaks to 0.4 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to strict trypsin, and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The same fraction number was given to all replicates of a group, but each group was given a fraction number differing by 3, so that match between runs were prevented between the different groups.  [maxq] J.Cox and M.Mann, Nature Biotechnology 26 (2008), p1367-1372, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 [uniprot] The uniprot consortium, Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D506-515 (2019), UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge, doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049

### Publication Abstract
Recent evidence has highlighted the role of <i>N</i> <sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) in the regulation of mRNA expression, stability, and translation, supporting a potential role for posttranscriptional regulation mediated by m<sup>6</sup>A in cancer. Here, we explore prostate cancer as an exemplar and demonstrate that low levels of <i>N</i> <sup>6</sup>-adenosine-methyltransferase (<i>METTL3</i>) is associated with advanced metastatic disease. To investigate this relationship, we generated the first prostate m<sup>6</sup>A maps, and further examined how METTL3 regulates expression at the level of transcription, translation, and protein. Significantly, transcripts encoding extracellular matrix proteins are consistently upregulated with <i>METTL3</i> knockdown. We also examined the relationship between METTL3 and androgen signaling and discovered the upregulation of a hepatocyte nuclear factor-driven gene signature that is associated with therapy resistance in prostate cancer. Significantly, METTL3 knockdown rendered the cells resistant to androgen receptor antagonists via an androgen receptor-independent mechanism driven by the upregulation of nuclear receptor <i>NR5A2/LRH-1</i>. IMPLICATIONS: These findings implicate changes in m<sup>6</sup>A as a mechanism for therapy resistance in metastatic prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Mettl3, M6a, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Dept for Biomedical Research, University of Bern; Inselspital and Bern Center for Precision Medicine
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Rubin
Dept for Biomedical Research, University of Bern; Inselspital and Bern Center for Precision Medicine


