### Accession
PXD022369

### Title
DNA damage-induced chromatome analysis in yeast reveals recruitment of Ubiquitin ligases for efficient DNA repairtest1

### Description
Eukaryotic cells package their genomes around histone octamers. In response to DNA damage checkpoint kinase-induced core histone degradation leads to a 20-40% reduction in nucleosome density in yeast. To gain insights into this process we report the first comprehensive proteomic analysis of yeast chromatin and the alterations that occur in response to DNA damage. We analyzed the protein content of formaldehyde cross-linked chromatin using tandem mass tag (TMT), multiplexing and high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS), after sucrose gradient enrichment of the chromatin fraction. Quantitative damage-induced changes in the chromatin-bound proteome (called chromatome), were compared among wild-type cells and those defective for the INO80 remodeler (arp8Δ), or high mobility group box proteins (Nhp6a and Nhp6b, nhp6ΔΔ). We find massive changes in the chromatome in response to Zeocin, which are strongly attenuated in cells lacking a functional INO80 remodeler.

### Sample Protocol
Three different  S. Cerevisiae strains were arrested in G1 phase with α-factor, prior to either treatment with DNA-damaging reagent or no treatment, and either directly prepared for proteomics analysis (whole cell extract, WCE) or first enriched first for the chromatin-associated protein content (chromatome). For chromatome preparations, cells were initially spheroplasted with Zymolase, and the lysis mixture was separated by sucrose gradient fractionation in the presence of formaldehyde. After ultracentrifugation, the chromatin pellet was resuspended and crosslinked in formaldehyde containing buffer, then digested with RNAse to remove RNA in chromatin chromatin samples. Further chromatin pellet was quickly washed with Urea and 2% SDS buffers.  Proteins from WCE or from chromatome were reduced, alkylated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin, prior to TMT-labeling of the resulting peptides, using the PreOmics NHS-iST kit and either Thermo Scientific’s TMT6plex or 10plex reagents. TMT-labeled peptides were either mixed in equal amounts either 1) as a 6plex of samples for each genotype with triplicates of treated or untreated, to study the effect of the treatment for each genotype, or 2) as a 9plex of samples for each treatment to study the effect of each genotype, with each condition represented by biological triplicates. 6plex or 9plex samples were fractionated by basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography into 48 fractions, each, and then analyzed by LC-MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry system, recording MS2 spectra in the Orbitrap for identification and quantification, at 15 k resolution (6plex) or 50 k resolution (9plex).

### Data Protocol
Two analyses were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 to 1) determine quantitative protein changes of the yeast proteome, and 2) to roughly identify selected histone PTM changes of yeast histones. MS raw data were loaded as “fractions”, with all MS data from basic pH fractions of a 6plex or 9plex experiment grouped as a single file set, re-calibrated and searched against the Uniprot Yeast database (downloaded from Uniport Uniprot on April 4 2017 with the query: organism:"Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) (Baker's yeast) [559292]" AND proteome:up000002311), and against commonly observed contaminants. For protein quantification, the search parameters were set to fully tryptic digestion, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, a maximum of two missed cleavages, and static modifications of with TMT6plex (+229 Da) at both lysines and peptide N-termini, and PreOmics NHS-iST Cys alkyation (+113 Da). Protein N-termini were further allowed to be dynamically modified with TMT6plex (229 Da) or acetyl (42 Da), without, or with initiator methionines removed (+98 Da for Met-loss+TMT6plex or -89 Da for Met-loss+Acetyl, respectively). To roughly identify and quantify histone PTMs, the same search settings were applied to identify “high confidence” yeast peptides, unmapped leftover MS2 spectra were then searched against only a subset of the same database, histones, allowing dynamic modifications with TMT6plex (+229 Da) at lysines and peptide N-termini, or monomethyl (Methyl_TMT6plex, +241 Da), dimethyl (+28 Da), trimethyl (+42 Da), or the ubiquityl remnant (GG_TMT6plex, +343 Da). In either case, the peptide and protein identification false discovery rate was set to 0.01 based on the target-decoy (concatenated) search strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2010 and PSM validation based on Percolator. Protein abundances were calculated based on the summed signal-to-noise values of all unique and razor peptide reporter ion signals above 10. Peptide abundances with more than 50% isolation interference (Co-isolation threshold) were not considered. Protein abundances were normalized based on the total yeast peptide amount, resulting in equal sums of abundances for all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hmgb1/nhp6, Dna dynamics, Teschromatome, Histone degradation, Zeocin, Homologous recombination, Chromatin proteomics, Ino80, Dna damage response, S. cerevisiae, Ubiquitin ligases, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research (FMI) Basel, Switzerland
FMI Basel

### Submitter
Jan Seebacher

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Gasser
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research (FMI) Basel, Switzerland


