### Accession
PXD032722

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of FFPE testicular tissue from men with obstructive and non-obstructive azoospermia

### Description
The project aimed to compare testicular proteomes from patients with obstructive and non-obstructive azoospermia in order to identify molecular signatures involved in spermatogenesis as well to identify candidate biomarkers for discriminating between different types of azoospermia. The samples used in this study were formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) testicular tissues obtained by biopsy from men with clinical diagnosis of azoospermia. Samples were grouped according to the histopathological report in 3 groups: 1) Spermatogenesis (obstructive azoospermia), 2) Hypospermatogenesis and 3) Sertoli cell only syndrome (SCO). Patients were aged 31–46 years with no differences among groups regarding age (Median age (Hypospermatogenesis) =35;  Median age (SCO) =34 and Median age (Spermatogenesis) =39). Each group had 9 samples or 27 samples in total were used for the comparative proteomics analysis by label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Proteins from FFPE tissues were isolated using 3-4 serial 10 µm thick sections. FFPE tissues were deparaffinized three times with xylene, followed by rehydration with ethanol (95%, 70% and 50%) and water for 5 min. After air dry for 30 min, the tissues were resuspended in 1:20 ratio (w/v) of Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 5mM MgCl2x6H2O, 10 mM CHAPS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.5 M DTT), vortexed, sonicated in ice bath for 30 min, and incubated at 95oC for 30 min and than at 80 °C for 2 h with mixing at 1000 rpm. After cooling on ice for 5 min and sonication for 15 min, the protein content was quantified by Bradford method. Sample preparation: Rapigest protocol was used with some modifications. Portion of each individual sample in Lysis buffer containing 100 µg of protein was adjusted to 100 µl with Lysis buffer and 150 μl of methanol and 38 μl of chloroform were added. After vortexing vigorously for about 1 min and centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 5 min, most of the upper layer of methanol/water was aspirated and 112 μl of methanol was added. Proteins were pelleted and dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1% RapiGestTM detergent in ratio 2.5:1 (w/v). DTT was added (0.12 µmol/50 µg protein) and the solution was sonicated and boiled for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. The volume of each sample containing total of 30 µg protein was adjusted to 35 µl with 0.1% RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3, heated at 80oC for 15 minutes, reduced in 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60oC and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Trypsin (TRYPSEQM-RO ROCHE) was added at a 1:100 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. TFA was added to final concentration of 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes. The final concentration of protein was 200 ng/μl and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase was added as an internal control with concentration of 25 fmol/μl. Nano LC-MS/MS: A label-free LC-MS/MS protein profiling was performed using an ultra-performance liquid chromatography system ACQUITY UPLC® M-Class (Waters Corporation) coupled with SYNAPT G2-Si High Definition Mass Spectrometer (Waters Corporation) equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device. Data were obtained using ion-mobility separation (IMS) enhanced MSE acquisition named ultradefinition MSE (UDMSE). Samples were run at 300 ng per run in UDMSE acquisition mode, in single technical replicate. Peptides were trapped on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column Symmetry C18, 5µm particles, 180 µm×20mm, (Waters Corporation), for 3 min at 8 µL/min in 0.1% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN)/99.9% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Peptide separation was done on C18 column HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75µm×250mm (Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using 90 min multistep concave gradient. The column temperature was set to 55 °C. Spectra were collected over the mass range 50–2000 m/z with scan time of 0.5 s. Collision energy was held at 0 V for low energy scan while for the high energy cycles, look-up table file was put into the MS file: (i) ion-mobility bins 0–20: CE of 2 eV, (ii) ion-mobility bins 21–120: CE ramp from 10.6 eV to 50.4 eV, (iii) ion-mobility bins 121–200: CE ramp from 51 eV to 60 eV. A reference sprayer was operated at 500 nl/min to produce a lockmass spectrum with Glu-1-Fibrinopeptide B (EGVNDNEEGFFSAR) (m/z 785.8426) every 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with Progenesis QIP version 4.1 (Nonlinear dynamics, Waters Corporation). Data was imported into Progenesis QIP with LE and HE threshold set to auto and data lock mass corrected. Imported runs were automatically aligned to the most suitable reference run identified by the software, followed by normalization of the protein abundances in individual runs using the run that was least different from all other. UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot database from June 2020 containing 20 370 proteins human protein sequences and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (UniProt P00330) was used. Using the PLGS database management tool, the sequence of each protein entry from the UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot database was reversed to generate decoy database, which was appended to the original fasta file. This combined target decoy database was used for database search with the following parameters: digest reagent - trypsin; maximum missed cleavages - two; maximum protein mass - 250 kDa; fixed modifications – carbamidomethyl C; variable modification – oxidation M. Search tolerance parameters were as follows: peptide tolerance - auto; fragment tolerance - auto; FDR < 1%. Ion matching requirements were: two fragment ion matches per peptide identification, five fragment ion matches per protein identification and one peptide matches per protein identification. Peptides with a sequence length less than six amino acids and a score below 4 were removed. Grouping of similar proteins and relative quantitation from non-conflicting peptides were used for protein building. Proteins were reviewed and exported in the form of .csv output file for subsequent data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding molecular mechanisms that underpin azoospermia and discovery of biomarkers that could enable reliable, non-invasive diagnosis are highly needed. Using label-free data-independent LC-MS/MS acquisition coupled with ion mobility, we compared the FFPE testicular proteome of patients with obstructive (OA) and non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) subtypes hypospermatogenesis (Hyp) and Sertoli cell-only syndrome (SCO). Out of 2044 proteins identified based on &#x2265;2 peptides, 61 proteins had the power to quantitatively discriminate OA from NOA and 30 to quantitatively discriminate SCO from Hyp and OA. Among these, H1-6, RANBP1 and TKTL2 showed superior potential for quantitative discrimination among OA, Hyp and SCO. Integrin signaling pathway, adherens junction, planar cell polarity/convergent extension pathway and Dectin-1 mediated noncanonical NF-kB signaling were significantly associated with the proteins that could discriminate OA from NOA. Comparison with 2 transcriptome datasets revealed 278 and 55 co-differentially expressed proteins/genes with statistically significant positive correlation. Gene expression analysis by qPCR of 6 genes (H1-6, RANBP1, TKTL2, TKTL1, H2BC1, and ACTL7B) with the highest discriminatory power on protein level and the same regulation trend with transcriptomic datasets, confirmed the proteomics results. In summary, our results suggest some underlying pathways in azoospermia and broaden the range of potential novel candidates for diagnosis. SIGNIFICANCE: Using a comparative proteomics approach on testicular tissue we have identified several pathways associated with azoospermia and a number of testis-specific and germ cell-specific proteins that have the potential to pinpoint the type of spermatogenesis failure. Furthermore, comparison with transcriptomics datasets based on genome-wide gene expression analyses of human testis specimens from azoospermia patients identified proteins that could discriminate between obstructive and non-obstructive azoospermia subtypes on both protein and mRNA levels. Up to our knowledge, this is the first integrated comparative analysis of proteomics and transcriptomics data from testicular tissues. We believe that the data from our study contributes significantly to increase the knowledge of molecular mechanisms of azoospermia and pave the way for new investigations in regards to non-invasive diagnosis.

### Keywords
Human, Testis, Azoospermia, Ffpe, Rapigest, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje

### Submitter
Katarina Davalieva

### Lab Head
Dr Katarina Davalieva
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia


