### Accession
PXD001266

### Title
A transcriptional regulator Sll0794 regulates tolerance to biofuel ethanol in photosynthetic Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
To improve ethanol production directly from CO2 in photosynthetic cyanobacterial systems, one key issue that needs to be addressed is the low ethanol tolerance of cyanobacterial cells. Our previous proteomic and transcriptomic analyses found that several regulatory proteins were up regulated by exogenous ethanol in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. In this study, through tolerance analysis of the gene disruption mutants of the up-regulated regulatory genes, we uncovered that one transcriptional regulator, Sll0794, was related directly to ethanol tolerance in Synechocystis. Using a quantitative iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS proteomics approach coupled with quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR), we further determined the possible regulatory network of Sll0794. The proteomic analysis showed that in the ∆sll0794 mutant grown under ethanol stress a total of 54 and 87 unique proteins were down- and up-regulated, respectively. In addition, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) demonstrated that the Sll0794 transcriptional regulator was able to bind directly to the upstream regions of sll1514, slr1512 and slr1838, which encode a 16.6 kDa small heat shock protein, a putative sodium-dependent bicarbonate transporter and a carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism protein CcmK, respectively. The study provided a proteomic description of the putative ethanol-tolerance network regulated by the sll0794 gene, and revealed new insights on the ethanol-tolerance regulatory mechanism in Synechocystis. As the first regulatory protein discovered related to ethanol tolerance, the gene may serve as a valuable target for transcription machinery engineering to further improve ethanol tolerance in Synechocystis.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial growth conditions - Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and the knockout mutants constructed in this study were grown in BG11 medium (pH 7.5) under a light intensity of approximately 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1 in an illuminating incubator of 130 rpm at 30°C (HNY-211B Illuminating Shaker, Honour, China). Cell density was measured on a UV-1750 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). For control growth and ethanol (1.5%, v/v) treatment, 10 mL fresh cells at OD730 of 0.5 collected by centrifugation and then were inoculated into 50 mL BG11 liquid medium in a 250-mL flask. Ethanol of analytical pure was purchased from Merck (U.S.A). Growth experiments were repeated at least three times to confirm the growth patterns. Cells for proteomics analysis were collected by centrifugation at 8,000 g for 10 min at 4°C.  Proteomics analysis - i) Protein preparation and digestion: for each sample, 10 mg of cells were frozen by liquid nitrogen immediately after centrifugation and washed with phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The cells were broken with sonication cracking at low temperature, and then centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g to collect the supernatant. In addition, cell debris was then re-suspended in a lysis buffer (8 M urea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 40 mM Tris-HCl), with 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (final concentration). After 5 min of vigorously vortex, dithiothreitol (DTT) was also added to a final concentration of 10 mM. After mix, the sample were centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g, and the supernatant was mixed well with ice-cold acetone (1:4, v/v) with 30 mM DTT. After repeating this step twice, all supernatants were combined and precipitated at -20°C overnight, and stored at -80°C prior to sample cleanup if not for immediate use. For digestion, protein pellet from previous step was resuspended in digestion buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate TEAB, 0.05% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL (total protein measured by bicinchonic acid assay (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)). Equal aliquots (500 µg) from each lysate were then digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C (Sigma; 1:40 w/w added at 0 and 2 h) and lyophilized; ii) iTRAQ Labeling: the iTRAQ labeling of peptide samples derived from each of the wild type control and the gene knockout mutant samples were performed using iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer' s protocol. Four samples (two biological replicates for the wild type control and two biological replicates for the mutant, respectively) were iTRAQ individually labeled. The peptides labeled with respective isobaric tags, incubated for 2 h and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Each of the labeled control and the mutant replicate samples were 1:1 pooled, and generating four combinations of samples, which were reconstituted in Buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.85). The mixed iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated using PolySULFOETHYL ATM Strong Cation Exchange Choematography (SCX) column (200 x 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle size, 200 Aº pore size) by HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan) at flow rate 1.0 ml min-1. The 50 min HPLC gradient consisted of 100% buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.85) for 5 min; 0-20% buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, 500 mM KCL, pH 3.0) for 15 min; 20-40% buffer B for 10 min; 40-100% buffer B for 5 min followed by 100% buffer A for 10 min. The chromatograms were recorded at 218 nm. A total of twenty fractions of labeled peptides were collected and then individually desalted with Sep-Pak® Vac C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts), concentrated to dryness using vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis: the mass spectroscopy analysis was performed using an AB SCIEX TripleTOF™ 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA), coupled with online micro flow HPLC system (Shimadzu, JAPAN). The peptides were separated using nanobored C18 column with a picofrit nanospray tip (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 5 μm particles) (New Objectives, Wubrun, MA). The separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 20 μl min-1, with a splitter to get an effective flow rate of 0.2 μl min-1. The mass spectrometer data acquired in the positive ion mode, with a selected mass range of 300-2000 m/z. Peptides with +2 to +4 charge states were selected for MS/MS. The three most abundantly charged peptides above a count threshold were selected for MS/MS and dynamically excluded for 30 s with ±30 mDa mass tolerance. Smart information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was activated with automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. The fragment intensity multiplier was set to 20 and maximum accumulation time was 2 s. The peak areas of the iTRAQ reporter ions reflect the relative abundance of the proteins in the samples. For peptide identification, Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer used in this study has high mass accuracy (less than 2 ppm). Other identification parameters used included: Fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.1 Da; Mass values: monoisotopic; Variable modifications: Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y); Peptide mass tolerance: 0.05 Da; Max missed cleavages: 1; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); Other parameters: default.  Proteomic data analysis: the MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.2.0.208) (Thermo Scientific) to generating peak list. The default parameters of Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.2.0.208) were used. The data acquisition was performed with Analyst QS 2.0 software (Applied Biosystems/MDS SCIEX). Protein identification and quantification were performed using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). For iTRAQ quantification, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected by the algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area, error factor (EF) and p-value (default parameters in Mascot Software package). The resulting data set was auto bias-corrected to get rid of any variations imparted due to the unequal mixing during combining different labeled samples. Genome sequence and annotation information of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 were downloaded from NCBI. The ratio between the mutant and the wild type was obtained directly based on the protein abundance for any given protein. Proteins with 1.5 fold or more change between ethanol-treated and control samples and p-value of statistical evaluation less than 0.05 were determined as differentially expressed proteins. The quantitation was performed at the peptide level by following the procedures described in http://www.matrixscience.com/help/quant_statistics_help.html. The student’s T-test was performed using the Mascot 2.3.02 software.

### Publication Abstract
To improve ethanol production directly from CO2 in photosynthetic cyanobacterial systems, one key issue that needs to be addressed is the low ethanol tolerance of cyanobacterial cells. Our previous proteomic and transcriptomic analyses found that several regulatory proteins were up-regulated by exogenous ethanol in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. In this study, through tolerance analysis of the gene disruption mutants of the up-regulated regulatory genes, we uncovered that one transcriptional regulator, Sll0794, was related directly to ethanol tolerance in Synechocystis. Using a quantitative iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS proteomics approach coupled with quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR), we further determined the possible regulatory network of Sll0794. The proteomic analysis showed that in the &#x394;sll0794 mutant grown under ethanol stress a total of 54 and 87 unique proteins were down- and up-regulated, respectively. In addition, electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that the Sll0794 transcriptional regulator was able to bind directly to the upstream regions of sll1514, slr1512, and slr1838, which encode a 16.6 kDa small heat shock protein, a putative sodium-dependent bicarbonate transporter and a carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism protein CcmK, respectively. The study provided a proteomic description of the putative ethanol-tolerance network regulated by the sll0794 gene, and revealed new insights on the ethanol-tolerance regulatory mechanism in Synechocystis. As the first regulatory protein discovered related to ethanol tolerance, the gene may serve as a valuable target for transcription machinery engineering to further improve ethanol tolerance in Synechocystis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001266 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001266).

### Keywords
Transcriptional regulator; ethanol; tolerance; synechocystis

### Affiliations
Tianjin university
Laboratory of Synthetic Microbiology  School of Chemical Engineering & Technology Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072,  P. R. China

### Submitter
Guangsheng Pei

### Lab Head
Dr Weiwen Zhang
Laboratory of Synthetic Microbiology  School of Chemical Engineering & Technology Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072,  P. R. China


