### Accession
PXD036454

### Title
The SPARC complex defines RNAPII promoters in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Kinetoplastids are a highly divergent lineage of eukaryotes with unusual mechanisms for regulating gene expression. We previously surveyed 65 putative chromatin factors in the kinetoplastid Trypanosoma brucei. Our analyses revealed that the predicted histone methyltransferase SET27 and the Chromodomain protein CRD1 are tightly concentrated at RNAPII transcription start regions (TSRs). Here we report that SET27 and CRD1, together with four previously uncharacterized constituents, form the SET27 promoter-associated regulatory complex (SPARC), which is specifically enriched at TSRs. SET27 loss leads to aberrant RNAPII recruitment to promoter sites, accumulation of polyadenylated transcripts upstream of normal transcription start sites, and conversion of some normally unidirectional promoters to bidirectional promoters. Transcriptome analysis in the absence of SET27 revealed upregulated mRNA expression in the vicinity of SPARC peaks within the main body of chromosomes in addition to derepression of genes encoding variant surface glycoproteins (VSGs) located in subtelomeric regions. These analyses uncover a novel chromatin-associated complex required to establish accurate promoter position and directionality.

### Sample Protocol
Following FASP digestion, samples were acidified with 10% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2007). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. LC-MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and constantly operated at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (total run time 190 min).  Survey scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5, and injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the ion trap at a rapid scan mode, with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al, 2007) with normalized collision energy of 28. The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 6 were selected for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against the Trypanosoma brucei brucei  protein database (Uniprot, release May 2019), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described by Cox et al (2014). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. Statistical analysis was performed by Perseus software, version 1.6.2.1 (Tyanova et al, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Kinetoplastids are a highly divergent lineage of eukaryotes with unusual mechanisms for regulating gene expression. We previously surveyed 65 putative chromatin factors in the kinetoplastid <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>. Our analyses revealed that the predicted histone methyltransferase SET27 and the Chromodomain protein CRD1 are tightly concentrated at RNAPII transcription start regions (TSRs). Here, we report that SET27 and CRD1, together with four previously uncharacterized constituents, form the SET27 promoter-associated regulatory complex (SPARC), which is specifically enriched at TSRs. SET27 loss leads to aberrant RNAPII recruitment to promoter sites, accumulation of polyadenylated transcripts upstream of normal transcription start sites, and conversion of some normally unidirectional promoters to bidirectional promoters. Transcriptome analysis in the absence of SET27 revealed upregulated mRNA expression in the vicinity of SPARC peaks within the main body of chromosomes in addition to derepression of genes encoding variant surface glycoproteins (VSGs) located in subtelomeric regions. These analyses uncover a novel chromatin-associated complex required to establish accurate promoter position and directionality.

### Keywords
Set27 promoter-associated regulatory complex (sparc), Trypanosoma brucei, Histone methyltransferase set27, Chromodomain protein crd1

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Kevin Hardwick

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Allshire
University of Edinburgh


