### Accession
PXD031372

### Title
Hyperammonemia-dependent and independent skeletal muscle phosphoproteomic responses during exercise

### Description
Phosphorylation of skeletal muscle proteins mediates cellular signaling and adaptive responses to exercise. Bioinformatic and machine learning approaches identified preclinical models that recapitulate human exercise responses. Feature selection showed that muscles from treadmill running mice and maximum intensity contractions shared the most differentially phosphorylated phosphosites (DPPS) with human exercise. Benefits of exercise in chronic diseases may be reduced by hyperammonemia, a consistent perturbation in chronic diseases and a muscle cytotoxin generated during contractile activity. Comparative analysis of experimentally validated molecules identified 63 DPPS on 265 differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEpP) shared between hyperammonemia in myotubes and skeletal muscle from exercise models. Functional enrichment analyses revealed distinct temporal patterns of enrichment shared between hyperammonemia and exercise models including protein kinase A(PKA), calcium signaling, mitogen activated protein kinase(MAPK) signaling, and protein homeostasis. Our approach of feature extraction of comparative unbiased data allows for model selection and target identification to optimize responses to interventions.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, cells were lysed in ~500µl of Urea Lysis Buffer (20mM HEPES, 9M urea, 1X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, pH 8.0 and protein concentrations measured using bicinchoninic acid assay as previously reported. Protein extracts were reduced by alkylated dithiothreitol and digested with trypsin overnight at room temperature. After digestion, peptides were purified (desalted), lyophilized and spiked with phosphopeptides standard I (Protea Biosciences Group, Inc. #PS-180-1) with 6 pmol each of three synthetic phosphopeptides [DRVpYIHPF (Angiotensin II), IKNLQpSLDPSH (Cholecystokinin 10-20) and DFNKFHpTFPQTAIGV (Calcitonin 15-29)]. These peptides were spiked in after digestion and prior to enrichment to serve as a measure of enrichment efficiency. Two of these phosphopeptides were identified in the LCMS/MS experiments. The data from these samples was searched against the full mouse UniProtKB database considering S, T, and Y phosphorylation as a dynamic modification. Equal amounts of peptide from each sample was phospho-enriched using Thermo Scientific™ High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, and the eluted peptides were dried immediately. Each sample was reconstituted in 30 μl 1% acetic acid, and spiked in 10 μl 50 fmole/ μl Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture (12.5 fmole/ μl final concentration) as reference. The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm internal diameter Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed- phase capillary chromatography column. Peptides from 5μL of the extract were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the mouse UniProt protein database using Andromeda search algorithm within Proteome Discoverer V2.3. Carbamidomethyl C was selected as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and phosphorylation (STY) were selected as variable modifications. Perseus software 1.5.8.5 was used for quantitative analysis of the results from Proteome Discoverer V2.3. The raw intensity of each phosphorylation site was normalized on the basis of starting amount of proteins. After removal of contaminant and reversed peptides, normalized phosphopeptide intensities were log2-transformed and filtered for valid values in three biological replicates from at least one developmental stage. Remaining missing values were imputed from the normal distribution. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with permutation-based false discovery rate (control at 0.05) was used to detect statistically significant differences in phospho-peptide levels between developmental stages. Hierarchical clustering of the z-score transformed abundance of the statistically significant phosphorylation sites was performed using Euclidean distance and the average linkage method. Sequence logos around phosphorylated residues were created (PhosphoLogo) for subsets of statistically significant sites based on profile plots (increasing or decreasing). The total number of peptides identified in all eighteen samples was 14453 with 9232 phosphopeptides. The experimental approach is shown in the graphical abstract.  Quantitative analysis. The relative abundance of the phosphopeptides in these samples was determined using a label free approach. This method involves aligning chromatograms and determining the normalized abundance for each peptide. The LFQ value was either derived from an identified peptide precursor or a precursor peak whose peptide was identified in another sample. If the precursor peak was not found in a sample, the data point would be missing. These data were normally not missing at random, but were either due to their abundances below the detection limit of the instrument or not presented in the samples. The censoring missing values were imputed using a quantile regression approach that imputes missing data using random draws from a truncated distribution with parameters estimated using quantile regression in Perseus62. The data matrix was log2 transformed and the missing values were imputed from a truncated normal distribution. The imputed data were taken randomly from the distribution of the data in the column down shift 1.8 σ and the width of selection was set at 0.3 σ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Hyperammonemia, Mass spectrometry, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasan Dasarathy
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA


