### Accession
PXD007158

### Title
HELA cells Sphingolipid pulldown (Cers6 and Cers5)

### Description
Ectopic lipid deposition and altered mitochondrial dynamics contribute to the development of obesity and insulin resistance. However, the mechanistic link between both processes remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that abrogation of ceramide synthase (CerS)6, which generates C16:0-sphingolipids, but not of the alternative C16:0-sphingolipid synthetizing CerS5 protects from obesity and insulin resistance, and both enzymes regulate C16:0-sphingolipid synthesis in distinct intracellular compartments. Moreover, we identify proteins, which specifically interact with C16:0-sphingolipids derived from CerS5 or CerS6. Here, only CerS6-derived C16:0-sphingolipids bind the mitochondrial fission factor (Mff). CerS6- and Mff-deficiency protects from fatty acid-induced mitochondrial fragmentation in vitro, and both proteins genetically interact in vivo in obesity-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and development of insulin resistance. Our experiments reveal an unprecedented specificity of sphingolipid-signaling depending on specific synthetizing enzymes, provide a mechanistic link between lipid deposition and mitochondrial dynamics in obesity, and define the CerS6/sphingolid/Mff interaction as a therapeutic target for obesity and diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Photo-Affinity Labelling and Purification of Sphingolipid Interacting-Proteins Identification of sphingolipid-interacting proteins was performed based on the published protocol from (Haberkant et al., 2016) with some modifications, using a bifunctional photoactivatable and clickable sphingosine (pacSph) as sphingolipid precursor (synthesized in house as in (Haberkant et al., 2016)) to label and purify sphingolipid binding-proteins. Each experiment (Exp01-03, Fig. 3A) was performed three times and included three different conditions of genotype and/or treatment. For each condition three confluent 10 cm culture-dishes of the respective cell line (S1PLΔ, S1PLΔ/CERS6Δ or S1PLΔ/CERS5Δ) that had been grown in SILAC-Media (light, media or heavy; see section ‘cell culture and treatment) were treated with a final concentration of 6 µM pacSph in SILAC-DMEM containing 10% FCS for exactly 4 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. Afterwards cells were washed three times with PBS and covered with 5 ml cold PBS. Cells were transferred on ice and were then either left untreated or placed in the light cone of a UV-lamp (Black-Ray B100AP High Intensity UV Lamp, 100W, 365nm; Upland, USA) at 15 cm distance for 5 min to photo-crosslink sphingolipid-protein complexes. Afterwards PBS was aspirated, the cells of one 10 cm dish scraped in 1 ml of cold PBS and pelleted by centrifugation at 5,000xg for 5 min at 4°C. Cell lysis was performed in 200 µl of lysis buffer (1xPBS supplemented with 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 2x protease inihibitor cocktail, 0.125 U/µl benzonase) by sonication in an ultrasonic bath sonicator followed by incubation at 4°C for 1 h. The lysates acquired from the three replicate dishes of one genotype and condition were combined and protein concentrations were measured using a PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of proteins from the different genotypes and conditions of one experiment were then combined and subjected to copper-catalyzed click-chemistry-based addition of biotin-N3 to the alkyne group of the bifunctional sphingolipid at cross-linked sphingolipid-protein complexes. To this end, 200 µg aliquots of proteins were brought to 187 µl with lysis-buffer and combined with 13 µl of a click-master-mix containing 15 mM CuSO4, 15 mM TCEP, 1.5 mM Biotin-N3, and 1.5 mM TBTA. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 4 h under constant shaking at 800 rpm. Afterwards, to remove residual free biotin-N3, proteins were precipitated by adding 5x the amount of methanol and proteins were stored over night at -80°C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted at 17,000xg for 30 min at 4°C, re-suspended in ice-cold methanol by sonication for 2 min and pelleted again. The methanol wash was repeated two times. Resulting protein pellets were dissolved in 40 µl 4% (w/v) SDS in PBS for 1 h at 37°C and constant shaking at 2,000 rpm, followed by continuous sonication until pellets were dissolved. The protein samples were combined and diluted with PBS to achieve a final SDS concentration of 0.2%. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 800xg for 1 min.   For pull-down of sphingolipid-protein-biotin complexes 50µl of High Capacity NeutrAvidinTM Agarose Beads were equilibrated in 0.2% SDS in PBS and incubated with the samples for 3 h while rotating at room temperature. Beads were washed 17 times in 1% SDS in PBS followed by three washes in PBS. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by adding 20µl sample buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 7.5 mM EDTA, 6% SDS, 15% Glycerol, 60 mM DTT) supplemented with 3 mM Biotin and incubation for 15 min at room temperature followed by incubation for 15 min at 95°C. Beads were loaded on Mobicol columns with inserted filters (35 µm pore size) and centrifuged for 2 min at 17,000xg to obtain the flow-through elution containing purified sphingolipid-protein complexes.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography and Mass spectrometry The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry equipment consisted out of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the benchtop QExactive instrument via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile and gradient time of either 60 or 150 min.    The content of buffer B was raised from 7 % to 23 % within 40/120 min and followed by an increase to 54 % within 5/7 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 85 % and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5 % within 2/5 min and held there for further 3 min. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.4 kV. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5, an isolation window of 2.1 Th and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  Note: A library of SILAC labeled HELA cells was used to increase identifications and quantifications. In the experimental setup this is indicated by the Group: LIBRARY   Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) (Version 1.5.3.8). Recorded MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded Jan. 2017) including a list of common contaminants. For SILAC quantification a minimum ratio count of 1 was required. Default settings of MaxQuant were used for mass tolerances and FDR settings e.g. 0.01 at the peptide-spectrum-match and protein level by the implemented decoy approach. Match-between-runs and re-quantify were enabled. N-term acetylation and oxidation at methionine residues were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Ectopic lipid deposition and altered mitochondrial dynamics contribute to the development of obesity and insulin resistance. However, the mechanistic link between these processes remained unclear. Here we demonstrate that the C<sub>16:0</sub> sphingolipid synthesizing ceramide synthases, CerS5 and CerS6, affect distinct sphingolipid pools and that abrogation of CerS6 but not of CerS5 protects from obesity and insulin resistance. We identify proteins that specifically interact with C<sub>16:0</sub> sphingolipids derived from CerS5 or CerS6. Here, only CerS6-derived C<sub>16:0</sub> sphingolipids bind the mitochondrial fission factor (Mff). CerS6 and Mff deficiency protect from fatty acid-induced mitochondrial fragmentation in&#xa0;vitro, and the two proteins genetically interact in&#xa0;vivo in obesity-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and development of insulin resistance. Our experiments reveal an unprecedented specificity of sphingolipid signaling depending on specific synthesizing enzymes, provide a mechanistic link between hepatic lipid deposition and mitochondrial fragmentation in obesity, and define the CerS6-derived sphingolipid/Mff interaction as a therapeutic target for metabolic diseases.

### Keywords
Hela, Sphingolipid, Cer6, Click chemistry, Cers5

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases (CECAD) and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krueger
Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases (CECAD) and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


