### Accession
PXD025930

### Title
MGA interactome in 293T cells using affinity purification and mass spectrometry

### Description
Tandem affinity purification of MGA-interacting proteins and mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Twenty 15-cm plates of 293T cells were transfected with pcDNA3-FLAG-His-MGA, MGA(967 – 1300), or MGA(2153 – 2856); 48 hours after transfection, the cells were lysed in TN buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.4/150 mM NaCl/1% NP-40/1 mM AEBSF/10 μg/ml aprotinin/10 μg/ml Leupeptin/1 μg/ml Pepstatin A/20 mM sodium fluoride). The lysate was incubated with Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) and FLAG-His-MGA and its interacting proteins were collected by centrifugation, washed three times with TN buffer, and eluted with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0/150 mM NaCl/250 mM imidazole. The eluted sample was immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody (M2, Sigma-Aldrich), the immunoprecipitate was eluted with FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich), and the eluted protein sample was processed with an Amicon Ultra 0.5 3k centrifugal filter device (Millipore) for concentration and buffer exchange to 50 mM Tris pH 8.5. Proteins were digested at 37 °C overnight with trypsin (Promega; 1:10, enzyme/substrate) in the presence of 10% acetonitrile. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw files were converted to mzXML format and were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (UniProt release 2016_04) using X! TANDEM CYCLONE TPP (2011.12.01.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB). Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification in all searches. Up to one missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The X! Tandem search results were analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, version 4.3. Peptide/protein identifications were validated by the Peptide/ProteinProphet software tools [1, 2]. [1] A. Keller, A.I. Nesvizhskii, E. Kolker, R. Aebersold, Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search, Anal Chem 74 (2002) 5383-5392. [2] A.I. Nesvizhskii, A. Keller, E. Kolker, R. Aebersold, A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry, Anal Chem 75 (2003) 4646-4658.

### Publication Abstract
MGA, a transcription factor and member of the MYC network, is mutated or deleted in a broad spectrum of malignancies. As a critical test of a tumor suppressive role, we inactivated <i>Mga</i> in two mouse models of non-small cell lung cancer using a CRISPR-based approach. MGA loss significantly accelerated tumor growth in both models and led to de-repression of non-canonical Polycomb ncPRC1.6 targets, including genes involved in metastasis and meiosis. Moreover, MGA deletion in human lung adenocarcinoma lines augmented invasive capabilities. We further show that MGA-MAX, E2F6, and L3MBTL2 co-occupy thousands of promoters and that MGA stabilizes these ncPRC1.6 subunits. Lastly, we report that MGA loss also induces a pro-growth effect in human colon organoids. Our studies establish MGA as a bona fide tumor suppressor in vivo and suggest a tumor suppressive mechanism in adenocarcinomas resulting from widespread transcriptional attenuation of MYC and E2F target genes mediated by MGA-MAX associated with a non-canonical Polycomb complex.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Interactome, Mga, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio

### Submitter
Yuzuru Shiio

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzuru Shiio
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio


