### Accession
PXD006766

### Title
Aspergillus niger Prolyl endoprotease (An-PEP) for Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry and Protein Structural Studies

### Description
To monitor the structural integrity of therapeutic proteins, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) is increasingly utilized in the pharmaceutical industry. The successful outcome of HDX-MS analyses depends on the sample preparation conditions, which involve the rapid digestion of proteins at 0Â°C and pH 2.5. Very few proteases are known to withstand such harsh conditions, with pepsin being the best-known exception, even though its activity is also strongly reduced at 0Â°C. Here, we evaluate the usage of a Prolyl-endopeptidase from Aspergillus niger (An-PEP) for HDX-MS. What makes this protease very attractive is its ability to cleave the hardest to digest amino acid, proline. To our surprise, and in contrast to previous reports, An-PEP activity was found optimal around pH 2.5 and could be further enhanced by urea up to 40%. Under typical HDX-MS conditions and using small amounts of enzyme, An-PEP generated an equivalent number of peptides as pepsin, as exemplified by using the two model systems; tetrameric human hemoglobin (Hb) and human IgG4. Interestingly, because An-PEP peptides are shorter than pepsin-generated peptides, higher sequence resolution could be achieved, especially for Pro-containing protein regions in the alpha subunit of Hb, revealing new protected Hb regions that were not observed with pepsin. Due to its Pro-preference and resistance to low pH, we conclude that An-PEP is an archetype enzyme for HDX-MS, highly complementary to pepsin, and especially promising for structural studies on Pro-rich proteins (PRPs) or proteins containing Pro-rich binding domains involved in cellular signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The lysate was prepared as described in Giansanti et al., 2016 with a few modifications. Briefly, cells were resuspended in 2 mL lysis buffer containing 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Signal-Aldrich) pH 8 and one tablet EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and lysed with sonication (3 x 1 min cycle with 1 min pause) on ice. Cell debris was removed via centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was determined by a protein assay (Bio-Rad), and was approximately 4 mg protein/mL lysate. Cysteine reduction (at 50 °C for 15 min) and alkylation (at room temperature for 15 min in the dark) was performed with 4 mM DTT (Signal-Aldrich) and 8 mM IAA (Signal-Aldrich), respectively using 2 mg lysate. Unreacted IAA was quenched with 4 mM DTT. The sample was diluted 4x with 0.1% formic acid (Merck) to reduce urea to 2 M and pH was adjusted to 2.5 with 10% formic acid. An-PEP was kept at RT for 10 min to equilibrate and then 10 ug of lysate protein was digested with 33 ng An-PEP in a 1/300 (enzyme/substrate) ratio for 4h at 37°C. Finally, the sample was centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g to remove precipitated protein material, desalted with Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) and dried to completeness.  250 ng of digested E.coli lysate were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed with nanoLC-MS/MS using a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analysis was performed in triplicate. The chromatographical system comprised of a 20 × 0.1 mm i.d. trapping column (Reprosil C18, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch) and a 50 × 0.005 cm i.d. analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18; 2.7 μm). Peptides were trapped with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and elution was achieved with solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at 100 nL/min in a total analysis time of 90 min. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 and precursor ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 and fragmented using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). The maximum ion accumulation time for MS scans was set to 250 ms and for MS/MS scans to 500 ms for AGC targets of 1000000 and 60000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt protein database (version 2016_01, 550,299 sequences) using the MASCOT and Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4). Enzyme specificity was set to no enzyme and cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a fixed modification, while oxidation on methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 50 ppm whereas mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.05 Da. Percolator was used for validation of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on q values. Additional PSM filters were the peptide score 20 and high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
To monitor the structural integrity of therapeutic proteins, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) is increasingly utilized in the pharmaceutical industry. The successful outcome of HDX-MS analyses depends on the sample preparation conditions, which involve the rapid digestion of proteins at 0 &#xb0;C and pH 2.5. Very few proteases are able to withstand such harsh conditions, with pepsin being the best-known exception, even though its activity is also strongly reduced at 0 &#xb0;C. Here, we evaluate the usage of a prolyl endopeptidase from Aspergillus niger (An-PEP) for HDX-MS. What makes this protease very attractive is that it cleaves preferentially the hardest to digest amino acid, proline. To our surprise, and in contrast to previous reports, An-PEP activity was found optimal around pH 2.5 and could be further enhanced by urea up to 40%. Under typical HDX-MS conditions and using small amounts of enzyme, An-PEP generated an equivalent number of peptides as pepsin, as exemplified by using the two model systems tetrameric human hemoglobin (Hb) and human IgG4. Interestingly, because An-PEP peptides are shorter than pepsin-generated peptides, higher sequence resolution could be achieved, especially for Pro-containing protein regions in the alpha subunit of Hb, revealing new protected Hb regions that were not observed with pepsin. Due to its Pro-preference and resistance to low pH, we conclude that An-PEP is an archetype enzyme for HDX-MS, highly complementary to pepsin, and especially promising for structural studies on Pro-rich proteins or proteins containing Pro-rich binding domains involved in cellular signaling.

### Keywords
Shorgun proteomics, Protease, Aspergillus niger, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Hemoglobin, Igg4, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Dr. Ir.

### Submitter
Liana Tsiatsiani

### Lab Head
Dr Albert JR Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


