### Accession
PXD004931

### Title
Two distinct extracellular protein signatures released by a single cell type identified by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Cells secrete extracellular RNA (exRNA) to their surrounding environment and exRNA has been found in many body fluids such as blood, breast milk and cerebrospinal fluid.  However, there are conflicting results regarding the nature of exRNA. Here, we have separated two distinct exRNA profiles released by mast cells, here termed high-density (HD) and low-density (LD) exRNA. The exRNA in both fractions was characterized by microarray and next-generation sequencing. Both exRNA fractions contained mRNA and miRNA, and the mRNAs in the LD exRNA correlated closely with the cellular mRNA, whereas the HD mRNA did not. Furthermore, the HD exRNA was enriched in lincRNA, antisense RNA, vault RNA, snoRNA, and snRNA with little or no evidence of full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The LD exRNA was enriched in mitochondrial rRNA, mitochondrial tRNA, tRNA, piRNA, Y RNA, and full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The proteomes of the HD and LD exRNA-containing fractions were determined with LC-MS/MS and analysed with Gene Ontology term finder, which showed that both proteomes were associated with extracellular vesicles. Additionally, the proteins in the HD fractions tended to be associated with the nucleus and ribosomes, whereas the LD fraction proteome tended to be associated with the mitochondrion. We show that the two exRNA signatures released by a single cell type can be separated by floatation on a density gradient. These results show that cells can release multiple types of exRNA with substantial differences in RNA species content. This is important for any future studies determining the nature and function of exRNA released from different cells under different conditions.

### Sample Protocol
HD and LD vesicles were initially lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer pH 8.5, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 5 mM EDTA. The remaining pellet was further solubilised with 250 mM TEAB, 4% SDS, and 300 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) pH 7.6. The protein concentration was determined using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 1000 µg per sample was used for further analysis.  Each sample was incubated with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), transferred to 3K MW cutoff filters (Pall) and diluted with 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) 52. Samples were alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) and digested with trypsin in 0.5 M TEAB at a 1:25 ratio overnight at 37ºC. The peptides were eluted at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes, and filters were rinsed with 20% acetonitrile (ACN) at 12,000 rpm for 5 minutes.   The concentrated peptides were acidified with 10% formic acid (FA) and diluted with SCX solvent A (25 mM ammonium formate pH 2.8, 20% ACN) and injected onto a PolySULFOETHYL A SCX column (2.1 mm i.d. × 10 cm length, 5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size). SCX chromatography and fractionation were carried out on an ÄKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare) at a 0.25 mL/minute flow rate using the following gradient: 0% B (500 mM ammonium formate pH 2.8, 20% ACN) for 5 minutes; 0–40% B for 20 minutes; 40–100% B for 10 minutes; and 100% B for 10 minutes. UV absorbance at 254 nm and 280 nm was monitored while fractions were collected at 0.5 mL intervals. The fraction volumes were reduced in a SpeedVac. The 20 peptide-containing fractions were desalted on PepClean C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The desalted and dried fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and analysed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an in-house constructed nano-LC column 53. Two-microlitre sample injections were made with an Easy-nLC autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running at 200 nL/minute. The peptides were trapped on a pre-column (45 × 0.075 mm i.d.) and separated on a reversed phase column, 200 × 0.075 mm packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles. The gradient was as follows: 0–70 minutes 5–25% ACN, 0.2% FA; 70–80 minutes 25–40% ACN, 0.2% FA80% ACN, 0.2%  FA over 5 minutes and held for the last 10 minutes at 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos settings were a: spray voltage 1.6kV, 1 microscan for MS1 scans at 60,000 resolution (m/z 400), and a full MS mass range m/z 400–1800. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode with one MS1 FTMS precursor ion scan followed by CID (collision-induced dissociation) MS2 scans of the ten most abundant doubly or multiply protonated ions in each FTMS scan. Dynamic exclusion within 20 ppm for 30 seconds was used after two repeats of MS2 for a precursor ion. MS2 were collected with 1 microscan and a collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
We performed peptide identification using X! Tandem incorporated in a trans-proteomic pipeline (version 4.6 OCCUPY rev 2).54 Each RAW data file was first converted to mzXML using the msconvert tool incorporated in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.4205).55 MS/MS scans in the converted mzXMLs were then searched in X!! Tandem against the Homo sapiens Swiss-Prot database (release 2013 08) containing 20,272 proteins. The tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used. Variable modification options were used for the oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da), deamination of N-terminal glutamine (−17.027 Da), and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid (−18.011 Da). The number of missed cleavage sites was set to be two. We finally used TPP to statistically identify peptides from the X!! Tandem search results by PeptideProphet (PeptideProphet ≥ 0.90) and then proteins using ProteinProphet (ProteinProphet ≥ 0.90). When multiple proteins were assigned to a protein group, we selected the representative protein with the highest coverage. To measure the quantity of each protein in our density fraction proteomes, we calculated relative protein abundance using absolute protein expression (APEX) 56. The APEX quantification is based on spectral counting of each protein corrected by prior expectation of observing each peptide. The first 50 top-ranked proteins with high spectral counts from the ProteinProphet results were selected as a training dataset in order to generate an experiment-specific dataset. With APEX normalization factor = 10,000, the protein abundance was then calculated as described in Braisted et al. 57.

### Publication Abstract
Cells secrete extracellular RNA (exRNA) to their surrounding environment and exRNA has been found in many body fluids such as blood, breast milk and cerebrospinal fluid. However, there are conflicting results regarding the nature of exRNA. Here, we have separated 2 distinct exRNA profiles released by mast cells, here termed high-density (HD) and low-density (LD) exRNA. The exRNA in both fractions was characterized by microarray and next-generation sequencing. Both exRNA fractions contained mRNA and miRNA, and the mRNAs in the LD exRNA correlated closely with the cellular mRNA, whereas the HD mRNA did not. Furthermore, the HD exRNA was enriched in lincRNA, antisense RNA, vault RNA, snoRNA, and snRNA with little or no evidence of full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The LD exRNA was enriched in mitochondrial rRNA, mitochondrial tRNA, tRNA, piRNA, Y RNA, and full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The proteomes of the HD and LD exRNA-containing fractions were determined with LC-MS/MS and analyzed with Gene Ontology term finder, which showed that both proteomes were associated with the term extracellular vesicles and electron microscopy suggests that at least a part of the exRNA is associated with exosome-like extracellular vesicles. Additionally, the proteins in the HD fractions tended to be associated with the nucleus and ribosomes, whereas the LD fraction proteome tended to be associated with the mitochondrion. We show that the 2 exRNA signatures released by a single cell type can be separated by floatation on a density gradient. These results show that cells can release multiple types of exRNA with substantial differences in RNA species content. This is important for any future studies determining the nature and function of exRNA released from different cells under different conditions.

### Keywords
Exosome

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science
Krefting Research Centre, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Lötvall
Krefting Research Centre, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


