### Accession
PXD016602

### Title
Hap2-Ino80 mediated transcription facilitates de novo establishment of CENP-A chromatin

### Description
Centromeres are maintained epigenetically by the presence of CENP-A, an evolutionarily-conserved histone H3 variant, which directs kinetochore assembly and hence, centromere function. To identify factors that promote assembly of CENP-A chromatin, we affinity selected solubilised fission yeast CENP-ACnp1 chromatin. All subunits of the Ino80 complex were enriched, including the auxiliary subunit Hap2. In addition to a role in maintenance of CENP-ACnp1 chromatin integrity at endogenous centromeres, Hap2 is required for de novo assembly of CENP-ACnp1 chromatin on naïve centromere DNA and promotes H3 turnover on centromere regions and other loci prone to CENP-ACnp1 deposition. Prior to CENP-ACnp1 chromatin assembly, Hap2 is required for transcription from centromere DNA. These analyses suggest that Hap2-Ino80 destabilises H3 nucleosomes on centromere DNA through transcription-mediated histone H3 turnover, driving the replacement of resident H3 nucleosomes with CENP-ACnp1 nucleosomes. These inherent properties define centromere DNA by directing a program that mediates CENP-ACnp1 assembly on appropriate sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin into peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Proteins were denatured by adding final 25mM DTT to the immunoprecipitated proteins and incubated at 95o C for 5 minutes. Samples were cooled at room temperature and 200 μl of 8M Urea in 100mM Tris-HCl pH8 was added and passed through Vivacon 500 column (VN01H21, Sartorius Vivacon 500, 30,000 MWCO Hydrosart) by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated to prevent free sulfhydryls from reforming disulfide bonds by incubation with 100 μl of 0.05 M Iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 8 M urea for 20 minutes at 27o C in the dark and centrifuged at 14,000xg to remove the supernatant. Columns were then washed once with 100 μl of 8M urea and twice with 100 μl of 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma). Proteins were digested by addition of 100 μl of 0.05 M ABC containing 0.3 μg of trypsin (90057, Thermo Scientific) at 37o C for 16 hours. Columns were spun at 14,000xg to collect the digested peptides and washed again with 100 μl of 0.05 M ABC. Trypsinization was stopped by addition of 10 μl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to bring the pH to below 2. C18 reverse-phase resin (66883-U, Sigma) was used to desalt peptide samples prior to LC-MS/MS. StageTips were packed tightly with 2 layers of C18 resin. The resin was conditioned with 30 μl of 100% methanol, washed with 30 μl of 80% acetonitrile to remove impurities and finally equilibrated by passing 30 μl of 0.1% TFA. The trypsinized peptide solution was passed through the stage tip by centrifugation at 2600 rpm for binding. Following stage tip desalting, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 2 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer and on a Q Exactive (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) both coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). In both cases, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated at 50o C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile 16 phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (190 min). For Fusion Lumos, FTMS spectra were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 7.0×105. MS2 was performed in the ion trap with ion target of 1.0×104 and HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al., 2007) with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the ten most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0×106 ions for MS scan, 5.0×104 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60 ms, dynamic exclusion for 50 s). The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.2.8 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Schizosaccaromyces pombe complete/reference proteome set of PomBase database (released in July, 2015), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and ubiquitination of lysine were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described by Cox et al. 2014. Absolute protein quantification was performed as described in Schwanhüusser et al. 2011. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. The Perseus software platform (Tyanova et al., 2016) version 1.5.5.1 was used to process LFQ intensities of the proteins generated by MaxQuant. The LFQ intensities were transformed to log2 scale and list was filtered for proteins with at least 2-3 valid values in any sample. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution for that IP.

### Publication Abstract
Centromeres are maintained epigenetically by the presence of CENP-A, an evolutionarily conserved histone H3 variant, which directs kinetochore assembly and hence centromere function. To identify factors that promote assembly of CENP-A chromatin, we affinity-selected solubilized fission yeast CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin. All subunits of the Ino80 complex were enriched, including the auxiliary subunit Hap2. Chromatin association of Hap2 is Ies4-dependent. In addition to a role in maintenance of CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin integrity at endogenous centromeres, Hap2 is required for de novo assembly of CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin on na&#xef;ve centromere DNA and promotes H3 turnover on centromere regions and other loci prone to CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> deposition. Prior to CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin assembly, Hap2 facilitates transcription from centromere DNA. These analyses suggest that Hap2-Ino80 destabilizes H3 nucleosomes on centromere DNA through transcription-coupled histone H3 turnover, driving the replacement of resident H3 nucleosomes with CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> nucleosomes. These inherent properties define centromere DNA by directing a program that mediates CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> assembly on appropriate sequences.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Centromeres, Histones, Nucleosomes, Cenp-a, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh
The University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Puneet Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Allshire
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh


