### Accession
PXD003792

### Title
Protein kinase A-dependent phosphorylation stimulates the transcriptional activity of hypoxia-inducible factor 1, part 1

### Description
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of genes encoding proteins that enable cells to adapt to reduced O2 availability. HIF-1 target genes play a central role  in  mediating  physiological processes that are dysregulated in cancer and heart disease, including angiogenesis, energy metabolism, and immunity. These disease processes are also characterized by increased activation of adenosine and β-adrenergic receptors, which triggers the synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), the allosteric regulator of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). We performed a proteomic screen in cardiomyocytes and identified PKA as a HIF-1α-interacting protein. PKA interacted with HIF-1α and phosphorylated Thr63 and Ser692 in vitro, co-immunoprecipitated with HIF-1α from cell lysates, and enhanced HIF transcriptional activity and target gene expression in human HeLa cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA inhibited the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1α in an O2-independent manner that required phosphorylation of Thr63  and Ser692 and was not affected by mutation of Pro402  and Pro564. PKA also stimulated the binding of the coactivator p300 to HIF-1α to enhance its transcriptional activity and this effect was lost upon mutation of Asn803. These data establish a potential link between stimuli that increase cAMP concentrations  and  HIF-1α-dependent changes  in  gene  expression, which  contribute  to the pathophysiology of cancer and heart disease.

### Sample Protocol
Purified GST-HIF-1α proteins were incubated with or without 1.5 μg of recombinant human Ca (Active Motif) in 50 μl of reaction buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 5 mM EGTA, 25 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM DTT, 200 μM ATP, and 10 mM MgCl2) for 3 h at 30°C on an orbital shaker (300 rpm). Reactions were stopped by addition of 4x Laemmli loading buffer and proteins were fractionated by SDSPAGE. Phospho-proteins were stained using Pro-Q Diamond Phosphoprotein Gel Stain (Thermo-Fisher) and imaged on a Typhoon 9400 variable mode imager (GE Healthcare). Total protein staining was performed using G250 Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Gel bands containing purified GST-HIF-1α proteins were reduced in 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 1 h, alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature protected from light, and digested at 37 °C overnight with either endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega; 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio) for GST-HIF-1α1-80 or trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) for all other phosphorylated GST-HIF-1α proteins. GST-HIF- 1α531-826 was also digested with sequencing grade Glu-C (Promega; 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio) at 37 °C overnight to facilitate more complete coverage of all Ser and Thr residues (97.2% coverage of all Ser and Thr residues on full-length HIF-1α final). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in the Johns Hopkins Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core on house-packed columns connected to an LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanospray electron source. A portion of the peptides were trapped for 5 min on a house-packed YMC trap precolumn (10 m, 120 Å; YMC Co. Ltd.) for 5 min at 5 ml/min and then separated on a house-packed analytical column (75 m x 15 cm) packed with C18H reverse-phase resin (5 m, 120 Å; ProntoSIL) connected to a 10 m PicoTIP emitter (New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient of 10–45% Buffer B over 90 min. Eluted peptides were injected directly into the Velos Orbitrap at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1800 m/z with up to 8 peptide masses individually isolated with a 1.9 Da window and fragmented (MS2) using a stepped collision energy of 34, 30 s dynamic exclusion. MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and 15,000 FWHM, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data files were searched against a custom HIF-1fragment database using PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.), algorithm version 7.0, set at the following search parameters: variable modifications of oxidation (M), carbamidomethylation (C), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (K, N-term); enzyme trypsin [D/P], with 4 maximum missed cleavages and non-specific cleavage at both ends; parent tolerance: 25.0 ppm; fragment tolerance: 0.03 Da peptide and phosphorylation false discovery rates (FDRs) were set at 1%, equivalent to a -10lgP value ≥ 30.7. The phosphorylated Thr63 and Ser692 peptides each had FDRs < 0.1% with -10lgP values of 58.32 and 76.86, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of genes encoding proteins that enable cells to adapt to reduced O2 availability. Proteins encoded by HIF-1 target genes play a central role in mediating physiological processes that are dysregulated in cancer and heart disease. These diseases are also characterized by increased production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), the allosteric activator of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Using glutathione S-transferase pull-down, coimmunoprecipitation, and mass spectrometry analyses, we demonstrated that PKA interacts with HIF-1&#x3b1; in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA phosphorylated Thr(63) and Ser(692) on HIF-1&#x3b1; in vitro and enhanced HIF transcriptional activity and target gene expression in HeLa cells and rat cardiomyocytes. PKA inhibited the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1&#x3b1; in an O2-independent manner that required the phosphorylation of Thr(63) and Ser(692) and was not affected by prolyl hydroxylation. PKA also stimulated the binding of the coactivator p300 to HIF-1&#x3b1; to enhance its transcriptional activity and counteracted the inhibitory effect of asparaginyl hydroxylation on the association of p300 with HIF-1&#x3b1;. Furthermore, increased cAMP concentrations enhanced the expression of HIF target genes encoding CD39 and CD73, which are enzymes that convert extracellular adenosine 5'-triphosphate to adenosine, a molecule that enhances tumor immunosuppression and reduces heart rate and contractility. These data link stimuli that promote cAMP signaling, HIF-1&#x3b1;-dependent changes in gene expression, and increased adenosine, all of which contribute to the pathophysiology of cancer and heart disease.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hif, Cardiomyocyte, Pka, Cancer cell, Hypoxia, Camp

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, and Departments of Medicine, Biological Chemistry, Oncology, Pediatrics, and Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

### Submitter
Robert Cole

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg L Semenza
Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, and Departments of Medicine, Biological Chemistry, Oncology, Pediatrics, and Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.


