### Accession
PXD022605

### Title
Scaling of cellular processes with ploidy

### Description
While most eukaryotic cells are diploid, with two chromosome sets, variances in ploidy are common. Despite the relative prevalence of ploidy changes and their relevance for pathology and evolution, a complete picture of consequences of altered ploidy is missing. We analyzed transcriptome and proteome changes in budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae from haploid to tetraploid and found that the mRNA and protein abundance increases linearly with ploidy, but does not double with doubling the DNA content. Besides this linear increase, we found that pathways related to mitochondria and to cytoplasmic ribosomes and translation are differentially regulated. Indeed, with increasing ploidy the cells reduce mitochondrial content and this effect can be rescued by antioxidants. Moreover, cells of higher ploidy reduce their ribosome content while maintaining constant translational output. We show that this is an active process regulated via the Tor1 and Sch9 kinases and a transcriptional corepressor of rDNA transcription, Tup1. Similarly, human tetraploid cells downregulate their ribosome content via Tle1, a Tup1 homolog, demonstrating that the proteome remodeling is a conserved response to increased ploidy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was done as described as in (Nagaraj et al, 2012). Briefly, cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreithol, 100 mM Tris pH 7.6), boiled for 5 min at 95ºC and sonicated for 15 min (Bioruptor Sonicator, 20 kHz, 320 W, 60 s cycles). Insoluble remnants were removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 5 min and 140 µg clarified protein extract was transferred to a 30 kDa MW cut-off spin filter (Amicon Ultra 0.5mL Filter, Millipore). SDS was completely replaced by repeated washing with 8 M urea. Cysteines were then alkylated using excess amounts of iodoacetamide. Proteins were then proteolytically digested overnight using LysC endoprotease (1:50 w/w enzyme to protein). Peptides were eluted and desalted using C18 StageTips.  MS-based proteomic measurements were performed as in (Nagaraj et al, 2012). Briefly, approximately 2 µg of desalted peptides were loaded and analyzed by linear 4h gradients. The LC system was equipped with an in-house made 50-cm, 75-µm inner diameter column slurry-packed into the tip with 1.9µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Product Nr. r119.aq). Reverse phase chromatography was performed at 50ºC with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of buffer B up to 40% in 240 min for a 4-h gradient run with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode with survey scans (MS resolution: 50,000 at m/z 400) followed by up to the top 10 MS2 method selecting ≥2 charges from the survey scan with an isolation window of 1.6 Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 25. Repeated sequencing was avoided using a dynamic exclusion list of the sequenced precursor masses for 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.3 (Cox & Mann, 2008) and searched against the S. cerevisiae Uniprot FASTA database (UniProt ID: UP000002311). Lysine-0 (light) and Lysine-8 (heavy) were used as SILAC labels. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. LysC/P was set as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages was accepted. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching against a generated reverse database. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ploidy, Yeast, Lc-msms, Silac

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Paul Menges

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Zuzana Storchova
University Kaiserslautern


