### Accession
PXD038895

### Title
Trans-Golgi protein TVP23B regulates host-microbe interactions via Paneth cell homeostasis and Goblet cell glycosylation

### Description
A key feature in intestinal immunity is the dynamic intestinal barrier, which separates the host from resident and pathogenic microbiota through a mucus gel impregnated with antimicrobial peptides.  The mechanisms underlying the maintenance and function of this intestinal barrier are not completely understood.  Using a mouse forward genetic screen for defects of intestinal homeostasis, we have found a mutation in Tvp23b, which conferred susceptibility to chemically induced and infectious colitis. Golgi apparatus membrane protein TVP23 homolog B (TVP23B) is a transmembrane protein conserved from yeast to humans. In the intestine, the protein is localized to the epithelium and its deficiency in the hematopoietic extrinsic compartment was essential to the colitis phenotype. We found that TVP23B controls the homeostasis of Paneth cells and function of goblet cells in vivo, leading to a decrease in antimicrobial peptides as well as a more penetrable mucus layer. As a result, Tvp23b-/- mice displayed decreased barrier function and a loss of host-microbe separation.  TVP23B-deficient colonocytes have a loss of core-3 O-glycosylation of colonic proteins, which is the major O-glycosylation present on gel forming mucins. TVP23B binds with another Golgi protein, YIPF6, which is similarly critical for intestinal homeostasis. The Golgi proteomes of YIPF6 and TVP23B-deficient colonocytes have a common deficiency of several critical glycosylation enzymes, including those necessary for core-3 glycosylation of mucins. TVP23B is necessary for the formation of the sterile mucin layer of the intestine and its absence disturbs the balance of host and microbe in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For the analysis of proteomes, isolated mucus samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C in reduction buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1 M DTT (Merck)) and the soluble fraction was added on top of a spin-filter (10 kDa, PALL) for a filter-aided sample preparation following a previous protocol33; however, 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride was used here instead of urea. Proteins on the filters were alkylated and subsequently digested for 4 h with LysC (Wako) followed by an overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega). Heavy peptides (SpikeTides TQL, JPT Peptide Technologies) for the absolute quantification of Muc2 (10 peptides, 100 fmol each34) were added before trypsin digestion. Peptides released from the filter after centrifugation were cleaned with StageTip C18 columns35. Nano liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated with an in-house-packed reverse-phase column (150 × 0.075 mm inner diameter, C18-AQ 3 µm) using a 30-min gradient from 10% to 45% of buffer B (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile) using a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Full mass spectra were acquired from 350–1,600 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200). Up to the 15 most intense peaks (charge state ≥2) were fragmented and tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. For absolute quantification, a separate targeted mass spectrometry method was used in which only precursors and their fragments of the heavy and corresponding light peptides were scanned with a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with the MaxQuant program (version 1.5.7.4) by searching against the mouse UniProt protein database (downloaded 20.02.2021) supplemented with an in-house database containing all the mouse mucin sequences (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). Searches were performed with full tryptic specificity, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, precursor tolerance of 20 p.p.m. in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 7 p.p.m. for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set to fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification. The required FDR was set to 1% for both peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. Proteins were quantified using the MaxQuant label-free quantification option, using a minimum of two peptides for quantification. Absolute quantification of Muc2 was performed with Skyline (version 4.2.037).

### Publication Abstract
A key feature in intestinal immunity is the dynamic intestinal barrier, which separates the host from resident and pathogenic microbiota through a mucus gel impregnated with antimicrobial peptides. Using a forward genetic screen, we have found a mutation in Tvp23b, which conferred susceptibility to chemically induced and infectious colitis. Trans-Golgi apparatus membrane protein TVP23 homolog B (TVP23B) is a transmembrane protein conserved from yeast to humans. We found that TVP23B controls the homeostasis of Paneth cells and function of goblet cells, leading to a decrease in antimicrobial peptides and more penetrable mucus layer. TVP23B binds with another Golgi protein, YIPF6, which is similarly critical for intestinal homeostasis. The Golgi proteomes of YIPF6 and TVP23B-deficient colonocytes have a common deficiency of several critical glycosylation enzymes. TVP23B is necessary for the formation of the sterile mucin layer of the intestine and its absence disturbs the balance of host and microbe in vivo.

### Keywords
Paneth cell, Goblet cel, Inflammatory bowel disease (ibd), Glycosylation, N-ethyl-n-nitrosourea (enu), Dextran sodium sulfate (dss)

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Mucin Biology Groups,Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Mucin Biology Groups,Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


