### Accession
PXD023013

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of Lysine 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation in Candida albicans

### Description
Candida albicans is the most common human fungal pathogen, causing diseases ranging from mucosal to systemic infections for both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation is a highly conserved posttranslational modification found in a wide variety of organisms. In this study, we survey the biological impact of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on lysine residuals (Khib) in C. albicans. Using an antibody-enrichment approach along with the traditional LC-MS/MS method, the pattern of Khib-modified proteins and sites were analyzed in one wild type strain of C. albicans. We identified 1438 Khib-modified proteins with 6659 modified sites in this strain, and a more detailed bioinformatics analysis indicated that the Khib-modified proteins are involved in a wide range of cellular functions with diverse subcellular locations. Functional enrichment analysis featured several prominent functional pathways, including ribosome, biosynthesis of antibiotics, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, biosynthesis of amino acids and carbon metabolism – of which the ribosome pathway is the most affected pathway. Even when compared with the reported lysine acetylation (Kac) and succinylation (Ksuc), the Khib-modified sites on ribosomal proteins remained the highest for C. albicans. These bioinformatic results suggest that 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation may play an indispensable role in the regulation of the ribosomal biogenesis and protein translation. Confirmation at the biochemical level would enable us to resolve  physiological and pathogenic roles of PTM in C. albicans.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and Culture The C. albicans strain SC5314 was grown at 28 °C on a rotary shaker (220 rpm) overnight in YPD medium and used as stock cultures. Ten milliliters of stock culture was inoculated into flasks containing 100 mL of fresh YPD medium, and cultured with shaking (220 rpm) at 28 °C for 4 h until OD600 reached 0.8.  Protein Extraction and Digestion The cultured cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6000 rpm and 4 °C for 10 min and were then washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Then sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g, 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 until urea concentration dropped less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 (trypsin-to-protein mass ratio) for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 (trypsin-to-protein mass ratio) for a second 4 h-digestion. Enrichment of Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated Peptides To enrich Khib-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 % NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number PTM-804, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with Ziptips C18 (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Qualitative proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a house-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6 % to 23 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in 98 % acetonitrile) over 36 min, 23 % to 35 % in 8 min and climbing to 80 % in 3 min then holding at 80 % for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1600 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1E5.

### Data Protocol
Database search Maxquant integrated with the Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to process the MS/MS data. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swiss Prot human database concatenated with the verse decoy database. Trypsin/P was designated as lyase, and up to 4 missing cuts were allowed. The precursor ion mass error in First search and Main search was set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm respectively, and the secondary fragment ion mass error was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as the fixed modification, and oxidation onmethionine, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on lysine, and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. The FDR thresholds for proteins, peptides and Khib sites were set to 1 %. GO Annotation The Gene Ontology (GO) is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. The proteome of  GO annotation was derived from the UniProt Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). ALL identified protein were first to converted to UniProt ID and then mapped under GOA IDs. When identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft was used to annotate function of proteins based on protein sequence alignment method. Gene Ontology annotation analysis was based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) connects known information on molecular interaction networks, including pathways and complexes (the "Pathway" database), genome projects (including the gene database) and biochemical compounds and reactions (including compound and reaction databases). KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway found in this study using KEGG online service tools — the KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) KEGG mapper. KOG Annotation  The KOG annotation of proteome was derived from the NCBI-COG database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/). The sequences of differentially modified proteins were blasted in a basically local alignment search tool (BLAST) version 2.2.28 to obtain protein KOG annotation. Subcellular Localization  The eukaryotic cells are elaborately subdivided into functionally distinct membrane bound compartments. Major constituents of these compartments are extracellular space, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), peroxisome, vacuoles, cytoskeleton, nucleoplasm, nucleolus, nuclear matrix and ribosomes. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. We used wolfpsort software to predicate subcellular localization of identified proteins.  Motif analysis Software motif-x was used to identify the context sequences of amino acids around 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated lysine residues (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. The database for searching these protein sequences were used default parameter in each database. When the number of peptides in a certain characteristic sequence form is greater than 20 and p value is less than 0.000001, the sequence is considered as a motif of the modified peptide. Functional Enrichment and Statistic Analysis For each category of GO annotation, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the modified protein against all proteins databases. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. The same two-tailed Fisher’s exact test and a corrected p-value < 0.05 were also used to considered significant under  KEGG for pathway analysis and InterPro for protein domain analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Candida albicans, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042 People’s Republic of China. Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042, People’s Republic of China.

### Submitter
Hailin Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Hailin Zheng
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042 People’s Republic of China. Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042, People’s Republic of China.


