### Accession
PXD012560

### Title
Chlamydomonas cpl3 mutant proteomics

### Description
This project aims to identify proteins with increased or decreased abundance in the photosynthetically-deficient cpl3 mutant compared to the wild type.

### Sample Protocol
TAP-dark-grown cells were collected by centrifugation and flash-frozen. Proteins were extracted from the frozen pellets by resuspension in lysis buffer (6M guandium Hydrochloride, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40mM chloroacetamide, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 1x MS-Safe protease inhibitor, 1x Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II), grinding with liquid nitrogen, followed by sonication. Protein lysates were then digested with trypsin (Promega) into peptides. Three biological replicates were processed for each strain. The samples were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMTs), multiplexed and then fractionated before tandem mass spectrometry analyses. Briefly, each sample was labeled with the TMT labeling reagent (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were then mixed in equimolar amounts and desalted using C18-stage tips. The dried peptide mix was then separated using strong cation exchange (SCX) stage-tips into four fractions. Each of the four fractions were then diluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and separated into three fractions using SDB-RPS stage tips. This procedure initially resulted in a total of 12 fractions. Fractions 1-3 (the children of the first SCX fraction) were pooled together yielding 10 final fractions. Each final fraction was diluted and injected per run using an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher). Samples were loaded onto a nano capillary column packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch) mated to metal emitter in-line with a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher). Samples were eluted using a split gradient of 10-20% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) in 32 min and 20-40% solution B in 92 min followed column wash at 100% solution B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the 60,000 resolution MS1 scan (380-1500 m/z), AGC target of 4e5 and max injection time of 50ms. Peptides above threshold 5e3 and charges 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with dynamic exclusion after 1 time for 60 s and 10 ppm tolerance. MS1 isolation windows of 1.6m/z, MS2 isolation windows 2 and HCD NCE of 55% were selected. MS3 fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution in the mass range of 120-500 with AGC 5e4 and max injection time of 86 ms. The total duty cycle was set to 3.0 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant, using default settings for MS3 reporter TMT 10-plex data. Files were searched against sequences of nuclear, mitochondrial, and chloroplast-encoded Chlamydomonas proteins supplemented with common contaminants. Raw files were also analyzed within the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher) using the Byonic70 search node (Protein Metrics). Data from Maxquant and Proteome Discoverer were combined in Scaffold Q+ (Proteome Software Inc.), which was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Scaffold Q+ un-normalized data were exported in the format of the log2 value of the reporter ion intensities, which reflect the relative abundances of the same protein among different samples multiplexed. Each sample was then normalized to a median of 0 (by subtracting the original median from the raw values, since the values are log2). For each gene, for each pair of samples, the normalized log2 intensity values from the three replicates of one sample were compared against those for the other sample using a standard t-test. The resulting P values were adjusted for multiple testing, yielding a false discovery rate (FDR) for each gene in each pair of samples. We note that our calculation of FDR does not take into account the spectral count of each protein, which is related to the absolute abundance of the protein and impacts the accuracy of proteomic measurements. Specifically, proteins with a low spectral count are likely of low abundance in cells and often exhibit a large variation in the intensity value between the biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic organisms provide food and energy for nearly all life on Earth, yet half of their protein-coding genes remain uncharacterized<sup>1,2</sup>. Characterization of these genes could be greatly accelerated by new genetic resources for unicellular organisms. Here we generated a genome-wide, indexed library of mapped insertion mutants for the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The 62,389 mutants in the library, covering 83% of nuclear protein-coding genes, are available to the community. Each mutant contains unique DNA barcodes, allowing the collection to be screened as a pool. We performed a genome-wide survey of genes required for photosynthesis, which identified 303 candidate genes. Characterization of one of these genes, the conserved predicted phosphatase-encoding gene CPL3, showed that it is important for accumulation of multiple photosynthetic protein complexes. Notably, 21 of the 43 higher-confidence genes are novel, opening new opportunities for advances in understanding of this biogeochemically fundamental process. This library will accelerate the characterization of thousands of genes in algae, plants, and animals.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt labeling, Algae, Photosynthesis, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Westlake University

### Submitter
Xiaobo Li

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Jonikas
Princeton University


