### Accession
PXD046912

### Title
Proteomics analysis of non-small cell lung cancer cell lines lacking ATGL (ATGL-KO) or MGL (MGL-KO) or expressing both (Control, NTC)

### Description
Adipose Triglyceride Lipase (ATGL) and Monoglyceride Lipase (MGL) are two enzymes that contribute to intracellular neutral lipolysis by breaking down triglycerides stored within lipid droplets. Recently, lipid droplet accumulation has been described as a novel hallmark of cancer. While lipid metabolism has been investigated in cancer in recent decades, the role of lipid hydrolysis and its enzymes have not been in the focus of cancer research. We and others have found that lipid hydrolysis enzymes might play an important role in the development and progression of lung cancer. To this end, we chose four different non-small cell lung cancer cell lines and employed CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing to knock out either ATGL (ATGL-KO) or MGL (MGL-KO), and a non-targeting control (NTC) was employed to generate a control cell line within each parental cell type. We then performed label free quantitative proteomics to identify differences between the generated cell lines and confirmed ATGL-KO in ATGL-KO cell lines as well as MGL-KO in MGL-KO cell lines. Furthermore, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), an enzyme that is important in some cancer, was upregulated in some, but not all, of the NSCLC cancer cell lines lacking either one of the two lipases.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics experiments, cells were washed in PBS and lysed in proteomics lysis buffer, consisting of 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 1 % sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) in 100 mM TrisHCl (pH = 8.5). After sonication with a sonication probe (amplitude = 70%, 10 sec, or until cells/tissue was lysed), cell debris is removed by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 5 min, 4°C). The samples are transferred into new Eppendorf tubes and heat-denatured (95°C, 10 minutes). Protein estimation by Pierce™ BCA protein assay (#23225, Thermo Fisher) is performed and 50 µg of protein are precipitated by acetone precipitation at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g, 10 min, 4°C, the pellet is dissolved in 25 % trifluoroethanol (TFE) and brought to 10 % TFE with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The NSCLC samples were digested in 1:50 sequencing grade modified trypsin (#V5111, Promega) overnight at 37°C, followed by loading 500 ng of sample onto Evotips™ according to the Evosep One sample preparation workflow prior to measurement by LC-MS/MS. The samples prepared on the Evotips™ were measured on an Evosep One with the Whisper 40 samples per day (SPD) method at a gradient flow of 100 nl / min over the course of 31 minutes. Evosep One was coupled to a timsTOF (Bruker, Germany) Pro-HT mass spectrometer operated in positive data independent acquisition (DIA) parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode with trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) enabled with a 100 ms cycle time (100 % duty cycle).

### Data Protocol
The protein search was carried out using Dia-NN with the following settings: library-free search with library generation (FASTA provided: swiss prot human database downloaded July 2022); fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: oxidation on methionine; peptide length range: 7 – 30; precursor charge range: 1 – 4; precursor m/z range: 30 – 1800; Fragment ion m/z range: 200 – 1800; 0.01 FDR filtering; protease: trypsin; max. missed cleavages: 2; match between run enabled. The data analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 2.0.9.0). Volcano plots were visualized with R (version 4.3.1) and LFQ intensity plots were visualized with Graphpad Prism (version 8.2.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mgl, H1299, Nsclc, A549, Atgl, H441, Lipase, Lipid hydrolysis, Lipolysis, H358

### Affiliations
Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 6, 8010 Graz, Austria
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Sophie Honeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


