### Accession
PXD034510

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 infects adipose tissue in a fat depot- and viral lineage-dependent manner

### Description
Visceral adiposity is a risk factor for severe COVID-19, and a link between adipose tissue infection and disease progression has been proposed. Here we demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 infects human adipose tissue and undergoes productive infection in human primary adipose-derived stromal-vascular cells differentiated into adipocytes. However, the permissiveness to infection and the cellular response depends on the anatomical origin of the cells and the viral lineage. Cells of visceral adipose tissue origin express more ACE2 and are more permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection than their subcutaneous counterpart. SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to inhibition of lipolysis in cells of subcutaneous origin, while in visceral fat cells, it results in higher expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Viral load and cellular response are attenuated when visceral adipose tissue cells are infected with the SARS-CoV-2 gamma variant. A similar degree of cell death occurs 4-days after SARS-CoV-2 infection, regardless of the cell origin or viral lineage. Hence, SARS-CoV-2 infects human adipose tissue cells, replicating and altering cell function and viability in a fat depot- and viral lineage-dependent fashion.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome of differentiated adipose tissue-derived cells was analyzed by mass spectrometry 24 hpi with SARS-CoV-2. Biological replicates were processed and analyzed in technical duplicates. Cells were chemically lysed with Lysis Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X-100, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and ultrasonication (3 cycles of 20 s each with 90% of frequency). Protein extract was quantified by Pierce BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 20 µg of the protein extract was transferred to a Microcon-10 Centrifugal Filter, with 10 kDa cutoff, for FASP protein digestion 51. Proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 mM IAA) and digested overnight by trypsin at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), pH 8.0. On the following day, the peptides were recovered from the filter in 50 mM AmBic, and trypsin activity was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). After that the peptides were concentrated in SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until use. Digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in an ACQUITY M-Class System (Waters Corporation) coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation). One µg of peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (Symmetry C18 5 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm, Waters Corporation) and subsequently separated in the analytical column (HSS T3 C18 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 150 mm; Waters Corporation). For gradient elution, 0.1% FA was used as eluent A and acetonitrile-FA (99.9% ACN:0.1% FA) as eluent B. Reversed-phase gradient was carried out over 120 minutes, with a linear gradient 3 - 60% acetonitrile over 60 min at 300 nL/min. In the Synapt G2-Si, the peptide spectra were acquired by ion mobility-enhanced data-independent acquisition (HDMSe). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in “Resolution Mode”, switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies, using a scan time of 1.0 s per function over 50–2000 m/z. The wave velocity for ion mobility separation was 1.000 m/s and the transfer wave velocity was 175 m/s. A [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard (Waters Corporation) was used as the reference lock mass compound.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from each experiment was processed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters Corporation). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database (UNIPROT Protein reviewed release 2021-03), using tolerance parameters of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 10 ppm for product ions. For peptide identification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as a variable modification, 2 missed cleavages, and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. Protein identification was performed using a minimum of 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, a minimum of 3 fragment ions per protein and a minimum of 1 peptide per protein. Label-free quantitative analysis was carried out using the relative abundance intensity normalized by all peptides identified. The expression analysis was performed considering the technical replicates for each experimental condition, following the hypothesis that each group is independent. Proteins with ANOVA (p) = 0.05 between the groups were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Visceral adiposity is a risk factor for severe COVID-19, and a link between adipose tissue infection and disease progression has been proposed. Here we demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 infects human adipose tissue and undergoes productive infection in fat cells. However, susceptibility to infection and the cellular response depends on the anatomical origin of the cells and the viral lineage. Visceral fat cells express more ACE2 and are more susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection than their subcutaneous counterparts. SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to inhibition of lipolysis in subcutaneous fat cells, while in visceral fat cells, it results in higher expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Viral load and cellular response are attenuated when visceral fat cells are infected with the SARS-CoV-2 gamma variant. A similar degree of cell death occurs 4-days after SARS-CoV-2 infection, regardless of the cell origin or viral lineage. Hence, SARS-CoV-2 infects human fat cells, replicating and altering cell function and viability in a depot- and viral lineage-dependent fashion.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Visceral fat, Obesity, Adipose tissue, Covid-19, Virus attenuation, Variants of concern, Inflammation, Fat depots, Lipolysis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil
UNICAMP

### Submitter
Bradley Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo A. Mori
Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil


