### Accession
PXD013550

### Title
Glycosidades of Pomacea canaliculata

### Description
In this study, liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was applied to define the occurrence, diversity and origin of glycosyl-hydrolases along the digestive tract of P. canaliculata. Cellulases, hemicellulases, amylases, maltases, fucosidases and galactosidases were identified across the digestive tract. The digestive gland and the contents of the crop and style sac yield a higher diversity of glycosidase-derived peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of salivary glands, digestive gland, and coiled gut  and contents of crop and the style sac were collected from apple snails. Proteins were suspended urea buffer (8M), sonicated and then were transferred to a 10 kDa MWCO filter unit (Millipore). After reduction, alkylation and  trypsin digestion, the peptides were analyzed on LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral datasets were searched against the Molluscan subset of Uniprot database appended with the transcriptome of P. canaliculata. Proteins were identified using ProteinPilot™ 5.0 software (SCIEX) with the Paragon Algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The freshwater snail <i>Pomacea canaliculata</i>, an invasive species of global significance, possesses a well-developed digestive system and diverse feeding mechanisms enabling the intake of a wide variety of food. The identification of glycosidases in adult snails would increase the understanding of their digestive physiology and potentially generate new opportunities to eradicate and/or control this invasive species. In this study, liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry was applied to define the occurrence, diversity, and origin of glycoside hydrolases along the digestive tract of <i>P. canaliculata</i>. A range of cellulases, hemicellulases, amylases, maltases, fucosidases, and galactosidases were identified across the digestive tract. The digestive gland and the contents of the crop and style sac yield a higher diversity of glycosidase-derived peptides. Subsequently, peptides derived from 81 glycosidases (46 proteins from the public database and 35 uniquely from the transcriptome database) that were distributed among 13 glycoside hydrolase families were selected and quantified using multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry. This study showed a high glycosidase abundance and diversity in the gut contents of <i>P. canaliculata</i> which participate in extracellular digestion of complex dietary carbohydrates. Salivary and digestive glands were the main tissues involved in their synthesis and secretion.

### Keywords
Hemicellulases, Lc ms/ms, Glycosidases, Cellulases, Apple snail, Proteome

### Affiliations
Instituto de Fisiologia (IHEM-CONICET). Universidad Nacional de Cuyo

### Submitter
Israel  Vega

### Lab Head
Dr Israel A. Vega
Instituto de Fisiologia (IHEM-CONICET). Universidad Nacional de Cuyo


