### Accession
PXD004659

### Title
PAXX is an accessory c-NHEJ factor that associates with Ku70 and has overlapping functions with XLF

### Description
In mammalian cells, classical non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ) is critical for DNA double-strand break repair induced by ionizing radiation and during V(D)J recombination in developing B and T lymphocytes. Recently, PAXX was identified as a new c-NHEJ core component. We report here, that PAXX-deficient cells exhibit a cellular phenotype uncharacteristic of a deficiency in c-NHEJ core components. PAXX-deficient cells display normal sensitivity to radiomimetic drugs, are proficient in transient V(D)J recombination assays, and do not shift towards higher micro-homology usage in plasmid repair assays. Although PAXX-deficient cells lack c-NHEJ phenotypes, PAXX forms a ternary complex with Ku bound to DNA.  Formation of this complex involves an interaction with Ku70 and requires a bare DNA extension for stability. Moreover, the relatively weak Ku-dependent stimulation of LIG4/XRCC4 activity by PAXX is unmasked by XLF ablation. Thus, PAXX plays an accessory role during c-NHEJ that is largely overlapping with XLF’s function.

### Sample Protocol
An N-terminal GFP tag was engineered into PAXX expression plasmids, and the fusion protein transiently overexpressed in HEK293 cells followed by treatment with calicheamicin-γ1 (Cali) to induce Double strands breaks (DSBs). Complexes were recovered using nanobodies directed against the GFP moiety covalently linked to magnetic beads. For mass spectrometry analyses, purified complexes were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Life Technologies). Running of protein was stopped as soon as proteins stacked in a single band. Protein containing bands were stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL), cut from the gel and digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) before mass spectrometry analysis as described (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using few steps of 100mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at RT. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56°C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at RT. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) for 1h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples (injected in triplicate) were reconstitued in 0.1% TFA 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solution A (0.1% formic acid - 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration by 4% of solution B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min. For peptides ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. Instrument method for the Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependant mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS.. MS spectra were acquired with the orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 or 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.  Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem. 1996 Mar 1;68(5):850-858.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4; Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) against the Human subset (20214 sequences) of the SwissProt database (2014_06). Database search were done using the following settings: a maximum of one trypsin miscleavage allowed, methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamido-methylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were used for search analysis. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot score threshold (identity, FDR<1%) were selected and used for protein identification. For Phosphopeptides identification, triplicate runs were used to search against SwissProt database. To above datasearch parameters, phosphorylation of S,T,Y was added as variable modification and PhosphoRS module was activated in ProteomeDiscoverer pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
In mammalian cells, classical non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ) is critical for DNA double-strand break repair induced by ionizing radiation and during V(D)J recombination in developing B and T&#xa0;lymphocytes. Recently, PAXX was identified as a c-NHEJ core component. We report here that PAXX-deficient cells exhibit a cellular phenotype uncharacteristic of a deficiency in c-NHEJ core components. PAXX-deficient cells display normal sensitivity to radiomimetic drugs, are proficient in&#xa0;transient V(D)J recombination assays, and do not shift toward higher micro-homology usage in plasmid repair assays. Although PAXX-deficient cells lack c-NHEJ phenotypes, PAXX forms a stable ternary complex with Ku bound to DNA. Formation of this complex involves an interaction with Ku70 and requires a bare DNA extension for stability. Moreover, the relatively weak Ku-dependent stimulation of LIG4/XRCC4 activity by PAXX is unmasked by&#xa0;XLF ablation. Thus, PAXX plays an accessory role during c-NHEJ that is largely overlapped by XLF's function.

### Keywords
V(d)j  recombination, Micro-homology mediated end joining, Dna double-strand break, Non-homologous end joining, Genomic instability

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
CRCM: Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Borg Jean-Paul
CRCM: Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France


