### Accession
PXD035233

### Title
Surface stiffness, hydration, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), hyaluronic acid, biofilm and bacterial mobility, protein patterns.

### Description
By a global proteomic approach and phenotypic assays, we investigated the impact of surface stiffness on E. coli biofilm formation capacity. A global proteomic approach was used in order to identify the most abundant proteins for the comparison between E. coli adhesion in PDMS 9 kPa and 574kPa, (polydimethylsiloxane,), and between HA 44Pa and 2kPa (hyaluronic acid gels).

### Sample Protocol
1/ Biofilm mode of growth in 2 differents stiffness of PDMS (PDMS 9 kPa-574kPa) and 2 differents stiffness of HA (44Pa-2kPa ).2/ Protein extraction 3/ Enzymatic digestion of protein extracts 4/ Tandem mass spectrometry 5/ Protein quantification: Label free experiment was performed. Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported and analysed in Progenesis LC-MS software.

### Data Protocol
A label-free experiment was performed as previously described by Obry et al.(Obry et al., 2015). Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 4.0.4441.29989, Newcastle, UK). For comparison, one sample was set as a reference and the retention times of all other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalization, statistical analysis was performed for one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculations. For quantitation, peptide 17 features presenting a p-value and a q-value of less than 0.05, and a power of more than 0.8, were retained. MS/MS spectra from selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.2.04) against the database restricted to E. coli K12 MG1655 from NBCI. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: 1 missed trypsin cleavage site allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set at 5 ppm and 0.35 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a decoy-fusion approach in Mascot (version 2.2.04). Identified peptide-spectrum-matches with a −10logP value of 20 or higher were kept at an FDR threshold of 5 %. Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis. For each condition, the total cumulative abundance of the protein was calculated by summing the abundances of peptides. Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded. Only the proteins that varied 2-fold in their average normalized abundances between growth conditions were retained.

### Publication Abstract
The surface stiffness of the microenvironment is a mechanical signal regulating biofilm growth without the risks associated with the use of bioactive agents. However, the mechanisms determining the expansion or prevention of biofilm growth on soft and stiff substrates are largely unknown. To answer this question, we used PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane, 9-574 kPa) and HA (hyaluronic acid gels, 44 Pa-2 kPa) differing in their hydration. We showed that the softest HA inhibited Escherichia coli biofilm growth, while the stiffest PDMS activated it. The bacterial mechanical environment significantly regulated the MscS mechanosensitive channel in higher abundance on the least colonized HA-44Pa, while Type-1 pili (FimA) showed regulation in higher abundance on the most colonized PDMS-9kPa. Type-1 pili regulated the free motion (the capacity of bacteria to move far from their initial position) necessary for biofilm growth independent of the substrate surface stiffness. In contrast, the total length travelled by the bacteria (diffusion coefficient) varied positively with the surface stiffness but not with the biofilm growth. The softest, hydrated HA, the least colonized surface, revealed the least diffusive and the least free-moving bacteria. Finally, this shows that customizing the surface elasticity and hydration, together, is an efficient means of affecting the bacteria's mobility and attachment to the surface and thus designing biomedical surfaces to prevent biofilm growth.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli biofilm formation, Motion and protein patterns on hyaluronic acid and polydimethylsiloxane depend on surface stiffnes

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSA Rouen, CNRS, Polymers, Biopolymers, Surfaces Laboratory, Rouen, France, PISSARO Proteomic Facility, IRIB, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSA Rouen, CNRS, Polymers, Biopolymers, Surfaces Laboratory, Rouen, France, PISSARO Proteomic Facility, IRIB, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France


