### Accession
PXD039337

### Title
HIC1 interacts with FOXP3 multi protein complex: a novel mechanism to regulate human regulatory T cell differentiation and function

### Description
Recent data have shown that Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is an important contributor to iTreg cell development and function. Using affinity-purification and tandem mass spectrometry we systematically characterized the HIC-1 interactome in human iTreg cells. On the basis of these data, we have shown that HIC1 is a part of FOXP3-RUNX1-CBFβ protein complex that regulates Treg signature genes and is indispensable for the suppressive function of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells. SRM was used to validate HIC1 interactors

### Sample Protocol
Growth Protocol CD4+ T cells were isolated from human umbilical cord blood, activated with plate-bound anti-CD3 (500 ng/24-well culture plate well; Immunotech) and soluble anti-CD28 (500 ng/mL; Immunotech) at a density of 2 × 106 cells/mL of X-vivo 15 serum-free medium (Lonza). For iTreg differentiation, the medium was supplemented with IL-2 (12 ng/mL), TGF-β (10 ng/mL) (both from R&D Systems), all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) (10 nM; Sigma-Aldrich), and human serum (10%). The media was cultured at 37°C in 5% CO2 and activated in presence of the following cytokines: IL-2 (12 ng/ml; R&D Systems); all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) (10 nM; Sigma-Aldrich); TGF-β1 (10 ng/ml; R&D Systems). Extraction protocol HIC-1 immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with an anti-HIC-1 antibody (Cat# sc-271499; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) that recognizes the C-terminus region of human HIC-1. The respective Immunoglobulin G (IgG) was used for the control IPs. Following the Pierce™ MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit (Cat# 90409) protocol, cells were harvested on ice and washed with PBS (2X). Cells were then re-suspended in the ice-cold IP-MS Cell Lysis Buffer, followed by incubation on ice for 20 min with periodic mixing. The protein lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min to pellet down the cell debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube and protein concentration was determined by using a DC protein assay kit (BioRad). Cell lysates (500-1000 μg) were mixed with the IP antibody (1:50 dilution) and the antibody/lysate solution diluted with the IP-MS cell lysis buffer and incubated overnight at +4 oC to form the immune complex. The immune complex was then incubated with Protein A/G magnetic beads for 1 h at room temperature (RT), followed by washing of beads and elution. The eluate, containing the target antigen, was then transferred to a new low protein-binding microcentrifuge tube and dried with a vacuum concentrator prior to MS preparation.  Digestion protocol The immunoprecipitated proteins (from both the HIC1 and IgG control bait) were digested with trypsin. Briefly, urea buffer (8 M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) was added to denature the proteins, followed by dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation at 370C for 1 h for reduction. The reduced disulphide bridges were subsequently alkylated using iodoacetamide (~14 mM) at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. The samples were diluted to a urea concentration of less than 1 molar and then digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.29 µg per sample) at 37 0C overnight (16-18 hours). The tryptic digests were acidified and desalted using in house made C18 Stage Tips (3M, Cat No 2215). The eluates from the Stage Tips were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then stored at -800C until further analysis.  Separation protocol An Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) was used.  The column configuration included a 20 x 0.1 mm i.d.  pre-column in conjunction with a 150 mm x 75 µm i.d. analytical column, both packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18-bonded silica (Dr Maisch GmbH). The separation gradient was from 5% to 21% B in 11 min, then to 36% B in 9 min, to 100% in 2 min, ending with an 8 min isochratic period. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used, with the following mobile phase compositions: A: 0.1 % formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile-water.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16 ((Cox and Mann, 2008). and searched against a human UniProt FASTA sequence database (downloaded, May 2019 and containing 20415 entries) with a common contaminants using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The specified search criteria were for trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, a fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine residues and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level.  The ‘proteinGroup.txt’ table generated from the search was filtered to remove contaminants, proteins only identified by site and reverse hits using Perseus 1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016). The protein LFQ values were log2 of values and the median values calculated for the technical replicates. The data was further filtered to remove the influence of inconsistently detected features, based on the inclusion criteria of three valid values in at least one group, i.e. IgG or HIC1. For statistical analysis of the data, the mass spectrometry interaction statistics (MiST) algorithm (Jäger et al., 2012) was used. The software compares the results from IgG control to pulldowns bait and then computes a score for each protein. The MiST scoring algorithm uses the protein signal intensity and reproducibility, together with its specificity to the bait, to calculate a score ranging from 0 to 1. The criteria of a MiST score, ≥0.75 with the HIC1 bait and ≤0.75 with IgG control bait was applied to define the putative protein interactors. Further filtering was made relative to an in-house database of proteins frequently detected with IgG baits in similar experiments (i.e. human Th cells with Dynabeads). Proteins detected in more than 85 and 70 percent of the previous measurements were excluded for 24 and 72 hour time-point respectively. Cytoscape was used to build the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the identified interactors (Shannon et al., 2003), combining exisiting protein-protein interaction data from the STRING database (Snel, 2000).

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptional repressor, hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) participates in a range of important biological processes, such as tumor repression, immune suppression, embryonic development and epigenetic gene regulation. Further to these, we previously demonstrated that HIC1 provides a significant contribution to the function and development of regulatory T (Treg) cells. However, the mechanism by which it regulates these processes was not apparent. To address this question, we used affinity-purification mass spectrometry to characterize the HIC1 interactome in human Treg cells. Altogether 61 high-confidence interactors were identified, including IKZF3, which is a key transcription factor in the development of Treg cells. The biological processes associated with these interacting proteins include protein transport, mRNA processing, non-coding (ncRNA) transcription and RNA metabolism. The results revealed that HIC1 is part of a FOXP3-RUNX1-CBFB protein complex that regulates Treg signature genes thus improving our understanding of HIC1 function during early Treg cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Hic1; interactome; immunoprecipitation; proteomics; foxp3; protein complex; runx1; regulatory t cells; t cell differentiation; tgf-β; treg; itreg.

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University
Turku Biosciences

### Submitter
Robert Moulder

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University


