### Accession
PXD027103

### Title
Unspecific Binding of Beads to Plasma Proteins

### Description
Nickel and maleimide beads were incubated in plasma and analysed with shotgun proteomics to determine the amount of plasma proteins bound to them

### Sample Protocol
Nickel and maleimide beads were incubated in plasma for 90 minutes Beads were washed with buffer containing PBS + 0.05% Tween20 then PBS (to remove excess Tween20) Beads were digested with trypsin and resulting digests were analysed with mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the Peaks10 Studio software package (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and searched against the Human Uniprot/Swissprot database (UniProt release 2020_03, 20,348 entries).

### Publication Abstract
Trastuzumab and pertuzumab are monoclonal antibodies used in the treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer. Therapeutic proteins may undergo chemical modifications that may affect the results of bioanalytical assays, as well as their therapeutic efficacy. Modifications may arise during production and storage, as well as after administration to patients. Studying in vivo biotransformation of monoclonal, therapeutic antibodies requires their enrichment from plasma to discriminate them from endogenous antibodies, as well as from other plasma proteins. To this end, we screened Affimer reagents for selectivity toward trastuzumab or pertuzumab. Affimer reagents are alternative binding proteins possessing two variable binding loops that are based on the human protease inhibitor stefin A or phytocystatin protein scaffolds. Affimer reagents were selected from an extensive library by phage display. The four best-performing binders for each therapeutic antibody were prioritized using a microtiter plate-based approach combined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in the selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode. These Affimer reagents were immobilized via engineered 6-His or Cys tags to Ni<sup>2+</sup>- or maleimide beads, respectively. Recovery values of 70% and higher were obtained for both trastuzumab and pertuzumab when spiked at 100, 150, and 200 &#x3bc;g/mL concentrations in human plasma followed by trypsin digestion in the presence of 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Notably, the maleimide beads showed undetectable unspecific binding to endogenous immunoglobulin G (IgGs) or other plasma proteins when analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The enrichment method was applied to samples from stress tests of the antibodies at 37 &#xb0;C to mimic in vivo conditions.

### Keywords
Unspecif binding plsam proteins

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
Department of Analytical, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Oladapo Olaleye

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Rainer Bischoff
Department of Analytical, University of Groningen, The Netherlands


