### Accession
PXD007689

### Title
Cellular signaling underlying GSIS in pancreatic β-cells

### Description
In the present study, we investigated signaling pathways associated with GSIS in freshly isolated rat Islets of Langerhans. Specifically, our aim was to reveal which phosphosites and N-linked sialylated glycosylation sites that were reversible regulated upon brief glucose stimulation and link these to cellular signaling pathways using bioinformatics tools.

### Sample Protocol
We applied a modified TiSH protocol, employing TiO2, enzymatic N-linked glycan release, SIMAC and HILIC to enrich and fractionate N-linked sialylated glycopeptides, phosphopeptides, and unmodified peptides with iTRAQ labeling from freshly isolated islets of newborn rats matured over a week (approximately 1,500 islets per condition) with low and high glucose stimulation over an initial temporal range from 0 to 15 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS datasets were processed for protein/peptide identification using the MSGF+ (v9979, 07/16/2014) combined MASIC pipeline with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, reporter ion m/z tolerance half width of 2 mDa, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against both the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2015_08, 7,928 entries) of rat sequences with decoy and mouse sequences (2013_06, 16,613 entries) with decoy using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ tags (K, peptide N-termini); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y).

### Publication Abstract
Normal pancreatic islet &#x3b2;-cells (PBCs) abundantly secrete insulin in response to elevated blood glucose levels, in order to maintain an adequate control of energy balance and glucose homeostasis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the insulin secretion are unclear. Improving our understanding of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) mechanisms under normal conditions is a prerequisite for developing better interventions against diabetes. Here, we aimed at identifying novel signaling pathways involved in the initial release of insulin from PBCs after glucose stimulation using quantitative strategies for the assessment of phosphorylated proteins and sialylated <i>N</i>-linked (SA) glycoproteins.Islets of Langerhans derived from newborn rats with a subsequent 9-10 days of maturation <i>in vitro</i> were stimulated with 20 mm glucose for 0 min (control), 5 min, 10 min, and 15 min. The isolated islets were subjected to time-resolved quantitative phosphoproteomics and sialiomics using iTRAQ-labeling combined with enrichment of phosphorylated peptides and formerly SA glycopeptides and high-accuracy LC-MS/MS. Using bioinformatics we analyzed the functional signaling pathways during GSIS, including well-known insulin secretion pathways. Furthermore, we identified six novel activated signaling pathways (<i>e.g.</i> agrin interactions and prolactin signaling) at 15 min GSIS, which may increase our understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying GSIS. Moreover, we validated some of the regulated phosphosites by parallel reaction monitoring, which resulted in the validation of eleven new phosphosites significantly regulated on GSIS. Besides protein phosphorylation, alteration in SA glycosylation was observed on several surface proteins on brief GSIS. Interestingly, proteins important for cell-cell interaction, cell movement, cell-ECM interaction and Focal Adhesion (<i>e.g.</i> integrins, semaphorins, and plexins) were found regulated at the level of sialylation, but not in protein expression. Collectively, we believe that this comprehensive Proteomics and PTMomics survey of signaling pathways taking place during brief GSIS of primary PBCs is contributing to understanding the complex signaling underlying GSIS.

### Keywords
Beta-cells, Lc-msms, Gsis, Rat, Islets

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark. Campusvej 55, Odense 5230 Denmark

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark. Campusvej 55, Odense 5230 Denmark


