### Accession
PXD018150

### Title
Tomato phototropin1 fruit proteome

### Description
Tomato phototropin1 mutant exhibits deep red color in the ripe fruits compared to the wild type. However, the mechanisms governing this intense fruit coloration in the mutant are largely unknown. Therefore, a proteomic approach combined with carotenoid profiling and carotenogenic gene expression was used to decipher the carotenogenesis in a tomato phototropin1 mutant with S. lycopersicum, cv. Ailsa Craig (tomato).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from fruit tissue were extracted using the protocol described in Kilambi et al. 2013. For proteome profiling, shotgun proteomic approach (GELC-MS) was followed as described in Kilambi et al., 2016 and 2017. Both wild type and mutant fruit samples were harvested at different ripening stages and were analyzed in parallel right from the protein extraction to LC-MS separation. In-gel digestion was carried out following the protocol described in Shevchenko et al. 2006. Eluted peptides after concentration in speedvac were desalted through C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and after aliquoting and drying, the peptides were stored at -80ºC.  The trypsin digests were analyzed using Easy-nLC II coupled to LTQ Orbitrap-VelosPro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For separation on nano-LC-MS/MS, an aliquot of dried peptides was re-suspended in solvent A (5% ACN+95% water (v/v)) and 300 ng of peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Integra Frit 100 µm x 2.5 cm, 5 µm, C18 New Objective, USA) and eluted on a Biobasic C18 picofrit column (75 µm x 10 cm, 5 µm, New Objective, USA) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using solvent A (water/ACN (95/5) with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (ACN/water (95/5) with 0.1% formic acid). For Nps1 - SL fruit samples, the gradient was- 5%-30% B (0-100 min), 30%-95% B (101-103 min), 95% B hold (104-106 min), 95%-5% B (107-113 min), 5% B hold (114-118 min).  Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent method in positive mode with Xcalibur (version 3.1.0, Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was calibrated for both positive and negative modes with Pierce LTQ Velos positive and negative calibration solutions (Thermo Scientific). The survey scans were performed in Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 using a mass range of 350-1800. MS/MS spectra were obtained in ion trap (IT) using collision induced dissociation (CID) for top 20 peaks resulting from each survey scan. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion period was enabled with a repeat count of 1, and a lock mass of 445.120030 was used for mass accuracy. The top 20 peaks were fragmented by CID using normalized collision energy of 35% with an isolation window of 2 m/z. Automatic gain control targets (AGC) for full MS and MSn were set at 500,000 (Orbitrap) and 10,000 (IT). Full MS data were acquired in profile mode while the MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Independent searches were performed for each fraction of an individual sample. Data obtained from the wild type and mutant were searched against the S. lycopersicum iTAG 3.2 proteome sequence (ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG3.2_release/ITAG3.2_proteins.fasta, downloaded on July 18, 2017, 35673 sequences and 12210990 residues). Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. In Sequest search engine, trypsin was selected as a protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspargine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered for high confidence, and a minimum number of two matched peptides were considered for assigning protein IDs. Percolator tool was used to assess peptide confidence; peptides with q value ≤ 0.01 (equivalent to a power of 1 at a P <0.05) were selected, which was estimated based on the number of decoy hits. Label-free quantitation (Scaffold version 4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc) was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins in the mutant compared to wild type after passing stringent selection criteria (P value≤0.05, minimum 2-fold change (either up- or down-regulation), minimum two peptides for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Phototropins, the UVA-blue light photoreceptors, endow plants to detect the direction of light and optimize photosynthesis by regulating positioning of chloroplasts and stomatal gas exchange. Little is known about their functions in other developmental responses. A tomato Non-phototropic seedling1 (Nps1) mutant, bearing an Arg495His substitution in the vicinity of LOV2 domain in phototropin1, dominant-negatively blocks phototropin1 responses. The fruits of Nps1 mutant were enriched in carotenoids, particularly lycopene, compared with its parent, Ailsa Craig. On the contrary, CRISPR/CAS9-edited loss of function phototropin1 mutants displayed subdued carotenoids compared with the parent. The enrichment of carotenoids in Nps1 fruits is genetically linked with the mutation and exerted in a dominant-negative fashion. Nps1 also altered volatile profiles with high levels of lycopene-derived 6-methyl 5-hepten2-one. The transcript levels of several MEP and carotenogenesis pathway genes were upregulated in Nps1. Nps1 fruits showed altered hormonal profiles with subdued ethylene emission and reduced respiration. Proteome profiles showed a causal link between higher carotenogenesis and increased levels of protein protection machinery, which may stabilize proteins contributing to MEP and carotenogenesis pathways. The enhancement of carotenoid content by Nps1 in a dominant-negative fashion offers a potential tool for high lycopene-bearing hybrid tomatoes.

### Keywords
Mature green, Carotenoids, Breaker and red ripe stages of ripening, Chlorophyll degradation, Tomato fruit proteome

### Affiliations
Associate Professor at University of Hyderabad
Associate professor Repository of Tomato Genomic Resources Department of Plant Sciences University of Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi
Associate professor Repository of Tomato Genomic Resources Department of Plant Sciences University of Hyderabad, India


