### Accession
PXD020325

### Title
The protein possibly interacting with TRIB2 in Bel-7402 cells

### Description
Bound materials that immunoprecipitated by anti-TRIB2 in Bel-7402 cells was extracted and separated using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. MS analysis was performed and protein was identified and quantified using MASCOT 2.4.1 server using the Swiss-Prot database.

### Sample Protocol
Bel-7402 cells were cultured in DMEM. Cells were centrifuged and digested using Western/IP lysis buffer, and the supernatant was extracted. After incubated with anti-TRIB2 antibodies overnight at 4℃, supernatant was incubated with Pierc Protein A/G Magnetic Beads in room temperature for 1h. Bound materials was put to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to separate different protein components. The protein bands in the Coomassie Brilliant blue gel were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptide digests of the proteins were analysed using capillary electrophoresis/ nano-liquid chromatography (Nano-LC) systems coupled with an electrospray ionisation and quadrupole-time-offlight mass spectrometer. An internal MASCOT 2.4.1 server using the Swiss-Prot database was used to identify peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The regulation of homeostasis in the Ubiquitin (Ub) proteasome system (UPS) is likely to be important for the development of liver cancer. Tribbles homolog 2 (TRIB2) is known to affect Ub E3 ligases (E3s) in liver cancer. However, whether TRIB2 regulates the UPS in other ways and the relevant mechanisms are still unknown. Here, we reveal that TRIB2 decreased Ub levels largely by stimulating proteasome degradation of Ub. In the proteasome, proteasome 20S subunit beta 5 (PSMB5) was critical for the function of TRIB2, although it did not directly interact with TRIB2. However, poly (rC) binding protein 2 (PCBP2), which was identified by mass spectrometry, directly interacted with both TRIB2 and PSMB5. PCBP2 was a prerequisite for the TRIB2 induction of PSMB5 activity and decreased Ub levels. A significant correlation between TRIB2 and PCBP2 was revealed in liver cancer specimens. Interestingly, TRIB2 suppressed the K48-ubiquitination of PCBP2 to increase its level. Therefore, a model showing that TRIB2 cooperates and stimulates PCBP2 to reduce Ub levels was established. Additionally, the reduction in Ub levels induced by TRIB2 and PCBP2 was dependent on K48-ubiquitination. PCBP2 was one of the possible downstream factors of TRIB2 and their interaction relied on the DQLVPD element of TRIB2 and the KH3 domain of PCBP2. This interaction was necessary to maintain the viability of the liver cancer cells and promote tumor growth. Mechanistically, glutathione peroxidase 4 functioned as one of the terminal effectors of TRIB2 and PCBP2 to protect liver cancer cells from oxidative damage. Taken together, the data indicate that, in addition to affecting E3s, TRIB2 plays a critical role in regulating UPS by modulating PSMB5 activity in proteasome to reduce Ub flux, and that targeting TRIB2 might be helpful in liver cancer treatments by enhancing the oxidative damage induced by therapeutic agents.

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Trib2

### Affiliations
tongji university
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Tumors, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, 200030, China. (lab head)

### Submitter
zhang xiao

### Lab Head
Dr zhang xiao,
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Tumors, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, 200030, China. (lab head)


