### Accession
PXD020100

### Title
Equine gluteal muscle LC-MSMS: Thoroughbred

### Description
Recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis (RER) develops in 5-10% of Thoroughbred racehorses. High-stress environments, nervous temperament, and diet influence the presentation of RER. RER-susceptibility is associated with alterations in intramuscular Ca2+ regulation with detrimental effects on mitochondria. Our study aims to determine underlying molecular drivers influencing RER-susceptibility by comparing the muscle proteome of control, RER-susceptible, and RER horses treated with dantrolene. Animals used in this study were Thoroughbred mares in race training between episodes of RER.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from snap frozen gluteus medius muscle samples (5 RER-susceptible and 5 control) in fresh RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free, Roche). Protein concentration was measured by standard BCA assay (PierceTM Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) and Coomassie-stained SDS gel. Five hundred µg from each sample were digested in trypsin, labeled with TMT11 reagents, fractionated, and eluted with RSLC column over 125 min at a constant flow rate. The eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120,000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top twenty ions in each survey scan subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation with fragment spectra acquired at 45,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and searched against the EquCab3.0 UniProt:UP000002281 protein database using three search engines: Sequest HT, Mascot v2.6 and X! Tandem, to annotate the peptide spectra. Scaffold Q+ v4.8.7 was used to quantitate TMT11 plex labeled peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides.  A second filter was applied to remove proteins with missing values. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 27,997 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 19,242 (69%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins (DEP) between control and RER-susceptible horses were determined by applying Permutation Tests within Scaffold Q+ and a significance threshold of Benjamini-Hochberg FDR≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thoroughbred, Muscle, Equine, Rer

### Affiliations
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Stephanie Valberg

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Valberg
Michigan State University


