### Accession
PXD003701

### Title
Urea artifacts interfere with immunopurification of lysine acetylation

### Description
Urea-based buffers can induce carbamylation artefacts. Here we report that carbamylation of lysine residues resembles the structure of acetylated lysines (K-ac) and compete during K-ac immunoaffinity purification. We propose an alternative strategy using an ionic detergent which improves significantly the selectivity and efficiency of K-ac affinity immuno-purifications.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic kidney 293T cells were lysed and reduced using four different approaches:  (A) Urea+TrisHCl: 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 100 mM Tris HCl, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 15 mM TCEP, 1:100 (v/v) HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail, 1:1000 (v/v) benzonase. Reduction was performed at room temperature for 30 minutes.  (B) Urea+Hepes: 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 100 mM Hepes, , 5 mM sodium butyrate, 15 mM TCEP, 1:100 (v/v) HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail, 1:1000 (v/v) benzonase. Reduction was performed at room temperature for 30 minutes.  (C) Urea-Hepes +Q: 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 100 mM Hepes, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 15 mM TCEP, 1:100 (v/v) HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail, 1:1000 (v/v) benzonase. Reduction was performed at 56ºC for 30 minutes.  (D) Sodium Deoxycholate: 5% (w/v) SDC, 100 mM Tris HCl, , 5 mM sodium butyrate, 15 mM TCEP, 1:100 (v/v) HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail, 1:1000 (v/v) benzonase.  This extract was heated during 10 minutes at 80ºC. Alkylation was performed using 5mM chloroacetamide for 1h at room temperature in darkness. First digestion using Lys-C (1:200 w/w, Wako) was performed during 4h at RT, followed by a dilution 8-fold in Milli-Q water. Second digestion using trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) was carried out overnight at 37⁰C. Digestions were stopped by addition of 2% TFA. SDC was removed from extract D by acid precipitation. Digested peptides were lyophilized. 12 mg of lyophilized peptides from each extract were used to perform each immunoaffinity purification with the PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] kit (Cell Signaling Technology®). For each extract, two immune-purifications were performed in parallel. Peptides were dissolved in 1.2 ml of Milli-Q IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCL) was added. For each IP, 20 µl of antibody-bead slurry were used. Elution of purified peptides was performed in two steps of 50 µl of 0.5% TFA (10 min, 25ºC in agitation). Samples were desalted with C18 stage tips. Eluate was dried in vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for subsequent analysis by LC-MS/MS in a Q-q-TOF Impact (Bruker Daltonics).  Besides, 500 µg of each extract was subjected to high pH reverse phase fractionation. Peptides were dissolved in 100 µl of phase A (10mM NH4OH). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 500 µl/min onto an XBridge BEH130 C18 (3.5 µm, 4.6 x 250 mm) column (Waters) during 60 minutes using a gradient of phase B (10mM NH4OH, 90% CH3CN). 50 fractions were collected, and concatenated into 15 fractions. The first 6 fractions were analysed by LC-MS/MS in a Q-q-TOF Impact (Bruker Daltonics). The Impact (Bruker Daltonics) was coupled online to a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent), equipped with a CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source supplemented with a CaptiveSpray nanoBooster operated at 0.2 bar/minute with isopropanol as dopant. Samples were loaded onto a reversed-phase C18, 5 µm, 0.1 x 20 mm trapping column (NanoSeparations) and washed for 10 min at 2.5 µl/min with 0.1% FA. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min onto a home-made analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, 3 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm, heated to 50 °C. The MS acquisition time used for each sample was 180 min. The Q-q-TOF Impact was operated in a data dependent mode. The spray voltage was set to 1.35 kV (1868 nA) and the temperature of the source was set to 160oC. The MS survey scan was performed at a spectra rate of 2.5 Hz in the TOF analyser scanning a window between 80 and 1600 m/z. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to a normalized threshold of 500 counts. The 30 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 and m/z > 350 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by collision induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 23 – 56 eV as function of the m/z value. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 30s.

### Data Protocol
All files were analysed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 with Andromeda as the search engine against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20,187 sequences). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, acetylation of lysine, carbamylation of lysine and peptide N-termini were included as variable modifications for the analysis of immuno-purified samples. For High pH fractions of total extracts, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, carbamylation of lysine and peptide N-termini were included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 30 ppm for the first search, and 7 ppm for the main search. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm. Identifications were filtered with a PSM and protein FDR of 1%. In order to count the number of acetylated or carbamylated peptides, msmsScans.txt table was used. Peptides that contained both acetylation of lysine and carbamylation of either N-terminal or lysine were not taken into account for further analysis. Peptides that had a carbamylated lysine in N-terminal was included in the subset of N-terminal carbamylated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive analysis of post-translational modifications (PTMs) often depends on the purification of modified peptides prior to LC-MS/MS. The implementation of these enrichment methods requires thorough knowledge of the experimental conditions to achieve optimal selectivity and sensitivity. In this regard, large-scale analysis of lysine acetylation, a key PTM for multiple cellular processes, makes use of monoclonal pan-antibodies designed against this moiety. We report that the immuno-purification of lysine-acetylated peptides is hampered by the copurification of lysine carbamylated peptides, a frequent urea artifact. This specific interaction can be explained by the similar chemical structures of lysine acetylation and lysine carbamylation. As an alternative, we propose a sample preparation protocol based on sodium deoxycholate that eliminates these artifacts and dramatically improves the selectivity and sensitivity of this immuno-purification assay.

### Keywords
Carbamylation, Urea, Acetyl, Acetylation, Carbamyl, Immunopurification

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)

### Submitter
Ana Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)


