### Accession
PXD017476

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics for nocodazole treated cells measured by Lumos DIA

### Description
Phosphoproteomic DIA-MS quantitative dataset for nocodazole treated cells (or “PhosDIA” in short). The MS samples injected in a previous publication for developing the IPF, an algorithm for identifying post-translationally modified peptides, were herein re-measured by a new, powerful Orbitrap Lumos DIA platform for this study (as a case study for developing NAguideR).

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, for the experimental condition, U2OS cells (about 3–4 million cells per plate) were treated with nocodazole (Sigma-Aldrich), an anti-mitotic drug, at a final concentration of 100 ng/ml for 18 h, which inhibits microtubule dynamics and thus arrests the cell cycle at G2/M phase. Treated and untreated samples (N=10 replicates, respectively) were collected and processed for protein digestion (50). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by using TiO2 resin (GL Sciences). The final phosphopeptides were desalted using C18 ultramicrospin columns (Nest). Phosphopeptide mixture originating from ∼10% of the starting cell materials per culturing dish was injected for DIA-MS. The DIA-MS measurements were performed on an established system (51). Briefly, the peptide separation was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective) (75 µm x 30 cm length). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a NanoFlex ion source was coupled to the LC platform. Spray voltage was set to be 2,000 V and heating capillary was kept at 275 oC. The DIA-MS method consisted of a MS1 survey scan and 40 MS2 scans of variable windows. The MS1 scan range is 350 - 1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution is 120k at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 and normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 5.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. The same samples were also measured by a shotgun analysis.

### Data Protocol
To analyze the DIA-MS results of “PhosDIA”, Spectronaut software was used to generate a spectral library from both shotgun proteomic and DIA acquisitions measuring phosphoproteomic samples. The data was reported by Spectronaut with default settings and a Q value cut-off of 1% at both peptide and protein levels. In particular, the PTM localization score were strictly kept at 0.75 to ensure the phosphosites are localized similar to Class I confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics experiments frequently generate data with missing values, which may profoundly affect downstream analyses. A wide variety of imputation methods have been established to deal with the missing-value issue. To date, however, there is a scarcity of efficient, systematic, and easy-to-handle tools that are tailored for proteomics community. Herein, we developed a user-friendly and powerful stand-alone software, NAguideR, to enable implementation and evaluation of different missing value methods offered by 23 widely used missing-value imputation algorithms. NAguideR further evaluates data imputation results through classic computational criteria and, unprecedentedly, proteomic empirical criteria, such as quantitative consistency between different charge-states of the same peptide, different peptides belonging to the same proteins, and individual proteins participating protein complexes and functional interactions. We applied NAguideR into three label-free proteomic datasets featuring peptide-level, protein-level, and phosphoproteomic variables respectively, all generated by data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) with substantial biological replicates. The results indicate that NAguideR is able to discriminate the optimal imputation methods that are facilitating DIA-MS experiments over those sub-optimal and low-performance algorithms. NAguideR further provides downloadable tables and figures supporting flexible data analysis and interpretation. NAguideR is freely available at http://www.omicsolution.org/wukong/NAguideR/ and the source code: https://github.com/wangshisheng/NAguideR/.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Nocodazle, Cell cycle, Dia, Lumos, U2os cells

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University School of Medicine


