### Accession
PXD013833

### Title
Vitamin C-induced breast cancer cell death is associated with remodeling the redox state of cysteine-containing proteins involved in translation and cell cycle progression

### Description
Recent studies show vitamin C (VitC) pro-oxidant properties at high pharmacological concentrations which favor repurposing VitC as an anti-cancer therapeutic agent. However, redox-based anticancer properties of different forms of VitC are yet partially understood. We examined the difference between the reduced and oxidized forms of VitC, ascorbic acid (AA) and dehydroascorbic acid (DHA), in terms of cytotoxicity and redox mechanisms toward breast cancer cells. Our data showed that AA displays higher cytotoxicity towards triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines in vitro than DHA. AA has a similar cytotoxicity on non-TNBC breast cancer cells with much less effect on noncancerous cell lines. Using MDA-MB-231, a representative TNBC cell line, we observed that cellular redox-state alterations conditioned AA- and DHA-induced cytotoxicity. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) accumulation extracellularly and in different intracellular compartments, and to a less degree, induced intracellular GSH oxidation, played a key role in AA-induced cytotoxicity. In contrast, DHA affected GSH oxidation and thus had less cytotoxicity. Furthermore, different cytotoxicity is observed among breast cancer cell lines. Bioinformatics analysis and biological experiments showed that peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) expression levels correlates with AA differential cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. A “redoxome” proteomics approach revealed that AA treatment altered the redox state of key antioxidant enzymes (PRDX 1-3) and a number of cysteines-containing proteins including many nucleic acid binding proteins and proteins involved in RNA, DNA and energetic processes. We showed that cell cycle progression delay and translation inhibition are parts of the underlying mechanisms for AA-induced cytotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Redoxome analysis Cells were plated in 6-well plates at density of 350 000 cells per well (2 ml volume of medium) and allowed to attach. After different treatments cells were washed 3 times with 1 ml ice cold PBS, 50 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Sigma-Aldrich). One ml/well 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich) was added and the 6-well plates were incubated on ice. Cellular extracts were centrifuged for 20 min at 14000 rpm at 4°C and the pellet was washed 3 times with cold acetone and dried using an Eppendorf Vacufuge Concentrator. Dried pellet was resuspended in 70 µl TES (100 mM Tris-HCl, 1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8.8) containing 100 mM NEM, and protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Purification of proteins containing oxidized thiols was performed according a a published protocol with slight modifications (Liu et al. 2014). (A) Labeling oxidized thiols with EZ-Link Biotin-HPDP: 3 mg proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA, washed twice with cold acetone, dried and resuspended in 1200 µl TES + 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) to reduce the oxidized thiols. Non-bond DTT was removed by repeating the precipitation and wash steps. Dried Pellet was resuspended in 300 µl TES + 0.4 mM EZ-Link Biotin-HPDP (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to allow labeling of newly reduced thiols. Non-bond biotin is eliminated as done for non-bound DTT. Dried pellet was resuspended in 500 µl TES and protein concentration was determined. (B) Purification of biotinylated proteins: For purification of the biotin-tagged proteins, 3 mg of proteins are incubated with NeutrAvidin Agarose Resins (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to incubation, resin equilibration was done according to manufacturer instruction using TES. The non-bond fraction is collected and stored at –80°C. After 5 washes with TES, the biotynilated fraction is eluted by adding 500 µl TES + DTT 20 mM. The fraction is concentrated by precipitation, washed and resuspended in TES and protein concentration is determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. 20 µg of proteins prepared from cells in the various conditions investigated were low migrated on a NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific), stained in Coomassie blue (SimplyBlue Safestain, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and fixed with a solution containing 50% ethanol, 10% MeCOOH and 40% H2O. In-gel digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml; Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C. Protein digests were analyzed in triplicate with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Label-free liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) acquisition was performed with a 2-h gradient. Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column, Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column, 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95% solvent A (H2O, 0.1% HCO2H) to 35% solvent B (100% MeCN, 0.1% HCO2H) over a period of 97 minutes, followed by column regeneration for 23 min. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000, with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4 × 105. Fragments were obtained by HCD with a collisional energy of 30, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in the top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 s at a resolution of 30,000, with an AGC target of 1 × 104. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were processed with an in-house Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1) using Sequest search node. The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. Label-free quantification in between subject analysis was performed on raw data with Progenesis-Qi software 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK) using the following procedure: (i) chromatograms alignment, (ii) peptide abundances normalization, (iii) statistical analyses of features, and (iv) peptides identification using the Proteome discoverer (v 2.1) Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All results were 1% FDR filtered before exporting. The resulting files were imported into Progenesis-Qi software for report edition. Variations of protein abundance were considered as validated if their Anova P values were lower than 0.05. The following variable modifications (2 maximum per peptide) were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (Protein N-term), carbamidomethylation (Cys) N-EthylmaleimideNEM (C), biotin-HPDP (Cys).

### Publication Abstract
Vitamin C (VitC) possesses pro-oxidant properties at high pharmacologic concentrations which favor repurposing VitC as an anti-cancer therapeutic agent. However, redox-based anticancer properties of VitC are yet partially understood. We examined the difference between the reduced and oxidized forms of VitC, ascorbic acid (AA) and dehydroascorbic acid (DHA), in terms of cytotoxicity and redox mechanisms toward breast cancer cells. Our data showed that AA displayed higher cytotoxicity towards triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines in vitro than DHA. AA exhibited a similar cytotoxicity on non-TNBC cells, while only a minor detrimental effect on noncancerous cells. Using MDA-MB-231, a representative TNBC cell line, we observed that AA- and DHA-induced cytotoxicity were linked to cellular redox-state alterations. Hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) accumulation in the extracellular medium and in different intracellular compartments, and to a lesser degree, intracellular glutathione oxidation, played a key role in AA-induced cytotoxicity. In contrast, DHA affected glutathione oxidation and had less cytotoxicity. A "redoxome" approach revealed that AA treatment altered the redox state of key antioxidants and a number of cysteine-containing proteins including many nucleic acid binding proteins and proteins involved in RNA and DNA metabolisms and in energetic processes. We showed that cell cycle arrest and translation inhibition were associated with AA-induced cytotoxicity. Finally, bioinformatics analysis and biological experiments identified that peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) expression levels correlated with AA differential cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells, suggesting a potential predictive value of PRDX1. This study provides insight into the redox-based mechanisms of VitC anticancer activity, indicating that pharmacologic doses of VitC and VitC-based rational drug combinations could be novel therapeutic opportunities for triple-negative breast cancer.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Dehydroascorbic acid, Ascorbic acid, Redoxome, Vitamin c, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
CNRS UMR3348, Institut Curie, Bâtiment 110, Centre Universitaire, 91405 Orsay, France. Phone: 33-1-69863016; Fax: 33-1-69869429
EHESP/LERES

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Meng-Er Huang
CNRS UMR3348, Institut Curie, Bâtiment 110, Centre Universitaire, 91405 Orsay, France. Phone: 33-1-69863016; Fax: 33-1-69869429


