### Accession
PXD029727

### Title
Conservation and divergence of myelin proteome profiles between humans and mice

### Description
While myelin is commonly assessed in mice as a model for humans, it remained unclear to which extent their myelin protein composition is similar. We analyzed the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from human white matter by two steps of discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation intermitted by osmotic shocks. We utilized a data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflow with alternating low and elevated energy (MSE) and an ion mobility-enhanced version thereof (referred to as UDMSE) to achieve both, a correct quantification of exceptionally abundant myelin proteins and a comprehensive coverage of the myelin proteome. Label-free protein quantification revealed that the relative abundance of the structural myelin proteins PLP, MBP, CNP and SEPTIN8 correlates well with that in c57Bl/6N-mice. Conversely, multiple other proteins were identified exclusively or predominantly in human or mouse myelin. Species-dependent diversity of myelin protein composition can be instructive when translating from mouse models to humans.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of central nervous system (CNS) myelin from post-mortem human white matter material by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Solubilization of white matter homogenate and purified myelin in ASB-14 detergent followed by automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analysis by LC-MS. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Human myelin disorders are commonly studied in mouse models. Since both clades evolutionarily diverged approximately 85 million years ago, it is critical to know to what extent the myelin protein composition has remained similar. Here, we use quantitative proteomics to analyze myelin purified from human white matter and find that the relative abundance of the structural myelin proteins PLP, MBP, CNP, and SEPTIN8 correlates well with that in C57Bl/6N mice. Conversely, multiple other proteins were identified exclusively or predominantly in human or mouse myelin. This is exemplified by peripheral myelin protein 2 (PMP2), which was specific to human central nervous system myelin, while tetraspanin-2 (TSPAN2) and connexin-29 (CX29/GJC3) were confined to mouse myelin. Assessing published scRNA-seq-datasets, human and mouse oligodendrocytes display well-correlating transcriptome profiles but divergent expression of distinct genes, including <i>Pmp2, Tspan2,</i> and <i>Gjc3</i>. A searchable web interface is accessible via www.mpinat.mpg.de/myelin. Species-dependent diversity of oligodendroglial mRNA expression and myelin protein composition can be informative when translating from mouse models to humans.

### Keywords
Human post mortem brain tissue, Translation, Oligodendrocyte, Autopsy, Myelin proteome, Central nervous system (cns), Mass spectrometry, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323


