### Accession
PXD033163

### Title
functional biomarker which could be used to predict connective healing based on an Achilles Tendon Model

### Description
Healing process after connective tissues (CT) injury is complex but important as CT are critical for human moving, and patient outcome of CT injured patients is protracted with high individual variation. Specific markers which could be used for healing prognosis will be great help to monitor patient outcome, and furtherly improve target treatment and patient recovery. Although several common factors like age, gender and body mass index (BMI) were reported to predict ATR healing outcome [references], more specific markers which can be used as predictors of patient outcome after ATR are still lacking. Several biomarkers have been reported to associate with tendon healing, and indicated their relationship with patient outcome(1-4). These results highlight the potential of protein expression detection and analysis for tendon study in general and healing outcome prognosis in particular. Collagen type I (Col1a1) is the main component of Achilles tendon and plays vital role in tendon healing via involving in collagen fibrils production among tendon fibroblasts(5). Higher production of Col1a1 is associated with faster tendon repair(6), previous study on animal model reported the increased Col1a1 synthesis can exert a positive effect on tendon healing[?]. Thus, functional proteins with high impact on Col1a1 can be used not only to improve tendon healing, also can be as targets for healing improvement and outcome prediction. The proteome file of Achilles tendon which is important to increase understanding of tendon healing and help to identify accurate outcome-related biomarkers is however lagged behind.  The identification of proteomic profile of Achilles tendon is very much limited in number of proteins and sample size(7-9), and is even few on human. Recent improvement in proteomic assay based on mass spectrometry (MS) made it possible to assemble the proteomic landscape of human tissues(10, 11) with high quality and sensitivity. To characterize the proteomic components in human Achilles tendon, we utilized biopsies from ATR patients with both good and poor 1-year healing outcome. A validated platform including quantitative MS and clinical database was used to identify proteomic landscape and potential bio-predictors of clinical outcome. Our study may provide a more comprehensive landscape of proteins for human Achilles tendon, as well as specific biomarkers which can be used for long term outcome prognosis after ATR.

### Sample Protocol
Patient Eligibility Criteria and Randomization. This is a retrospective study of 40 patients suffering with acute Achilles tendon rupture (ATR) who underwent reconstruction surgery at the Karolinska University Hospital. The majority of the ATR-cases, 90%, were sports-related. During the surgery, tendon biopsies were taken from the ruptured and the intact area and stored at minus 80℃ for future analysis. Patients were randomly selected from a patient cohort who participated in randomized control trials (RCTs). All the participants received the same anesthetic and surgical procedure to repair mid-substance tears within 2-4 days of injury, exclusion criteria followed our previous studies. Patient-reported and Functional Outcome.  The patient-reported outcome was evaluated 1-year postoperatively by validated questionnaires: Achilles Tendon Total Rupture Score (ATRS), Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) and the functional outcome was measured using the Heel-rise Test (HRT). All the rules and regulations of patient outcome measurement followed the same rules in our previous studies. Protein Extraction and Digestion of Tissue Samples Pulverized tissue samples were solubilized in 8M urea and 100 mM NaCl with 1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) and mixed vigorously. Low binding silica beads (400 µm, Ops Diagnostics, Lebanon NJ) were added to each sample and vortexed at high speed. Furtherly, samples were quickly frozen on block and run on a Vortex Genie disruptor for 2 min repeatedly in two cycles before additional AmBic, urea and NaCl were supplemented. After following centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to new tubes and 50 mM AmBic was added and vortexed vigorously.  Proteins were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM AmBic incubated at 37°C and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AmBic incubated in dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed overnight. The reaction was stopped with concentrated formic acid and samples were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate (bed volume of 40 µL, Thermo Scientific) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (miVac, Thermo Scientific). RPLC-MS/MS Analysis Briefly, reversed phase liquid chromatographic separations of peptides were performed on a C18 EASY-spray and C18 trap columns connected to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), targeting 5x106 ions with maximum injection time of 100 ms, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations from precursor ions with a charge state.  Proteomic Data Analysis, Protein Identification and Quantification Raw files were imported to Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed using the SwissProt protein database with Mascot v 2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd., UK) search engine. MS/MS spectra were matched with The Human Uniport database (last modified: 3 September 2020; ID:

### Data Protocol
Protein abundance was calculated based on normalized spectrum intensity (LFQ intensity), and an intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was used for normalization(14). A p value < 0.05 and fold change (FC) > 2 were set as significant threshold to identify differentially expressed proteins between good and poor outcome patients. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and KEGG database was used to identify the biological functions of enriched proteins. Enrichment analysis was performed with GO annotations on STRING v11.0 (http://string-db.org) database for the confirmation of protein-protein interaction network among subgroups. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and ssGSEA based on GO and KEGG databases were used to detect potential pathways involved in these identified biomarkers.  Statistical analysis and graphing were performed with SPSS (IBM SPSS, v26.0), GraphPad Prism 8.0 and R. Skewness was checked for all the variables. Standard descriptive statistics were used to summarize clinical variables like mean and SD. Differential comparison of protein expressions was calculated by unpaired Mann-Whitney U test, a p value < 0.05 and FC > 2 were considered as statistical significance. The outcome measurements were associated with proteomic files by means of a univariate analysis. Outcome measurements which were significant in univariate analysis were subsequently used as dependent variable in a multiple-linear regression model with independent variables, an adjust p value < 0.05 was set as significant threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Outcomes following human dense connective tissue (DCT) repair are often variable and suboptimal, resulting in compromised function and development of chronic painful degenerative diseases. Moreover, biomarkers and mechanisms that guide good clinical outcomes after DCT injuries are mostly unknown. Here, we characterize the proteomic landscape of DCT repair following human Achilles tendon rupture and its association with long-term patient-reported outcomes. Moreover, the potential regulatory mechanisms of relevant biomarkers were assessed partly by gene silencing experiments. A mass-spectrometry based proteomic approach quantified a large number (769) of proteins, including 51 differentially expressed proteins among 20 good versus 20 poor outcome patients. A novel biomarker, elongation factor-2 (eEF2) was identified as being strongly prognostic of the 1-year clinical outcome. Further bioinformatic and experimental investigation revealed that eEF2 positively regulated autophagy, cell proliferation and migration, as well as reduced cell death and apoptosis, leading to improved DCT repair and outcomes. Findings of eEF2 as novel prognostic biomarker could pave the way for new targeted treatments to improve healing outcomes after DCT injuries.Trial registration: NCT02318472 registered 17 December 2014 and NCT01317160 registered 17 March 2011, with URL http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02318472 and http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT01317160 .

### Keywords
Connective tissue, Biomarker, Ms, Healing, Eef2, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery  Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Massimiliano Gaetani

### Lab Head
Dr Junyu Chen
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery  Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet


