### Accession
PXD038778

### Title
Investigation of cerebellum-specific knockouts of CDH1 and APC1

### Description
Tissue-specific cerebellum knockouts of Anaphase-promoting complex subunits CDH1 and APC7 were compared to littermate controls to investigate the protein targets of the APC in post-mitotic neurons, as well as the effect of these proteins on the cerebellar phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen mouse cerebella were processed using the streamlined TMT labelling protocol (Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018) as previously adapted for mouse cerebella (Ferguson et al., 2022). Processing included lysis with 8M urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, reduction with 5mM TCEP, alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide, and quenching with 5mM DTT. This was followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of 100μg of protein, reconstitution in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5, digestion overnight at room temperature with 1:100 LysC (Wako 129-02541), and digestion with 1:100 trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 37°C. Peptides were labelled by adding anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) to ~30%, followed by labelling with TMT16 (Thermo A44520) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples are mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labelled peptide samples were de-salted using a 200mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Phosphopeptides were enriched using a Fe-NTA spin column (Thermo A32992) and desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis, while the flow-through was dried, reconstituted in 5% ACN 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, and fractionated using basic pH reverse phase chromatography on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 4.6x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Each combined fraction was desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.  Data Processing Protocol: Phosphoproteomic Data Collection   Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a nanoEASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house using a 180 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. Data was collected using a multi-notch SPS-MS3 method (McAlister et al., 2014; Ting et al., 2011). MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 120s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation with multi-stage activation (CID-MSA) or higher collision energy dissociation (HCD), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) of 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, and isolation window of 0.7 Da using a Top10 method. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 65%, maximum injection time of 250 ms, and AGC of 1.5e5.  Proteomic Data Collection Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a nanoEASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house using a 90 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. Data were collected using a Real-time search (RTS)(Erickson et al., 2019; Schweppe et al., 2020) SPS-MS3 (McAlister et al., 2014; Ting et al., 2011) method. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 120s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, AGC 2E4, NCE 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, and isolation window of 0.7 Da using a Top10 method. Through Thermo Fisher Scientific’s instrument application-programming interface (iAPI) for Tribrid mass spectrometers, an on-line real-time search algorithm (using the UniProt Mouse database, December 2018) was used to trigger MS3 scans for quantification (Erickson et al., 2019; Schweppe et al., 2020). MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 65%, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and AGC of 1.5e5.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Mouse database (December 2018), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT16 and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as static modifications, while methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidaion, and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (for phosphopeptide enriched runs) as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Phosphorylation sites were localized using AScorePro (Gassaway et al., 2022). Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labelling channels. Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the degradative ubiquitin ligase anaphase-promoting complex (APC) alter neurodevelopment by impairing proteasomal protein clearance, but our understanding of their molecular and cellular pathogenesis remains limited. Here, we employ the proteomic-based discovery of APC substrates in APC mutant mouse brain and human cell lines and identify the chromosome-passenger complex (CPC), topoisomerase 2a (Top2a), and Ki-67 as major chromatin factors targeted by the APC during neuronal differentiation. These substrates accumulate in phosphorylated form, suggesting that they fail to be eliminated after mitosis during terminal differentiation. The accumulation of the CPC kinase Aurora B within constitutive heterochromatin and hyperphosphorylation of its target histone 3 are corrected in the mutant brain by pharmacologic Aurora B inhibition. Surprisingly, the reduction of Ki-67, but not H3S10ph, rescued the function of constitutive heterochromatin in APC mutant neurons. These results expand our understanding of how ubiquitin signaling regulates chromatin during neurodevelopment and identify potential therapeutic targets in APC-related disorders.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Mouse, Anaphase promoting complex, Neurodevelopment

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology


