### Accession
PXD029163

### Title
SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE MEDIATES ADIPONECTIN RECEPTOR SIGNALING ESSENTIAL FOR LIPID HOMEOSTASIS AND EMBRYOGENESIS

### Description
Cells and organisms require proper membrane composition to function and develop. Phospholipids are the major component of membranes and are primarily acquired through the diet. Given great variability in diet composition, cells must be able to deploy mechanisms that correct deviations from optimal membrane composition and properties. Here, using unbiased lipidomics and proteomics, we found that the embryonic lethality in mice lacking the fluidity regulators Adiponectin Receptors 1 and 2 (AdipoR1/2) is associated with aberrant high saturation of the membrane phospholipids. Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from AdipoR1/2-KO embryos, human cell lines and the model organism C. elegans we found that, mechanistically, AdipoR1/2-derived sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) signals in parallel through S1PR3-SREBP1 and PPARγ to sustain the expression of the fatty acid desaturase SCD and maintain membrane properties. Thus, our work identifies an evolutionary conserved pathway by which cells and organism maintain membrane homeostasis and adapt to a variable environment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized on a FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) for 5 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s in lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Lysed samples were centrifuged at 21100 g for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) and a Benchmark Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad). Aliquots containing 30 µg of total protein from each sample were incubated at 56°C for 30 min in the lysis buffer with DTT at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). In short, the reduced samples were diluted to 1:4 by 8M urea solution, transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation) and washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM TEAB). Free cysteine residues were modified using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer for 20 min at RT and the filters were washed twice with 100 µl of digestion buffer. Pierce trypsin protease (MS Grade, Thermo Scientific) in digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 25 mM TEAB) was added at a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 3h. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated overnight, collected by centrifugation and isobaric labeling was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT-10plex) reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled samples were combined into one pooled sample, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The labelled pooled sample was treated with Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified desalted sample was pre-fractionated into 40 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 400 µL/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid

### Data Protocol
The data files were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database was used for the database search, using the Mascot search engine v.2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 0 missed cleavage and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Cysteine methylthiolation and TMT on peptide N-termini and on lysine side chains were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The TMT reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS3 HCD spectra and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only the quantitative results for the unique peptide sequences with the minimum SPS match % of 65 and the average S/N above 10 were taken into account for the protein quantification. Peptides were filtered for high confidence. Qlucore Omics Explorer software was used for the multivariant analysis. The complete lipid composition data are provided in supplementary tables.

### Publication Abstract
Cells and organisms require proper membrane composition to function and develop. Phospholipids are the major component of membranes and are primarily acquired through the diet. Given great variability in diet composition, cells must be able to deploy mechanisms that correct deviations from optimal membrane composition and properties. Here, using lipidomics and unbiased proteomics, we found that the embryonic lethality in mice lacking the fluidity regulators Adiponectin Receptors 1 and 2 (AdipoR1/2) is associated with aberrant high saturation of the membrane phospholipids. Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from AdipoR1/2-KO embryos, human cell lines and the model organism C. elegans we found that, mechanistically, AdipoR1/2-derived sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) signals in parallel through S1PR3-SREBP1 and PPAR&#x3b3; to sustain the expression of the fatty acid desaturase SCD and maintain membrane properties. Thus, our work identifies an evolutionary conserved pathway by which cells and organisms achieve membrane homeostasis and adapt to a variable environment.

### Keywords
Srebp, Membrane fluidity, Embryonic lethal, Tmt adiponectin receptor, Scd, Tandem mass tag, Phospholipid, Laurdan, Palmitic acid, Pparg, Sphingosine 1-phosphate

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Professor, Department of Chemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Box 462, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Pilon
Professor, Department of Chemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Box 462, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden


