### Accession
PXD007595

### Title
Unravelling the Mechanism of DFO/DpT44mt-Induced Cell Death in breast cancer cells

### Description
Iron is required as a cofactor for many critical cellular enzymes involved in energy metabolism and cell proliferation and is thus essential for all living cells. To facilitate the rapid replication, the neoplastic cells have significantly higher levels of ribonucleotide reductase and the transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) and many in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that, compared to normal cells, cancer cells are more sensitive to iron (Fe) deprivation because of their marked Fe requirements. The higher Fe utilization by cancer cells provides a rationale for the selective antitumor activity of chelators. To date, Deferoxamine (DFO) is one of the most widely used iron chelator. In addition, DFO also has some antitumor activity. Moreover, novel chelators based on the di-2-pyridylketone thiosemicarbazone (DpT) scaffold, such as di-2-pyridylketone 4,4-dimethyl-3-thiosemicarbazone (Dp44mT), induce iron sequestration and also form redox-active metal complexes that demonstrate potent and selective anti-tumor activity. Notably, Dp44mT and its analogs possess broad anti-cancer and anti-metastatic activity in vitro and in vivo against a variety of aggressive solid tumors.  Understanding the mechanism of action of these ligands and their effect on the ER stress pathway will yield better clinical outcomes. It has been reported that iron depletion induced by Dp44mT and its metal complexes causes apoptosis by generating cytotoxic ROS and by inducing DNA strand breaks. The redox active complexes formed in lysosomes induce damages generating tumor cell cytotoxicity. The alterations in gene expression after iron depletion are complex. Moreover, in cultured cells Dp44mT resulted in marked up-regulation of the Fe-responsive tumor growth and metastasis suppressor Ndrg1 (N-myc downstream regulated gene-1). Therefore, Up-regulation of Ndrg1 may be another mechanism by which chelators inhibit cancer cell proliferation. Here we combine biochemistry, microscopy, flow cytometry and LC/MS-MS analyses to investigate cellular events induced by DFO and Dp44mT iron chelators on two human breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-157, in terms of proliferation, cell cycle, cytotoxicity and death. These experiments could potentially provide additional information in terms of the mechanism(s) of action of iron chelators in breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and culture MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-157 breast cancer cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection and maintained in DMEM:F12 (1:1) containing 5% heat-inactivated FCS, 2 mmol/L l-glycine, 1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate, and 50 μmol/L β-mercaptoethanol at 37°C in 5% CO2 in air.   Cell treatments For cell treatments, DFO or Dp44mT in 100 % DMSO, respectively, were diluted directly in the cell culture medium to achieve the working concentrations. The final solvent and vehicle concentrations were less than 0.1 % for all samples, including controls.  Sample preparation, SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting  MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-157 cell lines  were exposed to drugs for the times indicated. Cell pellets were solubilised as previously described Protein concentrations, SDS-PAGE and electroblotting were determined and performed.   Nano-scale liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) analysis Cells were lysed in 50 µl of 0.1% RapidGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA), diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, and the protein amount was determined with the Bradford method. After reduction and derivatization, the proteins were digested with trypsin sequence grade trypsin (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:20. The reaction was stopped by acidification with 0.1% formic acid (FA) at 37°C for 30 minutes. To get rid of the acid-labile surfactant RapiGest SF, each sample was centrifuged for 40 min at 13000 rpm and the supernatant was desalted using Zip-Tip C18 (Millipore) before mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Four technical replicate analyses of each sample were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot sequence database (release 29.06.2015). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and 1% at the protein level against a concatenated target decoy database, and the minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Only proteins present and quantified in at least 3 out of 4 technical repeats were considered as positively identified; 2478, 2488 and 2496 proteins were identified in C, T1 and T2 , respectively; 108 proteins were exclusively expressed in C, 54 proteins in T1, and 137 proteins in T2. An ANOVA test (false discovery rate 0.05) was carried out to identify proteins differentially expressed among the three conditions: 1682 out of 2149 common proteins differ with statistical significance and were selected for further analyses. In particular, we focused on the differential proteomics between proteins expressed in C in comparison to proteins expressed in T1 or T2. Differential expression was considered as significant if (1) a protein was present only in C or T1/T2 or (2) its normalized (according to the LFQ algorithm) intensity resulted statistical different as calculated by Post Hoc Bonferroni test (t test cut-off at p value = 0.0167).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flow cytometry, Lc/ms-ms analyses., Di-2-pyridylketone thiosemicarbazone scaffold, 4-dimethyl-3-thiosemicarbazone, Di-2-pyridylketone 4, Iron, Iron chelator, Deferoxamine

### Affiliations
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
University of Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy


