### Accession
PXD038010

### Title
Global profiling identifies a stress-responsive tyrosine site on EDC3 regulating biomolecular condensate formation

### Description
RNA granules are cytoplasmic condensates that organize biochemical and signaling complexes in response to cellular stress. Functional proteomic investigations under RNA granule-inducing conditions are needed to identify protein sites involved in coupling stress response with ribonucleoprotein regulation. Here, we apply chemical proteomics using sulfonyl-triazole (SuTEx) probes to capture cellular responses to oxidative and nutrient stress. The stress responsive tyrosine and lysine sites detected mapped to known proteins involved in processing body (PB) and stress granule (SG) pathways, including LSM14A, FUS, and EDC3. Notably, disruption of EDC3 tyrosine 475 (Y475) resulted in hypo-phosphorylation at S161 and S131, and altered protein-protein interactions (PPI) with decapping complex components (DDX6, DCP1A/B) and 14-3-3 proteins. This resulting mutant form of EDC3 was capable of rescuing the PB-deficient phenotype of EDC3 knockout cells. Taken together, our findings identify Y475 as an arsenic-responsive site that regulates RNA granule formation by coupling EDC3 post-translational modification and PPI states.

### Sample Protocol
Probe-modified peptides: SILAC cell proteomes were fractionated and normalized to 2.3 mg/mL in PBS. ‘Heavy’ and ‘light’ proteomes were aliquoted and probe-modified proteins were conjugated to desthiobiotin-PEG-3-azide using CuAAC, proteomes were mixed and proteins were extracted, reduced, alkylated, enriched using avidin-agarose beads, trypsinized into peptides, and prepared for nano-electrospray ionization-LC-MS/MS analysis. Immunoprecipitation: Cell pellets were resuspended in “lysis buffer” and homogenized before incubating on ice for 20 min. Lysates were centrifuged and the supernatant was normalized in lysis buffer. 250 µL of soluble lysate fraction was incubated with 50 µL of µMACSTM DYKDDDDK Isolation Kit anti-FLAG beads for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The lysate-bead mix was added to a µColumn that had been prewashed with lysis buffer and was attached to a magnetic MACS MultiStand. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and five times with 50 mM Tris-HCl/150 mM NaCl in water and incubated with 20 µL of boiling elution buffer (from kit) for five minutes followed by addition of 50 µL of boiling elution buffer and elution (this elution was repeated twice); all fractions were combined. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP): 75 µL of both heavy and light lysate fractions (elution fractions for IP) were combined in a 10kDa cutoff spin column and centrifuged (“spin”). Samples were spun with 300 µL of 6 M urea/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (“UA”), followed by two additional spins with 200 µL of UA. Proteins were incubated with dithiothreitol, diluted with UA and spun (repeated twice), and incubated with iodoacetamide (50 mM, 100 µL, 20 mins RT, in dark) before diluting with 100 µL of UA and spinning through (UA was repeated once more). Proteins on columns were spun with 100 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (“ambic”) three times total and columns were incubated with trypsin/Lys-C for 15 hours at 37°C. Fractions were then spun (10 min) and collected in a lo-bind tube with ambic followed by an additional spin and collection with 50 µL of a 500 mM NaCl aqueous solution. Peptides were acidified with acetic acid and desalted using C18 stage-tip clean up protocol as previously described. Internal angiotensin and vasoactive peptide standards were added, peptides were snap-frozen, dried, and stored at -80 °C until usage. TiO2 affinity chromatography phosphoproteomics: SILAC HEK293T cells were transiently transfected, treated with PBS or arsenic, and pelleted. Cell pellets were resuspended in 6 M/25 mM urea/ammonium bicarbonate with protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablet, lysed via sonication, and centrifuged for 45 min. The supernatant was collected and 1 mg of soluble proteome was reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested as previously described. Tryptic peptides were transferred to a bio-spin column, acidified with 16 µL of formic acid, and dried. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of water with 0.1% formic acid and 20 µL were desalted using a C18 stage-tip clean up protocol. Desalted peptides were dried and phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-SelectTM TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit following manufacturer protocols. Phosphopeptides were dried before resuspension and analysis using LC-MS. General LC-MS data collection: Raw LC-MS data was collected as previously described for probe-modified peptides. For IP and unenriched proteomics experiments, a top-10 DDMS method was performed over 180 min in the positive mode. A full MS was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1e6, a maximum IT of 100 ms, a scan range of 350 to 2,000 m/z, centroid, with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. A subsequent DDMS was performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum IT of 100ms, a loop count of 10, a TopN of 10, an isolation window of 1.5m/z, a fixed first mass of 80.0m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 26, centroid. Either an EASY-nLCTM 1200 System or a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System was used to apply the following gradient using previously described mobile phases (%B) at a flowrate of 300nL/min: 0-8 min. (1%), 8-107 min. (21%), 107-142 min. (38%), 142-143 min. (80%), 143-149 min. (80%), 149-150 min. (1%), 150-180 min. (1%)26. A data-independent acquisition (parallel reaction monitoring) was utilized to generate quality MS2 spectra for the following peptides: DCP1A: SASPYHGFTIVNR - m/z: 483.5809, 486.9170 (heavy) +3 charge state, ASSPSPLTIGTPESQR - m/z: 814.4179, 819.4221 (heavy) +2 charge state; DCP1B: DISLAALQR - m/z: 493.7851, 498.7892 (heavy) +2 charge state, APTSVTPVAPGK - m/z: 562.8191, 566.8262 (heavy) +2 charge state; EDC4: ALQDVQIR - m/z: 471.7720, 476.7761 (heavy) +2 charge state.

### Data Protocol
Identification and analysis of peptides, proteins, and MS1s using LC-MS raw data was accomplished using bioinformatics software and quality control parameter protocols as previously described. For IP, unenriched, and phosphoproteomics experiments, the following EDC3 Y475F peptide was added to the human proteome database file used in the ByonicTM searches: IFCLDIGIPQQVFQEVGINYHSPFGCK, named ‘EDC3_Y475F_HUMAN’. For IP, unenriched, and phosphoproteomics experiments, data were searched were the following parameters: cleavage after lysine and arginine (C-terminal, fully specific), max 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 50 ppm, carbamidomethyl (+57.021464, C, fixed), oxidation (+15.994915, M, common1), phospho (+79.966331, H, S, T, Y, rare1), with no more than 2 total common and rare mods. All SR values were capped at a maximum value of 20. Median protein values were calculated from quality peptide matches and an average of medians across multiple bioreplicates was used as the final values. Phosphopeptide data was exported from Skyline and peptides were filtered by an idotp > 0.8, a |ppm error| < 5, and a SR 0.5 < x < 2.0 for the WT/WT arsenic mixing condition. The YF/WT SRs were then normalized to the relevant WT/WT SRs for the corresponding peptide. Peptides were then filtered for a 33% change in SR in either direction (x < 0.667 or x > 1.33) and a P-value was calculated using the T.TEST(SR1:SR2, AVG1:AVG2, 2, 3) function in excel comparing the independent bioreplicates to the overall dataset averages as a two-tailed t-test assuming unequal variances. Max SR values were capped at 20 and minimum SRs had to be greater than zero.

### Publication Abstract
RNA granules are cytoplasmic condensates that organize biochemical and signaling complexes in response to cellular stress. Functional proteomic investigations under RNA-granule-inducing conditions are needed to identify protein sites involved in coupling stress response with ribonucleoprotein regulation. Here, we apply chemical proteomics using sulfonyl-triazole (SuTEx) probes to capture cellular responses to oxidative and nutrient stress. The stress-responsive tyrosine and lysine sites detected mapped to known proteins involved in processing body (PB) and stress granule (SG) pathways, including LSM14A, FUS, and Enhancer of mRNA-decapping protein 3 (EDC3). Notably, disruption of EDC3 tyrosine 475 (Y475) resulted in hypo-phosphorylation at S161 and S131 and altered protein-protein interactions (PPIs) with decapping complex components (DDX6, DCP1A/B) and 14-3-3 proteins. This resulting mutant form of EDC3 was capable of rescuing the PB-deficient phenotype of EDC3 knockout cells. Taken together, our findings identify Y475 as an arsenic-responsive site that regulates RNA granule formation by coupling EDC3 post-translational modification and PPI states.

### Keywords
Tyrosine, P-bodies, Chemoproteomics, Rna granule, Lc-msms, Llps, Condensate, Stress granules, Sutex, Stress, Edc3

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Department of Chemistry University of Virginia

### Submitter
Dina Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Ku-Lung (Ken) Hsu
Department of Chemistry University of Virginia


