### Accession
PXD014531

### Title
Proteomic data of A. thaliana WT vs.  rpn8a, sp1 and ppi2 vs.sp1xppi2, rpn8axppi2

### Description
A mutation in the proteasomal lid subunit Rpn8a alters proteasome composition and exerts a beneficial effect on photosynthesis. The effect is particularly visible in a double mutant between rpn8a and the plastid protein import receptor Toc159 (ppi2xrpn8a) but also in an rpn8a single mutant that shows higher PSII efficiency and lower non-photochemical quenching. The double mutant shows elevated accumulation of pigments, higher levels of thylakoid membrane proteins and higher PSII quantum yield compared to the ppi2 single mutant. While proplastid-like pro-thylakoid structures are characteristic for ppi2, stacked thylakoids are frequently observed in the double mutant. The rpn8a mutation is accompanied by higher 20S and lower 26S proteasome abundance and increased expression levels of proteolytic stress markers. Unlike known retrograde signaling chains, there is no effect on the transcription of selected photosynthesis associated nuclear encoded gens (PhanGs). Since plastid precursor protein abundance is elevated in the double mutant it is conceivable that the changes in proteasome composition affect precursor stability. We propose a model in which mild proteasome impairment shifts the equilibrium between precursor import and degradation towards import, which is especially effective in plastid protein import mutants but also detectable in the wildtype background, albeit to a much weaker extent.

### Sample Protocol
A. thaliana was grown on ½ MS medium [½ Murashige & Skoog Medium (Duchefa Biochemie B.V); 1 mM MES; pH 5.6] including 0.8% (w/v) Plant Agar (Duchefa Biochemie B.V) with 0.8% (w/v) sucrose in phyto-cabinets (CU-36L3, CLF Plant Climatics GmbH) for about 65% humidity under short day conditions with 8 h light (normal light intensity: 150 μmol photons m-2 s-1, 21 °C) and 16 h darkness (18 °C). Plants were transferred after 7d into liquid MS medium with 0.8% (w/v) sucrose and cultivated for up to 28 d. For the extraction of total protein, 100 mg of plant material with 800 μl Rensink extraction buffer [100 mM NaCl; 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5; 0.5% (v/v) TritonX-100, 2 mM DTT] and 4 μl protease inhibitor cocktail (P9599, Sigma-Aldrich). The extraction was performed under rotation at 4 °C for 20 min. After centrifugation for 10 min at 14000 x g and 4 °C the protein concentration of the supernatant was determined according to Bradford (1976). Protein samples were precipitated using chloroform/methanol after Wessel and Flügge (1984). The sedimented protein was dried. 100 μg purified total protein were in-solution digested. Proteins were solubilised in 233 μl Ammonium hydrogen carbonate (25 mM) mixed with 0.05% (w/v) RapiGestTM SF (Waters Corporation), for 10 min at 80 °C. For reduction, the approach 6.2 μl DTT solution (10 mM in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated for 10 min at 60 °C. Alkylation took place after the addition of 6.2 μl Iodoacetamide (30 mM in 25 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate) for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion with  1 μg Trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5113, Promega) took place over night at RT and was stoped by adding 37% HCl (to pH below 2.0). Insoluble components were sedimented at 13000 x g and 4 °C for 30 min. Supernatants were used for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC separation and HD-MSE data acquisition was performed as previously described (Helm et al., 2014 doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.12.007). Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient 7-35% mobile Phase B (0.1% (w/v) FA in acetronitrile) for 120 minutes. MS acquisition was set to 50–5000 Da. Data analysis was carried out by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0.1)

### Publication Abstract
The proteasome is an essential protein-degradation machinery in eukaryotic cells that controls protein turnover and thereby the biogenesis and function of cell organelles. Chloroplasts import thousands of nuclear-encoded precursor proteins from the cytosol, suggesting that the bulk of plastid proteins is transiently exposed to the cytosolic proteasome complex. Therefore, there is a cytosolic equilibrium between chloroplast precursor protein import and proteasomal degradation. We show here that a shift in this equilibrium, induced by mild genetic proteasome impairment, results in elevated precursor protein abundance in the cytosol and significantly increased accumulation of functional photosynthetic complexes in protein import-deficient chloroplasts. Importantly, a proteasome lid mutant shows improved photosynthetic performance, even in the absence of an import defect, signifying that functional precursors are continuously degraded. Hence, turnover of plastid precursors in the cytosol represents a mechanism to constrain thylakoid membrane assembly and photosynthetic electron transport.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin proteasome system; plastid protein import

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3a, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3a, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


