### Accession
PXD026297

### Title
Assessing target engagment using proteome-wide solvent shift assays

### Description
Recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS) have enabled quantitative proteomics to become a powerful tool in the field of drug discovery, especially when applied toward proteome-wide target engagement studies. Similar to temperature gradients, increasing concentrations of organic solvents stimulate unfolding and precipitation of the cellular proteome. This property can be influenced by physical association with ligands and other molecules, making individual proteins more or less susceptible to solvent-induced denaturation. Herein, we report the development of proteome-wide solvent shift assays by combining the principles of solvent-induced precipitation (Zhang et al., 2020) with modern quantitative proteomics. Using this approach, we developed solvent proteome profiling (SPP), which is capable of establishing target engagement through analysis of SPP denaturation curves. We readily identified the specific targets of compounds with known mechanisms of action. As a further efficiency boost, we applied the concept of area-under-the-curve analysis to develop solvent proteome integral solubility alteration (solvent-PISA) and demonstrate that this approach can serve as a reliable surrogate for SPP. We propose that by combining SPP with alternative methods, like thermal proteome profiling, it will be possible to increase the absolute number of high-quality melting curves that are attainable by either approach individually thereby increasing the fraction of the proteome that can be screened for evidence of ligand binding.

### Sample Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle (Rad et al., 2021). Database searching included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded in February, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin, keratins, etc.) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the comet search algorithm. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias & Gygi, 2007). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: comet log expect, different sequence delta comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Each run was filtered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated at a data set level. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method (Savitski et al., 2015), proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 160 or greater across all channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle (Rad et al., 2021). Database searching included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded in February, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin, keratins, etc.) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the comet search algorithm. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias & Gygi, 2007). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: comet log expect, different sequence delta comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Each run was filtered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated at a data set level. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method (Savitski et al., 2015), proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 160 or greater across all channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS) have enabled quantitative proteomics to become a powerful tool in the field of drug discovery, especially when applied toward proteome-wide target engagement studies. Similar to temperature gradients, increasing concentrations of organic solvents stimulate unfolding and precipitation of the cellular proteome. This property can be influenced by physical association with ligands and other molecules, making individual proteins more or less susceptible to solvent-induced denaturation. Herein, we report the development of proteome-wide solvent shift assays by combining the principles of solvent-induced precipitation (Zhang et al., 2020) with modern quantitative proteomics. Using this approach, we developed solvent proteome profiling (SPP), which is capable of establishing target engagement through analysis of SPP denaturation curves. We readily identified the specific targets of compounds with known mechanisms of action. As a further efficiency boost, we applied the concept of area under the curve analysis to develop solvent proteome integral solubility alteration (solvent-PISA) and demonstrate that this approach can serve as a reliable surrogate for SPP. We propose that by combining SPP with alternative methods, like thermal proteome profiling, it will be possible to increase the absolute number of high-quality melting curves that are attainable by either approach individually, thereby increasing the fraction of the proteome that can be screened for evidence of ligand binding.

### Keywords
Target enagagement

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


