### Accession
PXD031251

### Title
PLATELET PROTEOME REVEALS FEATURES OF CELL DEATH, ANTIVIRAL RESPONSE AND VIRAL REPLICATION IN COVID-19.

### Description
This article provides the first proteomic analysis of platelets from COVID-19 patients. Our dataset shows that platelets are reprogrammed during severe COVID-19 and respond with the activation of type I interferon and cell death pathways, indicating platelet participation in the antiviral response. Additionally, identification of proteins involved in translation, mainly in non-surviving, and complete sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 genome call attention to platelets as viral repositories and markers poor prognosis in COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were suspended in 100 µL of 0.2 % (w/v) RapiGest SF® (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for cell lysis. Protein concentration was estimated by absorbance reading at 280 nm (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of 100 μg of protein from each sample were reduced in dithiothreitol (3 h at 37 °C, 10 mM final concentration) and alkylated in iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark at room temperature, 25 mM final concentration). Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at a 1:50 (m/m) enzyme/substrate ratio for overnight digestion at 37 °C, followed by 56 °C for 45 min in a thermoblock (Eppendorf). The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v). The tryptic peptides were desalted with POROS R2 resin (Applied Biosystems), packed in-house in micropipette tips (Millipore, Bedford, USA), and equilibrated in TFA 1% (v/v). After washing with TFA 0.1%, the peptides were eluted in TFA 0.1% containing acetonitrile 70% (v/v) and completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The purified peptides were resuspended in 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) solution and stored at -20 ° C until mass spectrometric analyses.

### Data Protocol
the raw data files were processed and quantified using PatternLab for Proteomics software91. Peptide sequence matching (PSM) was performed in PatternLab using the Comet algorithm92 against the protein-centric human database NeXtProt93 plus the SARS-CoV-2 reference proteome from Uniprot94, under ID UP000464024. A target-decoy strategy was employed. The search parameters were: tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides, with masses between 500 and 5,000 Da, up to 2 lost cleavage sites, modifications: carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met), an initial tolerance of 40 ppm for precursor ions. PSMs were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro)95 module and identifications were grouped by the number of enzymatically cleaved ends, resulting in two distinct subgroups. For each result, the scores for each metric (XCorr, DeltaCN, and ZScore) were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator, accepting up to 1% false discovery rate (FDR)96, estimated by the number of decoy sequence IDs. Results were further filtered to accept only PSMs with mass error less than 5 ppm and protein identifications supported by two or more independent identifications. Proteins identified by a single spectrum (1 hit wonder) with XCorr below 2 were excluded. The final list of mapped proteins was grouped according to maximum parsimony. In addition, PEAKS de novo analysis was run assuming trypsin digestion, with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Next, PEAKS DB analysis was performed using these same parameters, plus the possibility of up to two missed enzyme cleavages and nonspecific cleavage at both sides of the peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has affected over 400 million people worldwide, leading to 6 million deaths. Among the complex symptomatology of COVID-19, hypercoagulation and thrombosis have been described to directly contribute to lethality, pointing out platelets as an important SARS-CoV-2 target. In this work, we explored the platelet proteome of COVID-19 patients through a label-free shotgun proteomics approach to identify platelet responses to infection, as well as validation experiments in a larger patient cohort. Exclusively detected proteins (EPs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in the proteomic dataset and thus classified into biological processes to map pathways correlated with pathogenesis. Significant changes in the expression of proteins related to platelet activation, cell death, and antiviral response through interferon type-I were found in all patients. Since the outcome of COVID-19 varies highly among individuals, we also performed a cross-comparison of proteins found in survivors and nonsurvivors. Proteins belonging to the translation pathway were strongly highlighted in the nonsurvivor group. Moreover, the SARS-CoV-2 genome was fully sequenced in platelets from five patients, indicating viral internalization and preprocessing, with CD147 as a potential entry route. In summary, platelets play a significant role in COVID-19 pathogenesis via platelet activation, antiviral response, and disease severity.

### Keywords
Platelet, Covid-19, Proteome

### Affiliations
Center for Technological Development in Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Center for Technological Development in Health (CDTS/FIOCRUZ)

### Submitter
Monique Trugilho

### Lab Head
Dr Monique Ramos Oliveira Trugilho
Center for Technological Development in Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


