### Accession
PXD015422

### Title
High-resolution proteomics of Zika and Dengue serum samples

### Description
We used data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS) to profile ~800 proteinsfrom 122 serum samples Dengue or Zika Trinidadian patients. Two time points were collectedper patient. The DIA MS data were matched against a spectral library generated from high pH/low pH separated pooled serum samples.

### Sample Protocol
We resuspended serum samples(~75ug) with 0.1% Rapigest (Waters) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 5 minutes at 95°C to facilitate protein denaturation. It was then reduced with 5mM DTT(Sigma-Aldrich) for 30mins at 60°C. This was followed by alkylation with 15mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30minutes in the dark. We digested the samples overnight using sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (w/w ratio 1:50) (Sigma-Aldrich) on a thermomixer at 37°C, 200 RPM (Eppendorf). Rapigest surfactant was cleaved by incubating samples with ~200mM HCL (Sigma-Aldrich) (30 min, 37°C). We desalted the digested protein samples on C18 spin tips (Thermofisher Scientific) and dried the peptides under vacuum. The dried peptides were subsequently resuspended in 5%ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid (Sigma-Aldrich). The peptide concentration was measured using the fluorometric peptide quantification kit followed by manufacture’s (Thermo fisher scientific) protocol. To perform quality control for mass spec runs during the experiment, we constructed a pooled “QC” sample combining aliquots of 10 randomly chosen patient samples. For the spectral library we made a master pool from the aliquots of all 124 samples and fractionated the master pool using high-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography fractionation in Agilent1200 Infinity Series HPLC with a phenomenex Kinetex 5 u EVO C18 100A column (100 mm x 2.1 mm, 5 mm particle size). Mobile phase A was 20 mM ammonium formate, and B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 20 mM ammonium formate. Both buffers were adjusted to pH 10. Peptides were resolved using a linear 70 mins 0 – 40% acetonitrile gradient at a 100 ul/min flow rate. Eluting peptides were collected in 2 min fractions. We combined about 37 fractions covering the peptide-rich region to obtain 20 factions for analysis. The volume of re-combined fractions was reduced using an Eppendorf Concentrator Vacufuge Plus and suspended in 95% mass spectrometry grade water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid for subsequent low pH chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis. We used an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled on-line to a Q Exactive spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. The separation was performed using a 50 cm x 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 µm, 100Å particles and heated at 55°C. We used a 155 min segmented gradient of 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 80% ACN 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min as follows: 2 to 5 %B in 5 min, 5 to 25 %B in 110 min, 25 to 40 % B in 25 min, 49 to 80% B for 5 min and 80 to 95% B for 5min. Solvent B was  held  at  95%  for  another  5  min.  For DDA library, full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6, with a maximum ion time of 100 ms, and a scan range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following each full MS scan, data-dependent high-resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 2e5, maximum ion time of 50 ms, 1.5 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 100 m/z and NCE of 27 with centroid mode. The serum peptides from all patient samples and “QC” samples were analyzed as follow:  a full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, scan range of 350–1650 m/z, a maximum injection time 100ms, and AGC target 3e6. Then, 17 DIA variable windows (Additional file, inclusion_list_vogel) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, AGC target 1e6, and maximum injection time in auto mode. The sizes of variable windows were optimized using Bruderer et al 2017.

### Data Protocol
All 144 DIA samples (patient and QC samples) were analyzed using Spectronaut (Software Version: 12.0.20491.0.25225) against a Project Specific Spectral Library with default settings. The library was obtained using the Pulsar search engine within Spectronaut with default settings that included Trypsin/P digest, peptide length of 7-52 amino acids, up to 2 missed cleavages. The FASTA file was downloaded from UniProt on 2/15/2018 and contained 93,798entries including protein isoforms. We used in-house R scripts to process Spectronaut output, e.g. with respect to deriving a unique fragment identifier and removing replicate fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Distinguishing between Zika and dengue virus infections is critical for accurate treatment, but we still lack detailed understanding of their impact on their host. To identify new protein signatures of the two infections, we used next-generation proteomics to profile 122 serum samples from 62 Zika and dengue patients. We quantified &gt;500 proteins and identified 13 proteins that were significantly differentially expressed (adjusted p-value &lt; 0.05). These proteins typically function in infection and wound healing, with several also linked to pregnancy and brain function. We successfully validated expression differences with Carbonic Anhydrase 2 in both the original and an independent sample set. Three of the differentially expressed proteins, i.e., Fibrinogen Alpha, Platelet Factor 4 Variant 1, and Pro-Platelet Basic Protein, predicted Zika virus infection at a &#x223c;70% true-positive and 6% false-positive rate. Further, we showed that intraindividual temporal changes in protein signatures can disambiguate diagnoses and serve as indicators for past infections. Taken together, we demonstrate that serum proteomics can provide new resources that serve to distinguish between different viral infections.

### Keywords
Dengue, Serum, Dia, Zika

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, New York University - Department of Biology, Center for Genomics & Systems Biology , New York, USA
Assistant research Scientist

### Submitter
Shuvadeep Maity

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Associate Professor, New York University - Department of Biology, Center for Genomics & Systems Biology , New York, USA


