### Accession
PXD028537

### Title
PGRMC1 promotes progestin-dependent proliferation of breast cancer cells by binding prohibitins resulting in activation of ERα signaling

### Description
Combined menopausal hormone therapy is associated with increased breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women. In our previous studies, progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) was shown to play a role in progestins’ mode of action, resulting in enhanced proliferation of breast cancer cells. Here we describe a potential mechanism by which PGRMC1 contributes to breast cancer progression via interaction with prohibitins, inhibiting their function as transcription factor repressors, thereby facilitating estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) transcriptional activity and enhancing oncogenic signaling upon treatment with certain progestins, such as norethisterone and dydrogesterone.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by in-gel digestion with trypsin, essentially as described in PMID: 29069804.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed for protein identification and quantification with MaxQuant 1.5.3.8. Sequences from UP000005640, downloaded on 18th November 2015 from UniProt KB, were used. "Match between runs" and LFQ quantification were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
In previous studies, we reported that progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) is implicated in progestin signaling and possibly associated with increased breast cancer risk upon combined hormone replacement therapy. To gain mechanistic insight, we searched for potential PGRMC1 interaction partners upon progestin treatment by co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. The interactions with the identified partners were further characterized with respect to PGRMC1 phosphorylation status and with emphasis on the crosstalk between PGRMC1 and estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;). We report that PGRMC1 overexpression resulted in increased proliferation of hormone receptor positive breast cancer cell lines upon treatment with a subgroup of progestins including norethisterone and dydrogesterone that promote PGRMC1-phosphorylation on S181. The ER&#x3b1; modulators prohibitin-1 (PHB1) and prohibitin-2 (PHB2) interact with PGRMC1 in dependency on S181-phosphorylation upon treatment with the same progestins. Moreover, increased interaction between PGRMC1 and PHBs correlated with decreased binding of PHBs to ER&#x3b1; and subsequent ER&#x3b1; activation. Inhibition of either PGRMC1 or ER&#x3b1; abolished this effect. In summary, we provide strong evidence that activated PGRMC1 associates with PHBs, competitively removing them from ER&#x3b1;, which then can develop its transcriptional activities on target genes. This study emphasizes the role of PGRMC1 in a key breast cancer signaling pathway which may provide a new avenue to target hormone-dependent breast cancer.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Phb1, Pgrmc1, Hormone therapy, Progestins, Breast cancer, Progesterone, Phb2

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Germany


