### Accession
PXD006225

### Title
A proteomic atlas of insulin signaling reveals tissue-specific mechanisms of longevity-assurance

### Description
Lowered activity of the insulin/IGF signaling (IIS) network can ameliorate the effects of ageing in model organisms and, possibly, humans. Remodelling of the RNA transcriptome of long-lived IIS mutants has been extensively documented, but is only weakly predictive of consequent changes in protein expression, and the causal mechanisms at work, particularly in specific tissues, remain unclear. We have characterised changes in the proteomes of four key insulin-sensitive tissues of a long-lived Drosophila IIS mutant. We identified with high confidence ~6000 proteins, constituting 44% of the predicted proteome, which were mainly tissue-specific in expression. Lowered IIS resulted in robust, highly reproducible and tissue-specific responses, particularly pronounced in the brain and intestine, 60% of which were not detected in previous profiles of changes in RNA expression. Lowered IIS resulted in reduced expression of ribosome-associated proteins in the fat body, and a corresponding, tissue-specific reduction in translation. Mitochondrial electron transport chain proteins were increased in the fat body, leading to increased respiration, and the increase was both necessary for IIS-mediated lifespan extension and sufficient alone to mediate it. Proteosomal subunits were differentially regulated in IIS mutant gut, and directed expression of a single proteosomal subunit, RPN6, in the gut was sufficient to increase assembly and activity of the proteasome and to extend lifespan. Inhibition of proteasome activity specifically abolished IIS-mediated longevity. Tissue-specific proteomic profiling has thus deconstructed the diverse responses to reduced IIS, and demonstrated that they act in concert to ameliorate ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Fly tissues (50/sample) were lysed in pre-heated (95oc) 6M Guanidinium hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8,5 lysis buffer. Following shaking at 14000rpm (95oc) tissues were sonicated for 5 cycles (Bioruptor plus). Lysis buffer was then diluted 11-fold in digestion buffer (25mM Tris 8.5pH, 10% acetyl nitride) and vortexed prior to a trypsin gold (Promega) overnight (37oc) digest (1ug trypsin/50ug protein). Samples were sonicated again for 5 cycles, prior to a further trypsin gold (Promega) overnight (37oc) digest (0.5ug trypsin/50ug protein) for 4 hours (37oc) with gentle agitation. Samples were then placed in a SpeedVac (5min, 37oc) to remove acetyl nitride. Peptides were desalted using SDB.XC Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were then eluted using (80% Acetyl nitride, 0.1% Formic acid). Peptides were then placed in a SpeedVac (55min, 29oc) to remove acetyl nitride, and quantified via Nanodrop.  Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm column with 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.8 μm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Reversed phase chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a segmented gradient of 0% to 20% to 40% buffer B in 0 min to 85 min to 140 min for a 160 min gradient run with a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000; the resolution of the MS/MS scans was set to 15,000. Up to the 20 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 and <7 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 Th and fragmented by HCD (20) with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 50 and 100 ms respectively and the AGC target value for the MS and MS/MS scan modes were set to 1E6 and 1E5 respectively. The MS AGC underfill ratio was set to 20% or higher. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data files were analyzed / Protein identification was carried out using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.0.4 using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The data were searched against the canonical and isoform, Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL, Uniprot sequences corresponding to Drosophila melanogaster (20987 entries). The database was automatically complemented with sequences of contaminating proteins by MaxQuant. For peptide identification, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as “fixed” and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as “variable” modification. The in-silico digestion parameter of the search engine was set to “Trypsin/P,” allowing for cleavage after lysine and arginine, also when followed by proline. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein and peptide identification was performed false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on allowing for the identification of co-fragmented peptides. In order to transfer identifications to non-sequenced peptides in the separate analyses, the option “Match between runs” was turned on using a “Match time window” of 0.5 min and “Alignment time window” of 20 min. Label free quantification (LFQ) and normalization was done using MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). The default parameters for label-free quantification (LFQ) were used, except that the “LFQ min. ratio count” parameter was set to 1. Unique plus razor peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ analysis was done separately on each tissue.

### Publication Abstract
Lowered activity of the insulin/IGF signalling (IIS) network can ameliorate the effects of ageing in laboratory animals and, possibly, humans. Although transcriptome remodelling in long-lived IIS mutants has been extensively documented, the causal mechanisms contributing to extended lifespan, particularly in specific tissues, remain unclear. We have characterized the proteomes of four key insulin-sensitive tissues in a long-lived <i>Drosophila</i> IIS mutant and control, and detected 44% of the predicted proteome (6,085 proteins). Expression of ribosome-associated proteins in the fat body was reduced in the mutant, with a corresponding, tissue-specific reduction in translation. Expression of mitochondrial electron transport chain proteins in fat body was increased, leading to increased respiration, which was necessary for IIS-mediated lifespan extension, and alone sufficient to mediate it. Proteasomal subunits showed altered expression in IIS mutant gut, and gut-specific over-expression of the RPN6 proteasomal subunit, was sufficient to increase proteasomal activity and extend lifespan, whilst inhibition of proteasome activity abolished IIS-mediated longevity. Our study thus uncovered strikingly tissue-specific responses of cellular processes to lowered IIS acting in concert to ameliorate ageing.

### Keywords
Q exactive, Tissue specific, Shotgun, Drosophila melanogaster, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing

### Submitter
Robert Sehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Partridge
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing


