### Accession
PXD026924

### Title
A Conserved Nuclear Membrane Protein As an Essential Component of Plant Nuclear Lamina Is Required for Proper Genome Organization and Activity

### Description
Plant conserved nuclear membrane protein PNET2 was identified to associate with nucleoskeleton protein CRWN and KAKU4, nucleosome histone H2. As an essential component of nuclear lamina, PNET2 is required for global transcriptional reprogramming and chromasomal packing, thus to control plant survival.

### Sample Protocol
1. Transgenic seedlings of PNET2_A-BioID2, PNET2_B-BioID2, MAN1-BioID2, CRWN1-BioID2, KAKU4-BioID2 and wild type as a negetive control were treated with 50 um biotin and transgenic seedlings of YFP-BioID2 were treated with water, respectively, for 24 h before harvested. 2. Total protein was extracted and free biotin was removed using FPLC sysytem equipped with desalting columns. 3. Affinity purification using streptavidin coated beads was performed overnight to enrich biotinylated protein. 4. After AP, biotinylated protein was washed for five times to remove non-specific proteins and SDS-PAGE gel was used to separate all samples.  5. Gels were cut into three or four pieces of each lane and in-gel trypsin was performed before sumbmit to Mass spectrometry. 6. Peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS. 6.

### Data Protocol
To identify enriched protein candidates, ratiometric analysis was performed with peptide peak areas (LFQ values) as input using DEP package in R. Candidates with normalized peptide spectrum match value bigger than 0.5 (PSM > 0.5) were further filtered by cutoffs fold-change > 2 and p-value < 0.1 compared with both controls.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear basket (NB) is an essential structure of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and serves as a dynamic and multifunctional platform that participates in various critical nuclear processes, including cargo transport, molecular docking, and gene expression regulation. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not completely understood, particularly in plants. Here, we identified a guanylate-binding protein (GBP)-like GTPase (GBPL3) as a novel NPC basket component in Arabidopsis. Using fluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy, we found that GBPL3 localizes to the nuclear rim and is enriched in the nuclear pore. Proximity labeling proteomics and protein-protein interaction assays revealed that GBPL3 is predominantly distributed at the NPC basket, where it physically associates with NB nucleoporins and recruits chromatin remodelers, transcription apparatus and regulators, and the RNA splicing and processing machinery, suggesting a conserved function of the NB in transcription regulation as reported in yeasts and animals. Moreover, we found that GBPL3 physically interacts with the nucleoskeleton via disordered coiled-coil regions. Simultaneous loss of GBPL3 and one of the 4 Arabidopsis nucleoskeleton genes CRWNs led to distinct development- and stress-related phenotypes, ranging from seedling lethality to lesion development, and aberrant transcription of stress-related genes. Our results indicate that GBPL3 is a bona fide component of the plant NPC and physically and functionally connects the NB with the nucleoskeleton, which is required for the coordination of gene expression during plant development and stress responses.

### Keywords
Pnet2 crwn1 kaku4 man1  proximity chromatin

### Affiliations
Department of Plant & Microbial Biology University of California, Berkeley; CA,the United State.
university of California, Berkeley

### Submitter
Yu Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Yangnan Gu
Department of Plant & Microbial Biology University of California, Berkeley; CA,the United State.


