### Accession
PXD014071

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Col and AtPABs mutant

### Description
To determine if the difference in AtPAB-binding efficiency affects protein levels, we performed the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics on the two-week old seedlings of Col and the mut, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Two-week old Arabidopsis seedlings (about 2 g each) were ground in the liquid nitrogen, and the total protein was extracted with TCA. 150 µg protein of each sample was run into the SDS-PAGE as gel plug and digested with trypsin at 37ºC over night. 75 µg protein of each sample was labeled with TMT 6plex reagent (Thermo) and combined after labeling and dried.      Samples were desalted with a SPEC C18 column and solubilized in 200 µL buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and separated on an Xbridge column (Waters; C18; 3.5 µm, 2.1×150 mm) using the Agilent HP1100. Fractions were collected at 1-min intervals and dried under vacuum. The LC-MS/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex rapid-separation liquid chromatography system interfaced with an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed with Maxquant (version 1.6.2.6) with Andromeda search engine. Type of LC-MS run was set to reporter ion MS3 with 6plex TMT as isobaric labels. LC-MS data were searched against TAIR10 database with addition of potential contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Poly(a)-binding proteins; binding efficiency; translationa; arabidopsis

### Affiliations
IGDB,CAS
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Qing Huan

### Lab Head
Dr Wenfeng Qian
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


