### Accession
PXD027050

### Title
Inhibition of BET proteins during adolescence affects prefrontal cortex development: relevance to schizophrenia

### Description
Background: The present study investigated a role of proteins from BET family (epigenetic readers) in schizophrenia-like abnormalities in MAM-E17 model of schizophrenia. Methods: An inhibitor of BET proteins, JQ1, was given during adolescence in postnatal days (P) 23-P30, and behavioral response (sensorimotor gating, recognition memory) and prefrontal cortex (mPFC) function (long-term potentiation (LTP), molecular and proteomic studies) were performed in adult males and females. Results: Deficits in sensorimotor gating and recognition memory were observed only in MAM-treated males. However, adolescent JQ1 treatment affected control, but MAM-treated groups in both sexes. Electrophysiological study showed an LTP impairment only in male MAM-treated animals, and JQ1 did not have any effect on LTP in the mPFC. In contrast, MAM did not affect immediate early gene expression (markers of neuronal and synaptic activity), but JQ1 altered them in both sexes. Proteomic study revealed alterations in MAM-treated groups only in males, while JQ1 affected both sexes. Conclusions: Prenatal MAM administration induced schizophrenia-like abnormalities only in males. In contrast, adolescent JQ1 treatment affected both sexes and induced behavioral changes in control groups, altered  a markers of neuronal and synaptic activity and proteomic landscape in the mPFC of both groups (VEH- and MAM-treated). Thus, adolescent inhibition of BET family might change neuroplasticity in the mPFC.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction: Protein concentrations of obtained fractions were determined by BCA protein assay (Sigma-Aldrich). One hundred micrograms of calculated protein content of each sample was taken for analysis. Afterwards, samples were reduced by tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and cysteines were blocked according to the iTRAQ protocol (AB Sciex). Proteins were digested using Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (from Promega) overnight at 37°C. Stable isotope labelling: Samples were labelled using iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex) as recommended by the manufacturer for 8-plex iTraq. Labelled samples were combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Labconco). Strong Cation-Exchange Fractionation: Subsequently, lyophilizates were dissolved in 10 mM potassium phosphate in 25% acetonitrile at pH 3.0. The samples were purified on the Applied Biosystems Cation-Exchange Cartridge. The peptides were eluted from the column by 10 mM potassium phosphate in 25% acetonitrile at pH 3.0 with addition of 350 mM potassium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich). The eluate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and subjected to MacroSpin Columns with C18 resin from The Nest Group, Inc. to remove salts. The samples eluted by 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid were dried in a vacuum centrifuge once again and redissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for nanoLC-MALDI analyses. Chromatographic separation and spotting: Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved on a Proxeon EASY-nLC system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with the 2 cm long, 5 µm BioSphere C18 resin, 100 µm ID precolumn (NanoSeparations, The Netherlands) and the 10 cm long, 3 µm BioSphere C18 resin, 75 µm ID fused silica column (NanoSeparations, The Netherlands). The gradient was formed using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The system was controlled by the Hystar software (Bruker Daltonics). A gradient was performed from 2 to 35% B in 50 min and up to 90% B at 55 min, then kept until 65 min. Samples were loaded from a cooled (7°C) autosampler and separated with a linear gradient that was formed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography was controlled by the Hystar system (Bruker Daltonics). The LC eluent was directly mixed with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (HCCA, Bruker Daltonics) and deposited on an MTP AnchorChip 1536 BC plate (Bruker, Daltonik). LC eluent was spotted by Proteineer fc II (Bruker, Daltonik). Spots were deposited every 15 seconds, 192 fractions were spotted in total for one sample.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired on the ultrafleXtreme (Bruker, Daltonik) mass spectrometer with a TOF/TOF analyser. All MS spectra were recorded in positive reflector mode (700-3500 Da). For MS data, 4000 shots were accumulated for each spectrum. Collected data were analysed by WARP-LC software (Bruker Daltonics). Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy: Rodentia (UniProt/Swiss-Prot); enzyme: trypsin; missed cleavage sites allowed: 1; fixed modification: methylthio (C); variable modifications: methionine oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (Y); parent mass error: 25 ppm; and peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Shotgun, Prefrontal cortex, Maldi-tof/tof, Bet proteins, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Maj Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Pharmacology, Laboratory of Pharmacology and Brain Biostructure, Smetna Str. 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland
Department of Analytical Chemistry and Biochemistry, AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow Poland
Maj Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Przemyslaw Mielczarek

### Lab Head
Dr Marzena Mackowiak
Maj Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Pharmacology, Laboratory of Pharmacology and Brain Biostructure, Smetna Str. 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland


