### Accession
PXD033580

### Title
CAPTURE of the human U2 snRNA genes

### Description
In order to identify factors involved in transcription of human snRNA genes and 3’ end processing of the transcripts, we have carried out CRISPR affinity purification in situ of regulatory elements (CAPTURE), which is deadCas9-mediated pull-down, of the tandemly-repeated U2 snRNA genes in human cells. Pull-down proteins were identified by mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
4x10⁶ to 1 × 10⁷ dCas9BAP/BirA HEK293 stable cells were untransfected (dCas9 alone) as control or transiently transfected with a sequence-specific DSE (G3) or PSE (G6) guide RNA for 24 hours, followed by cross-linking with 2% formaldehyde for 10 minutes and then quenching with 0.25 M glycine for 5 minutes. Cells were washed twice with PBS, scraped and lysed with 10 ml of cell lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 85 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4, freshly added 1 mM DTT and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) + PhosSTOP (Sigma)) and rotated for 15 minutes at 4°C. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 2,300 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C to isolate the nuclei. The nuclei were resuspended in 5 ml nuclear lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, 4% SDS, pH 7.4, freshly added 1 mM DTT and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) + PhosSTOP (Sigma)) and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. The suspended nuclei were then mixed with 15 ml of 8 M urea buffer and centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 25 minutes at room temperature. Nuclei were then re-suspended in 5 ml nuclear lysis buffer and mixed with 15 ml of 8 M urea buffer (10mM Tris, 1mM EDTA, 8M Urea, pH 7.4 + cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) + PhosSTOP (Sigma)) and centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 25 min at room temperature. The samples were washed twice more in 5 ml nuclear lysis buffer and mixed with 15 ml of 8 M urea buffer, followed by centrifugation at 16,100 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Pelleted chromatin was then washed twice with 5 ml cell lysis buffer. The chromatin pellet was resuspended in 5 ml of IP binding buffer without NaCl (20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, pH 7.5, freshly added cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Sigma)) and aliquoted into Eppendorf tubes. Chromatin was then subjected to sonication to 200 bp on the Q Sonica Thermocube Q800R (35% amplitude, 30 seconds on and 30 seconds off for 1 hour). Fragmented chromatin was centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 25 min at 4°C. Supernatant was combined and NaCl was added to a final concentration of 150 mM NaCl. To prepare the streptavidin beads for affinity purification, 120 μl of streptavidin agarose slurry (Life Technologies) was washed 3 times in 1 ml of IP binding buffer and added to soluble chromatin. After overnight incubation at 4°C, streptavidin beads were collected by centrifugation at 800 x g for 3 minutes at 4°C. The beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml of IP binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 150-300 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, freshly added proteinase inhibitor) and proteins were then de-crosslinked by increasing the NaCl concentration to 3M and boiling it at 95°C for 1 hour. The samples were digested with trypsin FASP. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000)  coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 60 minutes linear gradient (15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)) at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 100ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120ms with fixed mass at 180m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For CAPTURE pulldown protein identification, MS/MS spectra were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) and filtered in Perseus. Search parameters included trypsin or LysC cleavage with up to two missed cleavage events. Searches also permitted variable modifications of methionine oxidation or acetylation, and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Precursor ion tolerance of 20 p.p.m. Peptide assignments were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on the peptide level. For dCas9 protein identification, tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT within Proteome discoverer PD1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) against a database containing 284 protein entries combining dCas9 protein sequence from Streptococcus Pyogenes and common contaminants. During database searches, cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), all N-terminal residues to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively. Protein identification was filtered at FDR below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In order to identify factors involved in transcription of human snRNA genes and 3' end processing of the transcripts, we have carried out CRISPR affinity purification in situ of regulatory elements (CAPTURE), which is deadCas9-mediated pull-down, of the tandemly repeated U2 snRNA genes in human cells. CAPTURE enriched many factors expected to be associated with these human snRNA genes including RNA polymerase II (pol II), Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 7 (CDK7), Negative Elongation Factor (NELF), Suppressor of Ty 5 (SPT5), Mediator 23 (MED23) and several subunits of the Integrator Complex. Suppressor of Ty 6 (SPT6); Cyclin K, the partner of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 12 (CDK12) and Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 13 (CDK13); and SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex-associated SWI/SNF-related, Matrix-associated, Regulator of Chromatin (SMRC) factors were also enriched. Several polyadenylation factors, including Cleavage and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor 1 (CPSF1), Cleavage Stimulation Factors 1 and 2 (CSTF1,and CSTF2) were enriched by U2 gene CAPTURE. We have already shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that CSTF2-and Pcf11 and Ssu72, which are also polyadenylation factors-are associated with the human U1 and U2 genes. ChIP-seq and ChIP-qPCR confirm the association of SPT6, Cyclin K, and CDK12 with the U2 genes. In addition, knockdown of SPT6 causes loss of subunit 3 of the Integrator Complex (INTS3) from the U2 genes, indicating a functional role in snRNA gene expression. CAPTURE has therefore expanded the repertoire of transcription and RNA processing factors associated with these genes and helped to identify a functional role for SPT6.

### Keywords
Transcription, Interactome, Snrna

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie  Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Shona Murphy
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford


