### Accession
PXD047841

### Title
Parallel control of cold-triggered adipocyte thermogenesis by UCP1 and CKB

### Description
Non-shivering thermogenesis in adipocytes is mediated by brown adipose tissue, purportedly through the sole action of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). The physiological relevance of UCP1-dependent thermogenesis has primarily been inferred from the attenuation of thermogenic output of mice genetically lacking Ucp1 from birth (germline Ucp1-/-). However, germline Ucp1-/- mice harbor secondary changes within brown adipose tissue beyond UCP1, such as reduced electron transport chain abundance. We show here that these secondary changes also encompass reduced expression of genes regulating fuel liberation, changes that would attenuate the capacity of any thermogenic pathway. Therefore, the quantitative contribution of UCP1-dependent and -independent thermogenesis is not fully understood. To mitigate the potentially confounding ancillary changes to brown adipose tissue of germline Ucp1-/- mice, we constructed mice with inducible adipocyte-selective disruption of Ucp1. We find that, while germline Ucp1-/- mice succumb to cold-induced hypothermia with complete penetrance, most mice with inducible deletion of Ucp1 maintain homeothermy in the cold. However, inducible adipocyte-selective co-deletion of Ucp1 and creatine kinase B (Ckb, an effector of UCP1-independent thermogenesis) exacerbates cold-intolerance, indicative of a negative genetic interaction and thus a parallel thermogenic function. We find no evidence for impairments in insulation or non-shivering thermogenesis in skeletal muscle that would drive this phenotype. Furthermore, following UCP1 deletion or UCP1/CKB co-deletion from mature adipocytes, moderate cold exposure triggers the regeneration of mature adipocytes that coordinately restore UCP1 and CKB to brown adipose tissue, providing further evidence of their parallel thermogenic relationship. Our findings suggest that thermogenic adipocytes utilize non-paralogous protein redundancy – through UCP1 and CKB – to promote cold-induced energy dissipation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation BAT was homogenized using a TissueLyser II (QIAGEN) in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl plus 1X Roche cOmplete protease and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitors.  Following a BCA assay to estimate protein concentration, all lysates were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 30 min at room temperature, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by chloroform-methanol precipitation, digested, and 25 ug peptides from each sample were labeled by TMT-pro (Thermo Scientific)69 following the SL-TMT protocol70. Male and female samples were separated in two TMT-plexes. Samples in each plex were then combined according to a ratio-check to ensure even loading of each TMT channel, then desalted using a sep-pak cartridge (Waters). Peptides were then fractionated using a reverse -phase High-pH HPLC method. Briefly, samples were loaded onto an Agilent C18 column using an Agilent 1100 quaternary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array detector (220- and 280-nm wavelength), peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, at a flow rate of 0.25 min/ml, into 24 fractions. The 12 even fractions (fraction 2, 4, …, 24) were purified by stage-tipping and subjected to LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS The proteomics samples were either analyzed using an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (LC) pump were used to analyze the samples. The columns are packed in house with 100 mm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 40 cm of GP-18 resin (2.6 mm, 200 A, Sepax, Newark, DE). A FAIMSPro (Thermo) device for FAIMS separation of precursors71. The FAIMS device was operated with default settings and multiple compensation voltages (-40V/-60V/-80V). All samples were analyzed with a 180 min gradient consisting of 2%–23% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate. Under each FAIMS voltage, peptide ions were collected in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 400 – 1600 using 2 sec cycles. Resolution for MS1 was set at 120,000, with standard automatic gain control (AGC) target. Tandem mass spectra (MS2) were matched in real time to targeted proteins71. When a peptide match was observed to a targeted protein, a quantitative SPS-MS3 scan was acquired72. Multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation at 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2 with a dynamic exclusion of 120 s. Quantification was performed using multinotch SPS-MS3 as described previously72.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching The Comet algorithm73 was used to search all MS/MS spectra against a database containing sequences of mouse (Mus Musculus) proteins downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org, 2020). Reversed sequences were appended as decoys for FDR filtering, and common contaminant proteins (e.g. human keratins, trypsin) were included. Peptides were searched using following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMT (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N-terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. The target-decoy method was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR)74-76. To distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was used to control peptide-level FDR to less than 1%. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids were discarded. Protein-level FDR was also controlled to 1% and as a result the number of peptide reverse hits were further decreased. Peptides were matched to the least number of proteins. TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise ratios for all quantified peptides matched to the same protein or site were summed up to report protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School
1Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada  2Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3G 1Y6, Canada

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Lawrence Kazak
1Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada  2Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3G 1Y6, Canada


