### Accession
PXD002646

### Title
A systematic evaluation of nanocast metal oxide microspheres for phosphoproteomics applications

### Description
We used the nanocasting technique to prepare a range of different metal oxide microspheres that allow an objective comparison of the different materials. Using samples of different complexity, ranging from synthetic peptides to whole cell lysates, we characterized the binding behavior of these materials. We observed that the phosphoproteome coverage achievable using TiO2, ZrO2, Fe2O3 and In2O3 is comparable in depth, although some differences between individual oxides exist. Single-shot LC-MS/MS experiments on a linear ion trap-orbitrap instrument identified more than 3000 phosphopeptides from the equivalent of 20 μg of HEK cell lysate protein. However, the application of common enrichment protocols to biological samples may still lead to some bias due to an underrepresentation of highly phosphorylated peptides. These peptides are predominantly observed when materials with lower phosphopeptide affinity such as NiO and Co3O4 are used for enrichment and their biological relevance may be underestimated.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were grown using standard procedures and lysed in 8.9 M urea / 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with sonication. After centrifugation, the supernatant was used for further processing: reduction (TCEP), alkylation (iodoacetamide), and two-step digestion (Lys-C for 3 h, trypsin overight). Digests were purified by solid-phase extraction.  Phosphopeptide enrichment using different metal oxides was performed following the procedures of Sugiyama et al. (Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2007) and Leitner et al. (Anal. Chem., 2010) with slight modifications. Tthe enriched fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer using 180 min LC gradients.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was searched using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 against the human subset of UniProt/SwissProt (version 2014_11) and the MaxQuant contaminant database. Cys carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification, Met oxidation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were specified as variable modifications. MS1 first search tolerance was 20 ppm, ITMS MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Additional settings were as follows: decoy mode = reversed, match between runs = on, minimum peptide length = 6, PSM FDR = 0.01. Label-free quantification was also performed with MaxQuant with the following parameters: minimum peptide count = 1, use unmodified and modified peptides for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The ability to comprehensively characterize biological samples, including tissues and body fluids, opens up new possibilities to diagnose and treat diseases and to better understand fundamental biological processes. For this purpose, suitable experimental workflows need to be designed. In this context, materials with particular chemoselective properties are used for the enrichment of certain classes of (bio)molecules. Metal oxides such as titanium dioxide have become the materials of choice for the large-scale study of protein phosphorylation in phosphoproteomics. Despite their widespread use, the main factors influencing their performance (for example, affinity and specificity) are not completely understood. This understanding is, however, crucial to develop improved materials and methods. Here, we used the nanocasting method to prepare microspheres of seven metal oxides with comparable textural properties, allowing an objective comparison of the materials and their binding properties. We evaluated these materials with samples of different complexity, ranging from synthetic peptides to whole cell lysates, using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry as a readout. A set of more than 7000 identified phosphopeptides allowed us to study differences between the metal oxide sorbents in detail. Importantly, the performance of the affinity materials was found to be mainly correlated with the oxides' isoelectric points (IEPs), with the materials that enriched the highest number of phosphopeptides having an IEP of around 6. This included the widely used TiO<sub>2</sub> and ZrO<sub>2</sub>, but also In<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> that was not previously known to possess affinity to phosphates. This finding supports the conclusion that the IEP has a stronger influence than the particular type of metal oxide and contrasts earlier reports that compared a limited number of materials with often unknown textural properties. Taken together, we introduce new metal oxides suitable for phosphopeptide enrichment, provide deeper insight into the properties that affect their performance, and offer a strategy to optimize enrichment protocols and materials.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293, Phosphoproteomics, Orbitrap elite, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


