### Accession
PXD025803

### Title
Human cytomegalovirus-induced host protein citrullination is crucial for viral replication

### Description
Citrullination is the conversion of arginine-to-citrulline by protein arginine deiminases (PADs), whose dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of cancers and autoimmune diseases. Consistent with the ability of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) to induce post-translational modifications of cellular proteins to gain a survival advantage, we show that HCMV infection of primary human fibroblasts triggers PAD-mediated citrullination of several host proteins, and that this activity promotes viral fitness. Citrullinome analysis reveals significant changes in deimination levels of both cellular and viral proteins, with interferon (IFN)-inducible protein IFIT1 being the most heavily deiminated one. As genetic depletion of IFIT1 strongly enhances HCMV growth, and in vitro IFIT1 citrullination impairs its ability to bind to 5’-pppRNA, we propose that viral-induced IFIT1 citrullination is a novel mechanism of HCMV evasion from host antiviral resistance. Overall, our findings point to a crucial role of citrullination in subverting cellular responses to viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
1ug of recombinant IFIT1, mock or PAD2 treated, were digested with 1:50 LysC (Wako #129-02541) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were purified and concentrated on stage tips with three C18 Empore filter discs (3M), and further measured via LC-MS/MS, using an EASY- nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), on a 20 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 μm column diameter; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) and separated using a 60 min acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.15 with carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification as well as oxidation (Met), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and citrullination (R), as defined by H(-1) N(-1) O, as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Citrullination is the conversion of arginine-to-citrulline by protein arginine deiminases (PADs), whose dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of cancers and autoimmune diseases. Consistent with the ability of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) to induce post-translational modifications of cellular proteins to gain a survival advantage, we show that HCMV infection of primary human fibroblasts triggers PAD-mediated citrullination of several host proteins, and that this activity promotes viral fitness. Citrullinome analysis reveals significant changes in deimination levels of both cellular and viral proteins, with interferon (IFN)-inducible protein IFIT1 being among the most heavily deiminated one. As genetic depletion of IFIT1 strongly enhances HCMV growth, and in vitro IFIT1 citrullination impairs its ability to bind to 5'-ppp-RNA, we propose that viral-induced IFIT1 citrullination is a mechanism of HCMV evasion from host antiviral resistance. Overall, our findings point to a crucial role of citrullination in subverting cellular responses to viral infection.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Hcmv, Ifit1

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology - Technical University Munich
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany

### Submitter
Virginie Girault

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany


