### Accession
PXD012958

### Title
Proteomics pipeline for identifying variant proteins in Plasmodium falciparum parasites isolated from children presenting with malaria

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum variant antigens named erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) are important targets for developing a protective immunity to malaria caused by P. falciparum. One of the major challenges in P. falciparum proteomics studies is identifying PfEMP1s at the protein level due to antigenic variation. To identify these PfEMP1s using shotgun proteomics, we developed a pipeline that searches high resolution mass spectrometry spectra against a custom protein sequence database. An algorithm, LAX, was developed as part of the pipeline that matches sequences to the most similar PfEMP1 and calculates a weight value used for PfEMP1 protein inference. The pipeline was first validated in the analysis of a laboratory strain with a known PfEMP1, then it was implemented on the analysis of parasite isolates from malaria-infected pregnant women and finally on the analysis of parasite isolates from malaria infected children where there was an increase of PfEMP1s identified in 28 out of 31 isolates.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples collected from malaria-infected children matured to trophozoite/schizont stages cultured in vitro. Mature parasites were enriched to >90% using Percoll gradient. Membrane proteins were extracted by sequential detergent isolation using 1% triton and 1% SDS. Samples fractionated by size in SDS-PAGE gels, reduced with 20 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 minutes at 600C, alkylated with 50 mM Iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark and digested with trypsin in a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: total protein) and incubated overnight at 370C. Digestion was stopped with formic acid and peptide samples were desalted using C18 zip tips. Tryptic digested peptide mixtures were loaded on to a reverse phase C-18 precolumn in line with an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 μm x 15 cm, 2 μm, 100Å). The peptides were separated using a gradient of 5% to 30% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile) for 75 min, and then to 95% solvent B for additional 50 min. The peptides were analyzed in data dependent mode and top 20 precursors were fragmented using CID in Ion Trap with collision energy of 35. The mass window for precursor ion selection was 2 Da and a minimum of 5000 counts were needed to trigger the MS/MS. The MS1 was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000 and MS2 in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using PEAKS® Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc, Waterloo, ON Canada) with a precursor tolerance 10 ppm and tolerance of 0.8 Da for MS/MS for CID against a combined database composed of Swiss Prot Human database (20,352 sequences), PlasmoDB version 24 database (5,542 sequences), VSA database (341 VAR gene sequences from 7 non-3D7 strains18), novel construct database (648). Sequences of known contaminants from the cRAP database were added (115 sequences). Carbamidomethyl (C), deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications and two missed cleave sites were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide was set to 1% by applying the target-decoy strategy. The output of PEAKS® Studio contains the protein-peptides and de novo peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> variant antigens named erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) are important targets for developing a protective immunity to malaria caused by <i>P. falciparum</i>. One of the major challenges in <i>P. falciparum</i> proteomics studies is identifying PfEMP1s at the protein level due to antigenic variation. To identify these PfEMP1s using shotgun proteomics, we developed a pipeline that searches high-resolution mass spectrometry spectra against a custom protein sequence database. A local alignment algorithm, LAX, was developed as a part of the pipeline that matches peptide sequences to the most similar PfEMP1 and calculates a weight value based on peptide's uniqueness used for PfEMP1 protein inference. The pipeline was first validated in the analysis of a laboratory strain with a known PfEMP1, then it was implemented on the analysis of parasite isolates from malaria-infected pregnant women and finally on the analysis of parasite isolates from malaria-infected children where there was an increase of PfEMP1s identified in 27 out of 31 isolates using the expanded database.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Proteogenomics, Variant antigens, Pfemp1

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Malaria Vaccinology and Immunology, NIAID, NIH
NIAID/LMIV

### Submitter
Patricia Gonzales Hurtado

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Fried
Laboratory of Malaria Vaccinology and Immunology, NIAID, NIH


