### Accession
PXD028551

### Title
Capacitive electrical stimulation effects on osteoblast-released matrix microvesicles

### Description
Passive implants currently used in the clinics cannot prevent failure rates and inherent revision arthroplasties. Novel bioelectronic devices that include biophysical stimulators (such as electric stimulators) and sensing systems are desired since these will allow for long-term monitoring and control of the bone-implant interface, in a personalized manner. We have developed acting-sensing dual systems operated at high frequency (HF) that are able to stimulate osteoconduction in pre-osteoblasts and osteoinduction in human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hASCs). The project included – to our knowledge – the first-time proteomic analysis of microvesicles secreted from osteoblasts electrically-stimulated in vitro by a capacitive stimulator of thin interdigitated electrodes delivering an electrical 60 kHz HF stimulation, 30 min/day. Results revealed regulation of osteodifferentiation and mineralization-related proteins (e.g. Tgfb3, Ttyh3, Itih1, Aldh1a1).

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts, under control (Ctrl) and Stim (electrically-stimulated in vitro by a capacitive stimulator of thin interdigitated electrodes delivering an electrical 60 kHz HF stimulation, 30 min/day) conditions, containing released matrix microvesicles (MVs), were collected at every medium change from 7 to 28 days in vitro (DIV) and stored at −80 °C until MVs isolation. MVs were isolated from the medium by ultra-centrifugation, based on (1,2). Conditioned medium was first pre-cleared by two centrifugation steps: 300 × g at 25°C for 5 min (5424, Eppendorf) and 18,500 × g at 4°C for 25 min (5810R, Eppendorf). The resulting supernatants were ultracentrifuged (Optima LE-80K, fixed-angle rotor 80Ti, Beckman Coulter GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) at 50,000 rpm for 60 min at 4°C for pelleting the MVs. Upon ultracentrifugation, pellets were resuspended in 1% (v/v) protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340) in PBS. Protein content was determined in each sample by the BCA assay (PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific, 23225).  References: 1. Schmidt, J. R. et al. Osteoblast-released Matrix Vesicles, Regulation of Activity and Composition by Sulfated and Non-sulfated Glycosaminoglycans. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 15, 558–572 (2016). 2. Xiao, Z. et al. Analysis of the extracellular matrix vesicle proteome in mineralizing osteoblasts. J. Cell. Physiol. 210, 325–335 (2007).

### Data Protocol
A comparative proteomic analysis between Ctrl and Stim samples was then performed, through nano Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS), as before (3). First, protein extracts (100 μg; n=4) were reduced with tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with chroloacetamide and enzymatically digested using trypsin. Resulting tryptic peptides were then separated by liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC) in an Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) source coupled to a high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trapping capillary column Acclaim PepMap C18 100A˚ [3 µm particle size, 300 µm internal diameter (i.d.) x 5 mm, 160454, Thermo Scientific] and a mobile phase of 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) at 10 μL/min. Upon 3 min loading, the trap column was switched to an EASY-Spray column [ES803A, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm particle size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific] at 300 nL/min. Sample elution was achieved by mixing solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (80% ACN), using a linear gradient as follows: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent (dd) acquisition mode. The analysis alternated between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and a subsequent high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan [normalized collision energy (NCE) 27%]. ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. Global settings were: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003); lock mass injection Full MS; chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings were: 70k resolution (m/z 200); automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e6; maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3; intensity threshold 7.3e4; charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8; peptide match preferred; exclude isotopes on; dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings were: microscans 1; 35k resolution (m/z 200); AGC target 2e5; maximum injection time 110 ms; isolation window 2.0 m/z; isolation offset 0.0 m/z; spectrum data type profile. Raw data were further analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 software (Thermo Scientific) by comparison against the Mus musculus proteome from the UniProt database. Tryptic peptides were identified by the Sequest HT search engine. The ion mass tolerance was defined at 10 ppm (for precursor ions) and 0.02 Da (for fragment ions). A maximum of 2 missing cleavage sites was allowed. Modifications were defined as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation as constant modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide confidence settings were set as high. The following settings were applied to the processing node Percolator: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%; validation based on q-value, which allows for more accurate determination of false positives for a given cut-off value, than using p-value alone. Protein levels were determined through label-free quantification – LFQ methodologies. Only proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides were considered for further analysis. The average abundances of proteins meeting the criteria above were compared between Ctrl and Stim conditions to determine the Stim/Ctrl abundance ratio. Further data analysis can be found in the corresponding paper (de Sousa, BM et al 2021, npj Regenerative Medicine, ‘Capacitive interdigitated system of high osteoinductive/conductive performance for personalized acting-sensing implants’).  References: 3. Miller, B. A. et al. The ovine hepatic mitochondrial proteome: Understanding seasonal weight loss tolerance in two distinct breeds. PLoS ONE 14, e0212580 (2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Electrical stimulation, Lc-ms/ms, Capacitive coupling, Bone, Extracellular, Osteoblasts, Matrix microvesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedicine (iBiMED), University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Aveiro, Portugal

### Submitter
Bárbara M de Sousa

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra I. Vieira
Department of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedicine (iBiMED), University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.


