### Accession
PXD033392

### Title
Single-cell transcriptional profiling identifies a spectrum of unconventional intraepithelial T lineage cells in human cord blood

### Description
Conventional CD4 and CD8 single positive T cell lineages constitute the main differentiation pathway in the thymus. In human thymus, a minor TCRαβ differentiation pathway diverges from the early double positive stage, consisting of CD10+ PD-1+ cells. These cells are phenotypically and functionally similar to murine agonist-selected intraepithelial T lymphocyte precursors (IELps) which home to the small intestine. Here, the progeny of the human agonist-selected IEL lineage was identified in antigen-inexperienced cord blood (CB) with a polyclonal T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire exhibiting a bias towards early TCR alpha chain rearrangements and elevated autoreactive indices. Single-cell RNA sequencing allowed further delineation of this unconventional lineage in CB. Trajectory analysis, along with TCR repertoire analysis, transcriptomics and proteomics, suggests a precursor-progeny relationship with the thymic IELps. The distinct, heterogeneous CB population can now be defined as CD3+ TCRαβ+ CD4- CCR7- CD26-. Besides recent thymic emigrants, this population also consists of newly identified effector clusters and previously described populations: the suppressive NK receptor expressing CD8+ Treg population, the KIR/NKG2A+ EOMES+ virtual memory population and the CD8αα+ T cell populations. The population shows a discriminating stable HELIOS expression and is exclusively able to downregulate CD8β expression, resulting in double negative T cells. The functional properties of this population suggest that the cells expand on inflammatory cues and exert cytotoxic and proinflammatory activity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (± 1.106 cells per pellet) were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea; 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Samples were sonicated by three pulses of 15 s, interspaced by 1 min pauses on ice at an intensity output of 15 W, and centrifuged for 15 min at 20 000g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 55 °C and then alkylated by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ̊C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were then purified on a SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge (Agilent), vacuum-dried, and kept at −20 °C until measured by LC-MS/MS. Immediately before injection, purified peptides were redissolved in 15 μL loading solvent (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid/water/acetonitrile (0.1:98:2, v/v/v)) and the peptide concentration was determined by measuring on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). 2 μg of peptide material of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20-mm trapping column (made in-house, 100-μm internal diameter, 5-μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch, Germany). Peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 200-cm-long micropillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality. The Ultimate 3000’s column oven was set to 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10-μm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the μPAC outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 145 min, starting at a flow rate of 750 nL/min switching to 300 nL/min after 15 min, followed by a 15-min washing phase plateauing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nL/min for 45 min followed by 5 min at 750 nl/min adding up to a total run length of 210 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.2 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375–1,500, AGC target 3 × 10^6 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms), acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 × 105 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 1.5 Da, fixed first mass 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3 × 104, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to 28% normalized collision energy, and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (from November 2018 with 20 424 entries) separately for PNT and CB T cells. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to the C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage next to prolines with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, leading to the identification of 4,539 and 3584 proteins for PNT and CB, respectively. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) separately for the PNT and CB data set after uploading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins that are only identified by peptides carrying at least one modified amino acid were removed. Replicate samples were grouped and proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit resulting in 3,001 and 2,024 quantified proteins for PNT and CB, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Intraepithelial t cells, T cell lineages, Cord blood, Q exactive hf, Agonist-selection, Shotgun proteomics, Label-free, Thymus

### Affiliations
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium.
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Bart Vandekerckhove
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium.


