### Accession
PXD014555

### Title
A PhotoClick cholesterol-based quantitative proteomics screen for cytoplasmic sterol binding proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Ergosterol is a prominent component of the yeast plasma membrane and essential for yeast cell viability. It is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and transported to the plasma membrane by non-vesicular mechanisms requiring carrier proteins. Oxysterol binding protein homologues and yeast StARkin proteins have been proposed to function as sterol carriers. Although many of these proteins are capable of transporting sterols between synthetic lipid vesicles in vitro, they are not essential for ergosterol transport in cells, indicating that they may be functionally redundant with each other or with additional - as yet unidentified - sterol carriers. To address this point we hypothesized that sterol transport proteins are also sterol binding proteins (SBPs), and used an in vitro chemo-proteomic strategy to identify all cytosolic SBPs. We generated a cytosol fraction enriched in SBPs and captured the proteins with a photoreactive clickable cholesterol analog. Quantitative proteomics of the captured proteins identified 342 putative SBPs. Analysis of these identified proteins based on their annotated function, reported drug phenotypes, interactions with proteins regulating lipid metabolism, gene ontology, and presence of mammalian orthologs revealed a subset of 62 characterized and nine uncharacterized candidates. Five of the uncharacterized proteins play a role in maintaining plasma membrane integrity as their absence affects the ability of cells to grow in the presence of nystatin or myriocin. We anticipate that the dataset reported here will be a comprehensive resource for functional analysis of sterol binding/transport proteins and provide insights into novel aspects of non-vesicular sterol trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomic analysis, 1.5 μg of protein per condition and replicate analyzed where subjected to in solution digest. In brief, protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and cysteines reduced and alkylated using 50 mM DTT followed by 27.5 mM iodoacetamide. For peptidolysis, Lys-C (Wako Chemicals GmbH) was used at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:15 for 3 h at room temperature, followed by dilution to 2 M Urea with 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4 and over night peptidolysis using trypsin (Serva) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:10 and room temperature. Resulting peptides where purified and concentrated using solid phase extraction (SPE) on Stage tips and differentially labeled using reductive dimethylation as described (“Light”: control sample without UV crosslinking, “Heavy”: fully crosslinked sample). After mixing labeled samples 1:1 (5 μg, both) and a further SPE, lyophylized peptides were resuspended in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid and one third of the volume analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2), using a 15 cm/70 μm ID in-house packed capillary column emitter (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1,9um, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a buffer system comprising solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) as well as a EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC in-line to a QExactive mass spectrometer (both ThermoFisher Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Instumentation parameters employed were read out and summarized using MARMoSET and have been included in the supplementary material. Following LC-MS2 analysis, data was analyzed for identification and relative quantitation using the MaxQuant suite of tools (version 1.5.6.5) against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae UniprotKB database (downloaded 20170118; 6721 entries) employing default parameters, including a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein group level, both. Raw data as well as MaxQuant analysis details have been deposited in Pride. Downstream bioinformatic processing was done using an in-house developed R pipeline based on limma (https://github.com/bhagwataditya/autonomics).

### Publication Abstract
Ergosterol is a prominent component of the yeast plasma membrane and essential for yeast cell viability. It is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and transported to the plasma membrane by nonvesicular mechanisms requiring carrier proteins. Oxysterol-binding protein homologues and yeast StARkin proteins have been proposed to function as sterol carriers. Although many of these proteins are capable of transporting sterols between synthetic lipid vesicles in vitro, they are not essential for ergosterol transport in cells, indicating that they may be functionally redundant with each other or with additional-as yet unidentified-sterol carriers. To address this point, we hypothesized that sterol transport proteins are also sterol-binding proteins (SBPs), and used an in vitro chemoproteomic strategy to identify all cytosolic SBPs. We generated a cytosol fraction enriched in SBPs and captured the proteins with a photoreactive clickable cholesterol analogue. Quantitative proteomics of the captured proteins identified 342 putative SBPs. Analysis of these identified proteins based on their annotated function, reported drug phenotypes, interactions with proteins regulating lipid metabolism, gene ontology, and presence of mammalian orthologues revealed a subset of 62 characterized and nine uncharacterized candidates. Five of the uncharacterized proteins play a role in maintaining plasma membrane integrity as their absence affects the ability of cells to grow in the presence of nystatin or myriocin. We anticipate that the dataset reported here will be a comprehensive resource for functional analysis of sterol-binding/transport proteins and provide insights into novel aspects of non-vesicular sterol trafficking.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Lc-ms2, Sterol

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Anant K. Menon
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY


