### Accession
PXD036491

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies a signature of disease severity in the plasma of COVID-19 pneumonia patients associated to neutrophil, platelet and complement activation

### Description
Plasma proteomics provide valuable and unbiased information about disease progression and therapeutic candidates. Recent proteomic studies have identified molecular changes in plasma of COVID-19 patients that implied significant dysregulation of several aspects of the inflammatory response accompanied to a general metabolic suppression. However, which of these plasma alterations are associated to disease severity remain partly characterized.  A known limitation of proteomic studies of plasma samples is the large difference in the macromolecule abundance, with concentration spanning at least 10 orders of magnitude. To improve the coverage of plasma contents, we performed a deep proteomic analysis of plasma from 10 COVID-19 patients with severe/fatal pneumonia compared to 10 COVID-19 patients with pneumonia who did not require ICU admission (non-ICU). To this aim, plasma samples were first depleted of most abundant proteins and peptides obtained by trypsin digestion subjected to a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation before LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma protein purification, Peptide Purification and LC-MS/MS Analysis To remove high abundance proteins,100ul of plasma for each sample, pre-treated with Triton-X100 (Merck Life Science), to a final concentration of 1%, to make the samples safe, were processed with High-select Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer's protocol. The depleted sample, with albumin, IgG, fibrinogen and other abundant proteins removed, were eluted in 10mM PBS and 0,02% sodium azide, pH 7,4.  From each sample 14ug of purified proteins were boiled at 95◦C and were treated with DL-dithiothreitol (10 mM at 56C, Merck Life Science) and iodoacetamide (55 mM at room temperature, Merck Life Science) for disulfide bond reduction and alkylation respectively. Then the samples were diluted 10 times by adding 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Merck Life Science), 1 M urea (Merck Life Science) and digested with trypsin (0.4 μg / sample, Promega) at 37◦C overnight.  The peptide mixture was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration 0.1%, Fluka) and fractionated, based on the peptides hydrophobicity, using Pierce High pH Reverse Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer's protocol.  Peptides in each fraction (8/sample) were dried, resuspended in 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN, Fluka), 0.1% TFA and 0.1% formic acid (Fluka) and then analyzed twice, as technical replicates, by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution mass spectrometry using Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap as described [26]. In particular, the peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-LC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific), loaded onto a 75 μm C18 column (ES800-PepMap™ RSLC  C18, 150 mm  × 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 100 min linear multistep gradient elution (from 4 to 90% eluent B, 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, with a constant flow rate of 0.3 μL/min), and were analyzed by Q Exactive plus™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with this run condition: electrospray ionization (ESI)  voltage  2.0  kV and MS data were acquired in a positive mode using data-dependent mode selecting the 15 most intense ions with full scan MS spectra range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1700.0, resolution of 70,000, injection time 100 ms, AGC target 3×106, isolation window ±2.0 m/z, charge exclusion 1,7,8, >8 and the dynamic exclusion 20s. For HCD fragmentation, resolution was set to 17,500, AGC target to 10000 and injection time of 80 ms.

### Data Protocol
Quantification and statistical analysis The raw data from the mass spectrometric analysis were processed using the MaxQuant software v.1.5.5.1 and quantified using the iBAQ algorithm  [27]. Data were analyzed with Perseus software v.1.6.15 [28] (http://www.perseus-framework.org). Briefly, data were filtered based on categorical rows; only identified by side, reverse and potential contaminants were removed. Calculated iBAQ were log2 converted, grouped to compare HD, non-ICU and ICU, and filtered based on proteins identified in at least one group with a coverage of 90%. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution based on total matrix (width 0.3 and down shift 1.3). The obtained matrix of 216 identifications was used to calculate the Principal Component Analysis (2 components, FDR < 0.05) and to generate a volcano plot for HD vs non-ICU, HD vs ICU/F groups and non-ICU vs ICU/F groups with 250 randomizations based on two sides t-test (FDR <0.05, S0=0.1). Hierarchical clustering of identified proteins was performed after Z-score normalization then, significantly different proteins among groups were calculated by multiple-sample test (ANOVA) and Post hoc Tukey’s HSD test of one-way ANOVA (FDR <0.05). Euclidean distance were used to compare different groups and clusters were extracted using n=4 and n=15 to allow a better discrimination of lower abundant proteins.   Plasma proteins that underwent significant fold changes were considered for the classification of biological dysregulated processes. Only processes relevant for plasma proteins were included in the list. The network analysis and the visualization of plasma proteins significantly modulated in non-ICU and ICU/F was performed using the application of String-DB specifically developed for Cytoscape (v3.8.2) (StringApp) [29]. Functional enrichment analysis was performed for each of identified cluster and significant GO process were revaluated (FDR <0.05). Graph pad Prism 8 was used to generate reported plots.

### Publication Abstract
Most patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 display mild symptoms with good prognosis, while 20% of patients suffer from severe viral pneumonia and up to 5% may require intensive care unit (ICU) admission due to severe acute respiratory syndrome, which could be accompanied by multiorgan failure.Plasma proteomics provide valuable and unbiased information about disease progression and therapeutic candidates. Recent proteomic studies have identified molecular changes in plasma of COVID-19 patients that implied significant dysregulation of several aspects of the inflammatory response accompanied by a general metabolic suppression. However, which of these plasma alterations are associated with disease severity remains only partly characterized.A known limitation of proteomic studies of plasma samples is the large difference in the macromolecule abundance, with concentration spanning at least 10 orders of magnitude. To improve the coverage of plasma contents, we performed a deep proteomic analysis of plasma from 10 COVID-19 patients with severe/fatal pneumonia compared to 10 COVID-19 patients with pneumonia who did not require ICU admission (non-ICU). To this aim, plasma samples were first depleted of the most abundant proteins, trypsin digested and peptides subjected to a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation before LC-MS analysis.These results highlighted an increase of proteins involved in neutrophil and platelet activity and acute phase response, which is significantly higher in severe/fatal COVID-19 patients when compared to non-ICU ones. Importantly, these changes are associated with a selective induction of complement cascade factors in severe/fatal COVID-19 patients. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036491. Among these alterations, we confirmed by ELISA that higher levels of the neutrophil granule proteins DEFA3 and LCN2 are present in COVID-19 patients requiring ICU admission when compared to non-ICU and healthy donors.Altogether, our study provided an in-depth view of plasma proteome changes that occur in COVID-19 patients in relation to disease severity, which can be helpful to identify therapeutic strategies to improve the disease outcome.

### Keywords
Plasma, Proteomics, Neutrophils, Sars cov 2, Complement, Platelets

### Affiliations
Department of Epidemiology, Preclinical Research and Advanced Diagnostics, National Institute for Infectious Diseases IRCCS “L. Spallanzani”, Rome, Italy.
INMI IRCCS Lazzaro Spallanzani

### Submitter
Fabiola Ciccosanti

### Lab Head
Dr Gian Maria Fimia
Department of Epidemiology, Preclinical Research and Advanced Diagnostics, National Institute for Infectious Diseases IRCCS “L. Spallanzani”, Rome, Italy.


