### Accession
PXD012732

### Title
CDC14B interactome - The proteomic approach aimed at the identification of interaction partners for the human dual phosphatase and tumor suppressor CDC14B by Co-inmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments. In this approach, CDC14B interactomes from unsynchronized and G2/M enriched cells were compared semi-quantitatively based on spectral counting. This approach yielded the deubiquitylase USP9X as a G2/M-specific CDC14B interactor which has been confirmed by Western-blot (WB).

### Description
The proteomic approach aimed at the identification of interaction partners for the human dual phosphatase and tumor suppressor CDC14B by Co-inmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments. In this approach, CDC14B interactomes from unsynchronized and G2/M enriched cells were compared semi-quantitatively based on spectral counting. This approach yielded the deubiquitylase USP9X as a G2/M-specific CDC14B interactor which has been confirmed by Western-blot (WB).

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells overexpressing Tandem-Strep-single-FLAG-CDC14B (SF-CDC14B) or empty vector were lysed in buffer containing Tris /HCl 50mM, NaCl 150mM, EDTA 1mM, NP40 0.1%, MgCl2 5mM, Glycerol 5% and protease inhibitors. After immunoprecipitation, beads were washed four times in Tris-buffered saline (TBS)-buffer prior to elution of the proteins using FLAG peptide (Sigma, #F4799) at a final concentration of 300 µg/ml. MS sample preparation was performed as described previously (Gloeckner, Boldt, and Ueffing 2009). Briefly, precipitated eluates were re-dissolved in 50mM Ammoniumbicarbonate pH8.0 supplemented with 0.2% RapiGestTM (Waters) surfactant and reduced/ alkylated by DTT/ Iodoacetamide prior to overnight proteolysis with trypsin (Promega). Proteolysis was followed by hydrolysis of the surfactant by TFA according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, all samples were desalted with StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Vacum-dried samples were re-dissolved in 0.5% TFA. MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate3000 nano high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nano spray ion source as previously described (Meixner et al. 2011): Tryptic peptide mixtures were automatically injected and loaded at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 95% buffer C (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade water) and 5% buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water) onto a nano trap column (100 µm i.d.  2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings). After 5 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 µm i.d. 15 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings) by a linear gradient from 5% to 40% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 140 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 40% to 100% buffer B in 5 min. The eluting peptides were analysed an LTQ Orbitrap XL instrument. From the high-resolution MS prescan with a mass range of 300 to 1500, the ten most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 200 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for CID was set to a value of 35 and the resulting fragments were detected with normal resolution in the linear ion trap. The lock mass option was activated and a background signal with a mass of 445.120020 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation, was excluded for 30 s by dynamic exclusion. References: Gloeckner, C. J., K. Boldt, and M. Ueffing. 2009. 'Strep/FLAG tandem affinity purification (SF-TAP) to study protein interactions', Curr Protoc Protein Sci, Chapter 19: Unit19 20. Meixner, A., K. Boldt, M. Van Troys, M. Askenazi, C. J. Gloeckner, M. Bauer, J. A. Marto, C. Ampe, N. Kinkl, and M. Ueffing. 2011. 'A QUICK screen for Lrrk2 interaction partners--leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 is involved in actin cytoskeleton dynamics', Mol Cell Proteomics, 10: M110 001172.

### Data Protocol
For publication, RAW data have been re-analysed with recent software versions. MS/MS spectra have been extracted from RAW files in the MGF format by msconvert (ProteoWizard release 3.0.6938; 2014-11-25) and were searched with Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.5.1) using Mascot Daemon. The search was performed against the human subset of the SwissProt database (release 2016_08; 20177 entries) with the following settings: Carbamidomethyl as fixed and Methionine oxidation and Deamidation (Glutamine/ Asparagine) as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al. 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A semi-quantitative comparison was done based on spectral counts. References: Keller, A., A. I. Nesvizhskii, E. Kolker, and R. Aebersold. 2002. 'Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search', Anal Chem, 74: 5383-92. Nesvizhskii, A. I., A. Keller, E. Kolker, and R. Aebersold. 2003. 'A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry', Anal Chem, 75: 4646-58.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mitosis secures cellular integrity and its failure critically contributes to the development, maintenance, and treatment resistance of cancer. In yeast, the dual phosphatase Cdc14 controls mitotic progression by antagonizing Cdk1-mediated protein phosphorylation. By contrast, specific mitotic functions of the mammalian Cdc14 orthologue CDC14B have remained largely elusive. Here, we find that CDC14B antagonizes CDK1-mediated activating mitotic phosphorylation of the deubiquitinase USP9X at serine residue 2563, which we show to be essential for USP9X to mediate mitotic survival. Starting from an unbiased proteome-wide screening approach, we specify Wilms' tumor protein 1 (WT1) as the relevant substrate that becomes deubiquitylated and stabilized by serine 2563-phosphorylated USP9X in mitosis. We further demonstrate that WT1 functions as a mitotic transcription factor and specify CXCL8/IL-8 as a target gene of WT1 that conveys mitotic survival. Together, we describe a ubiquitin-dependent signaling pathway that directs a mitosis-specific transcription program to regulate mitotic survival.

### Keywords
Usp9x, Cdc14b

### Affiliations
1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
DZNE

### Submitter
Johannes Gloeckner

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Johannes Gloeckner
1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany


