### Accession
PXD023989

### Title
Phase separation and stress granule association of SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid protein

### Description
The current work identified the protein interactors of SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid RNA binding protein (NCAP or N protein) in lung cancer A-549 cells, using a co-immunoprecipitation strategy, which is coupled with SILAC-based mass spec. A significant proportion of the identified NCAP interacting proteins included stress granule (SG) and immunoregulators. SG nucleator G3BP1 showed specific interaction wit NCAP in unstressed and oxidative- or heat-stressed cells. Following stress treatment, NCAP showed enhanced association with SGs. Recombinant NCAP exhibited in vitro liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS)to form liquid droplets. RNA stimulated NCAP to develop droplets in vitro and SG assembly in cells, and RNase A treatment completely blocked both of these functions. An RNA intercalating mitoxantrone disrupted NCAP assembly in SGs invitro and in cells. This study provides insight into the biological processes and biophysical properties of the SARS-CoV-2 NCAP and identifies a candidate way to target this protein.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were maintained in RPMI media without arginine and lysine and supplemented with light (R0K0) or heavy (R10K8) amino acids, dialyzed fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were maintained in SILAC media for a minimum of 5 cell divisions to achieve >95% incorporation of labelled amino acids. Mass spec analysis of sample lysates from the labelled cells confirmed the incorporation of heavy amino acids. Four sets of cell culture conditions were established: In the first two sets, cells growing in heavy amino acid media were transfected with the control plasmid (GFP-His-Heavy-UT), and cells growing in light amino acid media were transfected with NCAP plasmid (NCAP-GFP-His-Light-UT), and these cells were kept as untreated. In the second set of cells, the plasmid transfections were reversed, i.e., cells growing in light amino acid media were transfected with the control plasmid (GFP-His-Light-ARS), and cells growing in heavy amino acid media were transfected with NCAP plasmid (NCAP-GFP-His-Heavy-ARS), and these cells were treated with 100 uM arsenite for 1 h. Cell lysates were prepared from all conditions, and an equal amount of proteins were incubated with anti-His antibodies to pulldown the tagged proteins from respective conditions. The immunoprecipitated samples from different conditions were mixed to generate three samples (GFP-His-Heavy-UT: NCAP-GFP-His-Light-UT, GFP-His-Light-ARS: NCAP-GFP-His-Heavy-ARS, and NCAP-GFP-His-Light-UT: NCAP-GFP-His-Heavy-ARS. The samples were processed using established methods, and analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS platform (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer™ Software - Thermo Fisher Scientific.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ncap, Sars-cov-2, Silac mass spec, Nucleocapsid

### Affiliations
Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, Canada
Vancouver Prostate Centre

### Submitter
Syam Prakash Somasekharan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Syam Prakash Somasekharan
Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, Canada


