### Accession
PXD006026

### Title
Identification of alternative splice variants using unique isoform-specific tryptic peptide sequences for database searches

### Description
Alternative splicing is a mechanism in eukaryotes by which different forms of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are generated from the same gene. Identification of alternative splice variants requires the identification of peptides specific for alternative splice forms. For this purpose, we generated a human database which contains only proteotypic tryptic peptides specific for alternative splice forms from Swiss-Prot entries. Using this database allows an easy access to the peptide sequences that matches the unique amino acid sequence of splice variants to MS data. Furthermore, we combined this database without isoform 1-specific peptides with human Swiss-Prot. This combined database can be used as a general database for searching of LC-MS data. LC-MS data derived from in-solution digests of two different cell lines (LNCaP, HeLa), and phosphoproteomics studies were analyzed using these two databases. Several non-isoform 1-specific peptides were found in both cell lines, some of them seemed to be cell line specific. Control and apoptotic phosphoproteomes from Jurkat T cells revealed several non-isoform 1-specific peptides and some of them showed clear quantitative differences between the two states.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion of various cell line samples.  Enrichment of phosphopeptides. LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed to generate peak list in Mascot generic format (*.mgf) using ProteoWizard release version 3.0.7230. Database searches were performed using Mascot in-house version 2.4.0 to search the canonical SwissProt (Human, 20187 sequences), canonical & isoform SwissProt (Human, 42,144 sequences, 24,279,941 residues), SwissProt-plus isoform ≠ 1 (Human, 44,471, 11,826,192 residues), and the isoform specific database (Human, 74,259 sequences, 1,434,844 residues) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and oxidation of methionines, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing is a mechanism in eukaryotes by which different forms of mRNAs are generated from the same gene. Identification of alternative splice variants requires the identification of peptides specific for alternative splice forms. For this purpose, we generated a human database that contains only unique tryptic peptides specific for alternative splice forms from Swiss-Prot entries. Using this database allows an easy access to splice variant-specific peptide sequences that match to MS data. Furthermore, we combined this database without alternative splice variant-1-specific peptides with human Swiss-Prot. This combined database can be used as a general database for searching of LC-MS data. LC-MS data derived from in-solution digests of two different cell lines (LNCaP, HeLa) and phosphoproteomics studies were analyzed using these two databases. Several nonalternative splice variant-1-specific peptides were found in both cell lines, and some of them seemed to be cell-line-specific. Control and apoptotic phosphoproteomes from Jurkat T cells revealed several nonalternative splice variant-1-specific peptides, and some of them showed clear quantitative differences between the two states.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Phosphorylation, Proteoform, Proteomics, Isoforms, Protein species, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
University of Oslo Department of Biosciences

### Submitter
Christian Koehler

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
University of Oslo Department of Biosciences


