### Accession
PXD003595

### Title
Characterization of the human urinary proteome and peptidome

### Description
Urine represents an ideal source of clinically relevant biomarkers since it contains a large number of proteins and low molecular weight peptides. Characterization of the normal urinary proteome and peptidome can serve as a reference for disease and can aid in biomarker discovery. Proteomic and peptidomic analysis of urine can also provide insight into normal physiology and disease pathology, especially for urogenital diseases. We developed an integrated proteomic and peptidomic analytical protocol for normal urine. We employed ultrafiltration to separate protein and peptide fractions, which were analyzed separately using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. By analyzing six urines from healthy individuals, we identified 1754 proteins by proteomic analysis and 4543 endogenous peptides, arising from 566 proteins by peptidomic analysis. Overall, we identified 2091 non-redundant proteins by this integrated approach. In silico protease activity analysis indicated that metalloproteases are predominantly involved in the generation of the endogenous peptide signature. In addition, a number of proteins that were detected in normal urine have previously been implicated in various urological malignancies, including bladder cancer and renal cell carcinoma. Thus, this study can provide a reference for assessing alterations in cancer-specific biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection The study was approved by the Research Ethics Board of St. Michael’s Hospital. Approximately 20-50 mL of second morning, mid-stream urine was collected from 3 healthy female volunteers (65-79 years of age) and 3 healthy male volunteers (62-75 years of age) using a self-sampling method (Supplemental Table 1). All subjects included in the study had no history of kidney-related or systemic disease. All urine specimens were individually processed in parallel using the same reagents and columns to minimize bias in sample preparation. Following the addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (CompleteTM; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim Germany) the samples were centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 minutes at 4˚C to remove cellular debris. To minimize the impact of freeze thaw cycles, urine samples were aliquoted and immediately frozen at -80 ˚C until further processing. A 200 µL volume of urine was used to measure creatinine concentration and total protein.  Proteomic and peptidomic sample preparation Urine samples were thawed on ice and vortexed to resuspend any precipitate. The samples were centrifuged at 2000 g. Urine volumes were normalized with respect to 90 μmol of creatinine per sample (~3-10 mL per individual). The pH of the urine samples was adjusted to 8.0 by dropwise addition of 0.5 mol/L ammonium bicarbonate. The urine was then concentrated using Vivaspin 20 10kDa cut-off membranes (Sartorius Stedim Biotech), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The device was initially flushed with 10 mL Millipore water. The retentate (containing high molecular weight proteins) was recovered and stored at -20˚C overnight for processing the next day. A final concentration of 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the filtrate samples and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, which was followed by alkylation with 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes. Filtrate samples were then acidified by dropwise addition of formic acid to pH 4.0. Acidified samples were passed through a hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced reversed-phase cartridge (Oasis HLB). The cartridge (1cc (30 mg); Waters cat# WAT094225) was pre-equilibrated with 1 mL 90% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid, and 0.02% TFA. The cartridge was washed with 15 mL buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid and 0.02% TFA). The acidified sample was then loaded and washed with 15 mL of buffer A. Peptides were eluted by adding 700 µL of 60% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, 0.02% TFA. Eluted samples were then mixed with equal volumes of ethyl acetate and centrifuged at 17, 000 g for 5 minutes. The upper layer was discarded and the sample was reduced to a volume of 200 μL using the Speedvac system. Peptide samples were then stored at -20˚C until further processing. The next day retentate samples were thawed on ice and vortexed. Retentate samples were assayed using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) to determine the protein concentration. An equal mass of protein (200 µg) was collected from each sample and brought to a total volume of 100 µL using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Powdered urea was added to each tube to a final concentration of 8M for protein denaturation. A final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the retentate samples and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, which was then followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetemide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 50mM ABC to reduce the urea concentration to 2M. The samples were then digested with trypsin (50:1 protein/trypsin) overnight at 37˚C. Trypsin digestion was stopped the next day with formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. The samples were subsequently reduced to approximately 200μL using the Speedvac system. Trypsin-digested protein samples were then stored at -20˚C until further processing. Strong cation exchange chromatography  Both proteomic and peptidomic samples were re-suspended in 300 μL mobile phase A (0.26M formic acid in 5% acetonitrile). The samples were injected into a PolySUFLOETHYL A column with a 200-Å pore size and diameter of 5 μm (The Nest Group) containing a hydrophilic, anionic polymer (poly-2-sulfoethyl aspartamide). A 60 minute linear gradient separation was performed on an HPLC system (Agilent 1100) using mobile phase B (0.26M formic acid in 5% ACN and 1 M ammonium formate). The eluate was monitored at a wavelength of 280 nm. In total, 26 fractions per sample were collected for proteomics. Fractions 11-21 were pooled (Frs. 11-13, 14-17, and 18-21). In addition, twelve fractions per sample were collected for peptidomics. Fractions 3-9 were pooled (Frs. 3-5, 6, and 7-9). Fractions for both proteomic and peptidomic analysis were collected at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/minute.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Both the proteomic and peptidomic raw data were analyzed in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 with the integrated Andromeda search engine [25]. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against a reverted version of the SwissProt human database (version January 2015) for proteomic analysis and a randomized version for peptidomic analysis. Label-free quantification was carried out as described by Luber et al. [26]. Briefly, protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity [27].  For proteomic analysis carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and protein N-acetylation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the digestion method. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for proteomic analysis. For peptidomic analysis carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and oxidized proline were set as variable modifications. An unspecific enzyme search was selected as the digestion method. A maximum of fifty missed cleavages were allowed for peptidomic analysis.  For both proteomic and peptidomic analyses, the initial mass tolerance for protein identification for MS peaks was 20 ppm and for MS/MS peaks was <5 ppm [28]. Both the peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate was specified at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Protease activity analysis, Urinary peptidome, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Urinary proteome, Peptidomics, Peptide sequence alignment

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Section Head of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Mount Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ashley Di Meo

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios P. Diamandis
Section Head of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Mount Sinai Hospital


