### Accession
PXD003983

### Title
Hemi-methylated DNA regulates DNA methylation inheritance through allosteric control of H3 ubiquitylation by UHRF1

### Description
DNA methylation is a heritable chromatin modification essential to mammalian development that functions with histone post-translational modifications to regulate chromatin structure and gene expression programs. The epigenetic inheritance of DNA methylation requires the combined actions of DNMT1 and UHRF1, a histone- and DNA-binding RING E3 ubiquitin ligase that facilitates DNMT1 recruitment to sites of newly replicated DNA through the ubiquitylation of histone H3. UHRF1 binds DNA with modest selectivity towards hemi-methylated CpG dinucleotides (HeDNA); however, the contribution of HeDNA sensing to UHRF1 function remains elusive. Here, we reveal that the interaction of UHRF1 with HeDNA is required for DNA methylation inheritance but is dispensable for chromatin interaction, which is governed by reciprocal positive cooperativity between the UHRF1 histone- and DNA-binding domains. We further show that HeDNA functions as an allosteric regulator of UHRF1 ubiquitin ligase activity, directing ubiquitylation towards multiple lysines on the H3 tail adjacent to the UHRF1 histone-binding site. Collectively, our studies define a highly orchestrated epigenetic control mechanism involving modifications both to histones and DNA that facilitate UHRF1 chromatin targeting, H3 ubiquitylation, and DNA methylation inheritance.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of mass spec samples: 20 μg of Hela extracted mononuclesomes (Epichyper #16-0002) were used as substrate in each ubiquitylation reaction supplied with either HeDNA or UnDNA for 2 hours. The reactions were placed on ice, treated with Universal Nuclease (Thermo, 1:5,000), and the ubiquitylated products were immunoprecipitated with FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma). The resin was washed 3x with 1 mL of wash buffer (HEPES, pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl), split in half, and the beads were transferred to spin columns (Vivacon) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). Half of the sample was reacted with proprionic anhydride (Alfa Aesar) using a modified version of this procedure(Lin and Garcia, 2012). 100 μl of a 1:3 ratio of proprionic anhydride diluted in 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0 was added to each spin column followed by 50 μl NH4OH to adjust the pH to 8.0. Each reaction was incubated for 30 min at 30C before being spun through the column. This protocol was repeated to ensure complete proprionylation of free lysines in the sample. The proprionylated and unreacted samples were then digested on resin using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) digested at 37C for 2 hours. This mixture was analyzed with LC-MS/MS without proprionylation of the free amines exposed after trypsin digestion.  The peptide mixture was analyzed in positive mode using a nanoAquity UPLC coupled LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation used a 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim® PepMap 100) and a 15 cm EASY-spray analytical column (75 μm ID, C18 beads of 3.0 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size). The HPLC flow rate was set to 350 nL/min over a gradient of 1% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B in 150 min. The full mass scan (300 to 2000 m/z) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with a maximum injection time of 500 ms, and MS/MS was performed in a data-dependent manner for the top 15 intense ions in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzXML format using ProteoWizard(Kessner et al., 2008) and searched using the Crux pipeline(McIlwain et al., 2014) (version 2.1.16867) against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot sequence database  (downloaded on 2/20/15)(Boutet et al., 2007). Search parameters were set as the following: peptides between 6 and 25 amino acids long with a precursor mass tolerance of 0.5 amu, no missed cleavages, fully-enzymatic Arg-C digestion, a static propionyl modification (+56.026215) on lysines, and a maximum of 4 variable modifications consisting of up to 2 lysine ubiquitinations (+58.016716), 2 methylations (+14.01565), 2 dimethylations (-27.994915), 2 trimethylations (-13.979264), 2 acetylations (-14.015644), 1 methionine oxidation (+15.99492), and 1 STY phosphorylation (+79.966331). The mass of propionyl was subtracted from variable lysine modification masses (except methylation) due to the already applied static propionyl modification. For unpropionylated samples, the differing parameters were: up to 3 missed cleavages, fully-enzymatic trypsin digestion, no static modifications, and a maximum of 4 variable modifications consisting of up to 2 lysine ubiquitinations (+114.042931), 2 methylations (+14.01565), 2 dimethylations (+28.0313), 2 trimethylations (+42.046951), 2 acetylations (+42.010571), 1 methionine oxidation (+15.99492), and 1 STY phosphorylation (+79.966331). Prior to execution of the Percolator algorithm supplied by Crux, deltaCn scores were re-computed using an alternate definition: deltaCni = 1 – ((xcorr1-xcorri) / xcorr1). This adjustment was performed because the similar mass of trimethylation and acetylation results in identical xcorr values for the low mass accuracy MS/MS spectra from linear ion traps, which then led to invalid deltaCn values with the default equation used by Percolator. After application of a 5% FDR threshold, peptides were further filtered by ensuring they had the expected retention time relative to peptides having the identical unmodified sequence. We used the following procedure. First, peptides with the same unmodified sequence were sorted in ascending order by their Percolator PEP (posterior error probability). Then, each peptide (starting from lowest to highest PEP) was accepted if at least one of its MS/MS scan’s retention time was consistent relative to all currently accepted peptides having the same unmodified sequence. The expected relative retention time constraints were: ubiquitin < dimethyl  <= trimethyl < acetyl < propionyl < methyl, oxidation < unmodified, and phosphorylation <= unmodified. Peptides expected to have the same retention times were allowed to elute within 2 min of each other. Finally, peptide H3K9me3 + K14ub was accepted after manual inspection of its corresponding MS/MS spectra, isotopic distribution, and its consistent retention time despite being above the 5% FDR threshold. Quantification was performed within Skyline(MacLean et al., 2010) and the results were exported for further visualization and analysis using the R programming language.

### Publication Abstract
The epigenetic inheritance of DNA methylation requires UHRF1, a histone- and DNA-binding RING E3 ubiquitin ligase that recruits DNMT1 to sites of newly replicated DNA through ubiquitylation of histone H3. UHRF1 binds DNA with selectivity towards hemi-methylated CpGs (HeDNA); however, the contribution of HeDNA sensing to UHRF1 function remains elusive. Here, we reveal that the interaction of UHRF1 with HeDNA is required for DNA methylation but is dispensable for chromatin interaction, which is governed by reciprocal positive cooperativity between the UHRF1 histone- and DNA-binding domains. HeDNA recognition activates UHRF1 ubiquitylation towards multiple lysines on the H3 tail adjacent to the UHRF1 histone-binding site. Collectively, our studies are the first demonstrations of a DNA-protein interaction and an epigenetic modification directly regulating E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. They also define an orchestrated epigenetic control mechanism involving modifications both to histones and DNA that facilitate UHRF1 chromatin targeting, H3 ubiquitylation, and DNA methylation inheritance.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Ubiquitin, Dna methylation, Uhrf1, Histone h3 ubiquitylation, Epigenetics, Ring e3 ligase

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Center for Epigenetics Van Andel Research Institute Grand Rapics, Michigan 49503, USA

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Rothbart
Center for Epigenetics Van Andel Research Institute Grand Rapics, Michigan 49503, USA


