### Accession
PXD022529

### Title
Biomarkers of pediatric cataracts: a proteomics analysis of aqueous fluid

### Description
Abstract Background: Cataracts are among the most common causes of childhood vision loss worldwide. This study seeks to identify differentially expressed proteins in the aqueous humor of pediatric cataract patients.   Methods: Samples of aqueous humor were collected from pediatric and adult cataract patients and underwent mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. Samples of pediatric cataracts were grouped by subtype and compared to adult samples. Differentially expressed proteins in each subtype were identified. Gene ontology analysis was performed using WikiPaths for each cataract subtype.  Results: Seven pediatric patients and ten adult patients were included in the study. Of the pediatric samples, all seven (100%) were male, three (43%) had traumatic cataracts, two (29%) had congenital cataracts, and two (29%) had posterior polar cataracts. Of the adult patients, seven (70%) were female and seven (70%) had predominantly nuclear sclerotic cataracts. 128 proteins were upregulated in the pediatric samples and 127 proteins were upregulated in the adult samples, with 75 proteins shared by both groups. Gene ontology analysis identified inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways as upregulated in pediatric cataracts. Conclusions: Inflammatory and oxidative stress mechanisms may be involved in pediatric cataract formation and warrant further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation and SDS-Gel Purification Protein concentration of hAH samples was determined by Bradford Protein Assay and ~20µg of sample (7 to 10 µL) was loaded onto a 12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and run for 6 min at 200V resulting in a ~2cm “gel plug”.  The gel was stained with Imperial Stain (Pierce) for 1hr at room temperature, and destained overnight in dH2O at 4° C. The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised as follows.   In-gel trypsinization and LC-MS/MS sample preparation Gel Samples were excised by sterile razor blade and chopped into ~1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in distilled H2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 and 10 μL of 200 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl at 37° C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer and allowed to react in the dark at 20° C for 30 minutes. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37° C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme-protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted first with 5% formic acid, then with 75% ACN:5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried. Digested peptides were cleaned up on a C18 column (Pierce), speed vacuumed and sent for LC-MS/MS to the Proteomics Core at Mayo Clinic.  HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were resuspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3-16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3-12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μL C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nL/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%-95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition and analysis The samples were analyzed via data-dependent electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360-2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the SPROT Human database (Download 5/1/2020 with isoforms) *.fasta sequence, using the following criteria: Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was selected for Quantitation with a minimum of 1 high confidence peptide to assign LFQ Intensities. Trypsin was selected as the protease with maximum missing cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (N-term), Deamidation (NQ). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ Intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and reported in the proteinGroups.txt. The proteingroups.txt file was processed in Perseus (version 1.6.7). Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. LFQ peak intensities were Log2 transformed, median normalized and missing values were imputed via default settings in Perseus. The data was then grouped via patient age into Peds or Adult and Log2 ratio was determined (Peds/Adult) and significance determined at 20% up or down.  Peds significant hits were >= 0.26, Adult significant hits were <= -0.32 and any remaining hits were groups into a common bin. Systems biology analysis was performed in DAVID.

### Publication Abstract
Cataracts are among the most common causes of childhood vision loss worldwide. This study seeks to identify differentially expressed proteins in the aqueous humor of pediatric cataract patients. Samples of aqueous humor were collected from pediatric and adult cataract patients and subjected to mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. Samples of pediatric cataracts were grouped by subtype and compared to adult samples. Differentially expressed proteins in each subtype were identified. Gene ontology analysis was performed using WikiPaths for each cataract subtype. Seven pediatric patients and ten adult patients were included in the study. Of the pediatric samples, all seven (100%) were male, three (43%) had traumatic cataracts, two (29%) had congenital cataracts, and two (29%) had posterior polar cataracts. Of the adult patients, seven (70%) were female and seven (70%) had predominantly nuclear sclerotic cataracts. A total of 128 proteins were upregulated in the pediatric samples, and 127 proteins were upregulated in the adult samples, with 75 proteins shared by both groups. Gene ontology analysis identified inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways as upregulated in pediatric cataracts. Inflammatory and oxidative stress mechanisms may be involved in pediatric cataract formation and warrant further investigation.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Lfq, Pediatric cataracts; proteomics; aqueous humor

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sarah Hilkert Rodrigue, MD, MPH
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL.


### SDRF

