### Accession
PXD030209

### Title
XL-MS data of BAM and SurA binding

### Description
We present XL-MS data of the BAM:SurA complex to define the interaction sites for SurA on BAM

### Sample Protocol
10 μM of BAM with 10 uM of SurA was buffer exchanged into 10 mM potassium phosphate, 150 mM sodium chloride, pH 8.0, 0.02 % DDM. DSBU was added at a final concentration of 500 μM and the crosslinking reaction was allowed to proceed for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5). The crosslinked proteins were precipitated using chloroform–methanol, as previously described ref and the proteins were resuspended in rapigest (Waters) (1 % (w/v) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 10 μl). Dithiothreitol (50 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 10 μl) was then added and the mixture was incubated at 37 ºC for 1 h. Next, iodoacetamide (100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 10 μl) was added and the mixture was incubated at 37 ºC for a further 1 h. Finally, trypsin was added to the reduced and alkylated protein (1:50 w/w enzyme:protein, Promega) along with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (70 μl) and the mixture was then incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The desalted peptides were evaporated to dryness, and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroethanol (50 μl). The peptides were then analysed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Peptides (3 μl) were injected onto a 30 cm capillary emitter column (inner diameter 75 μm, packed with 3-μm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18 media, Dr Maisch) prepared in-house, and separated by gradient elution of 2-30 % (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) over 60 min at 300 nL.min−1. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with precursor fragmentation performed by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation. Each high-resolution scan (m/z range 500–1500, R = 60,000) was followed by 10 product ion scans (R = 15,000), using stepped normalised collision energies of 27, 30 and 33 %. Only precursor ions with charge states 3-7+ (inclusive) were selected for tandem MS. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Cross-link identification was performed using MeroX v2.0.1.4. A maximum of two of the four marker ions, corresponding to fragmentation of the crosslinker, were allowed to be missing in the database search, the mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and the false discovery rate was set to 1 %. Manual verification of all spectra was performed to ensure correct assignment and that a significant degree of sequence coverage of each crosslinked peptide was present in the spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Correct folding of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) into the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria depends on delivery of unfolded OMPs to the &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machinery (BAM). How unfolded substrates are presented to BAM remains elusive, but the major OMP chaperone SurA is proposed to play a key role. Here, we have used hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), crosslinking, in vitro folding and binding assays and computational modelling to show that the core domain of SurA and one of its two PPIase domains are key to the SurA-BAM interaction and are required for maximal catalysis of OMP folding. We reveal that binding causes changes in BAM and SurA conformation and/or dynamics distal to the sites of binding, including at the BamA &#x3b2;1-&#x3b2;16 seam. We propose a model for OMP biogenesis in which SurA plays a crucial role in OMP delivery and primes BAM to accept substrates for folding.

### Keywords
E coli, Sura, Crosslinking, Bam

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


