### Accession
PXD029164

### Title
Towards biorecycling of polyurethanes: Strategies of Pseudomonas capeferrum TDA1 for extra- and intracellular degradation

### Description
The continuing reports of plastic pollution in various ecosystems highlight the threat posed by the ever-increasing consumption of synthetic polymers. Therefore, Pseudomonas capeferrum TDA1, a strain recently isolated from a plastic dump site, was examined further regarding its ability to degrade polyurethane (PU) compounds. The previously reported degradation pathway for 2,4-toluene diamine (2,4-TDA), a precursor and degradation intermediate of PU, could be confirmed by RNA-seq in this organism. In addition, different cell fractions of cells grown on a PU oligomer were tested for extracellular hydrolytic activity using a standard assay. Strikingly, purified outer membrane vesicles (OMV) of P. capeferrum TDA1 grown on a PU oligomer showed higher esterase activity than cell pellets. Hydrolases in the OMV fraction possibly involved in extracellular PU degradation were identified by mass spectrometry. On this basis, we propose a model for extracellular degradation of polyester-based PUs by P. capeferrum TDA1 involving the role of OMVs in synthetic polymer degradation.

### Sample Protocol
OMV were isolated from P. capeferrum TDA1 samples grown on PU oligomer or succinate (as a negative control) as described previously. Samples were grown until an OD560 0.4-0.5. Cells were then harvested, and supernatant was filtered through a 0.45-µm pore size membrane (Sartorius AG, Göttingen, Germany). Then, isolation was carried out as detailed in Kadurugamuwa and Beveridge (1995). OMVs were harvested through ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 3 h at 4°C. Supernatant was then discarded and OMV pellet was resuspended with the remaining supernatant. Protein concentration was also obtained by Bradford measurement (BioRad). Relative values of OMV release were obtained as previously reported by comparing absolute OMV concentration after isolation to total bacterial protein.

### Data Protocol
Supernatants, cell pellets and OMVs from cultures with PU oligomer and succinate were harvested and processed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Before that, supernatants were precipitated with 10% TCA overnight and washed with ice-cold acetone. In the case of OMVs, an SDS was proven unnecessary, and samples were directly treated with trypsin. Peptide lysates were re-dissolved in water containing 0.1% formic acid (20 µL) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate source (Advion, Ithaca, NY, USA) in LC chip coupling mode. Peptide lysates were injected on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 5 μL/min by using 98% water/2% ACN 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 80 min. Mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 80% ACN/0.08% formic acid in water (B). Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search settings for the Sequest HT search engine were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The raw files were searched against the protein-coding sequences of Pseudomonas sp. TDA1 (Uniprot Proteome ID UP000476571). The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator embedded in Proteome Discoverer was set for the protein FDR (<1%).

### Publication Abstract
The continuing reports of plastic pollution in various ecosystems highlight the threat posed by the ever-increasing consumption of synthetic polymers. Therefore, Pseudomonas capeferrum TDA1, a strain recently isolated from a plastic dump site, was examined further regarding its ability to degrade polyurethane (PU) compounds. The previously reported degradation pathway for 2,4-toluene diamine, a precursor and degradation intermediate of PU, could be confirmed by RNA-seq in this organism. In addition, different cell fractions of cells grown on a PU oligomer were tested for extracellular hydrolytic activity using a standard assay. Strikingly, purified outer membrane vesicles (OMV) of P. capeferrum TDA1 grown on a PU oligomer showed higher esterase activity than cell pellets. Hydrolases in the OMV fraction possibly involved in extracellular PU degradation were identified by mass spectrometry. On this basis, we propose a model for extracellular degradation of polyester-based PUs by P. capeferrum TDA1 involving the role of OMVs in synthetic polymer degradation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Polyurethane degradation, Outer membrane vesicles, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


