### Accession
PXD025785

### Title
Sequence  analysis of Giardia virus proteins by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Giardiasis, caused by the protozoan parasite Giardia duodenalis, is an intestinal diarrheal disease affecting almost one billion people worldwide. A small endosymbiotic dsRNA viruses, G. lamblia virus (GLV), genus Giardiavirus, family Totiviridae, might inhabit human and animal isolates of G. duodenalis. Three GLV genomes have been sequenced so far, and only one was intensively studied, moreover a positive correlation between GLV and parasite virulence is yet to be proved. To understand the biological significance of GLV infection in Giardia, the characterization of several GLV strains from naturally infected G. duodenalis isolates is necessary. In the contest of high-throughput sequencing of four GLVs strains, from Giardia isolates of human and animal origin, we report on a new, unclassified viral sequence (designed GdRV-2), unrelated to Giardiavirus, encoding and expressing for a single large protein with a RdRp domain homologous to Totiviridae and Botybirnaviridae. We have analyzed the sequence of the GLV capsid protein (CP) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) by LC-MS/MS analysis using different enzymatic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Purified viral particles or protein extracts from G. duodenalis isolates infected with the virus, prepared as described above, were separated on 8% SDS-PAGE in Tris-glycine SDS buffer in duplicate. Separated proteins were either subject to immublot (see above paragraph) with anti-GLV-CP polyclonal serum (1:2000), to identify the CP and the CP/RdRp fusion proteins, or stained with Coomassie (Colloidal Blue Staining kit, Invitrogen). Coomassie stained protein bands corresponding to anti-GLV-CP positive bands were cut and treated with dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAM) and, finally, separated digestions were performed using the following different sequencing-grade enzymes: trypsin, (Promega Corporation, WI, United States), chymotrypsin, (Roche Diagnostics, Germany), GluC and AspN (Roche Diagnostics, Germany). Propionylation experiments were performed treating the dried gel bands with 10 µl solution containing 100 mM propionic anhydride in 2M NaCl and 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8 for 5min on ice. Then, 90 µl of 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer was added and the incubation proceeded for 25 min on ice. The reaction was quenched by adding 50mM Tris at pH 8.5 and the bands were subjected to 5 min long washes with Tris for three times and 20 min long washes with ammonium bicarbonate for other three times, before proceeding with DTT, IAM and trypsin digestion as described before. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After protein digestion, the peptides were desalted on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min before being separated onto a 20-cm-long silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective, MA, United States), packed in-house with a C18, 5μm, 100 Å resin (Michrom BioResources, CA, United States). A binary system of buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 5% water, and 0.1% formic acid) was adopted over a 60-minute gradient (from 5% to 30% of buffer B in 35 min, to 80% in 5 minutes, followed by washing and conditioning steps) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The peptide ionization was performed with a Flex-Spray ion nano-source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) held at 1,8 KV and with an inlet capillary at 275°C. Full-scan MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 K resolution, in a 350–1,550 m/z window f. Data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in the Orbitrap at 30 K resolution, in top speed mode with a 3 s cycle time, and dynamic exclusion enabled for 60 s. The most intense precursors were selected through a monoisotopic precursor selection filter and with charge > 1, isolated in the quadrupole in 1.6 m/z window, and fragmented by 30% normalized higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 4 × 105 for MS and 5 × 104 for MS/MS, with 50 ms for MS and dynamic max injection time for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A database including G. duodenalis database (GiardiaWB_DB-43_G intestinalis Assemblage AWB containing 9295 sequences downloaded from www.giardiadb.org), bovine database (6909 sequences downloaded from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot), and the Giardiavirus sequences of CP and CP/RdRp proteins from HP and CAT GLV were used to identify GLV proteins from trypsin digested samples. Semi-tryptic cleavage was considered for peptide identification and 1% FDR was allowed by Percolator node in PD workflow. The database containing the virus proteins was used in the search of peptides deriving from every enzymatic digestion to perform a multiconsensus view of the proteins coverage; no specific cleavage was selected and fixed value PSM validator node in the PD workflow was used. Precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The searches included fixed modifications for cysteine carbamydomethylation (+57.021464) and variable modifications for methionine oxidation (+15.9949), and N-acetylation (+42.010565) on protein terminus and N-propionylation on protein and peptide N-terminus (+ 56.026215).

### Publication Abstract
Giardiasis, caused by the protozoan parasite <i>Giardia duodenalis</i>, is an intestinal diarrheal disease affecting almost one billion people worldwide. A small endosymbiotic dsRNA viruses, <i>G. lamblia</i> virus (GLV), genus <i>Giardiavirus</i>, family <i>Totiviridae</i>, might inhabit human and animal isolates of <i>G. duodenalis</i>. Three GLV genomes have been sequenced so far, and only one was intensively studied; moreover, a positive correlation between GLV and parasite virulence is yet to be proved. To understand the biological significance of GLV infection in <i>Giardia</i>, the characterization of several GLV strains from naturally infected <i>G. duodenalis</i> isolates is necessary. Here we report high-throughput sequencing of four GLVs strains, from <i>Giardia</i> isolates of human and animal origin. We also report on a new, unclassified viral sequence (designed GdRV-2), unrelated to <i>Giardiavirus</i>, encoding and expressing for a single large protein with an RdRp domain homologous to <i>Totiviridae</i> and <i>Botybirnaviridae</i>. The result of our sequencing and proteomic analyses challenge the current knowledge on GLV and strongly suggest that viral capsid protein translation unusually starts with a proline and that translation of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) occurs via a +1/-2 ribosomal frameshift mechanism. Nucleotide polymorphism, confirmed by mass-spectrometry analysis, was also observed among and between GLV strains. Phylogenetic analysis indicated the occurrence of at least two GLV subtypes which display different phenotypes and transmissibility in experimental infections of a GLV na&#xef;ve <i>Giardia</i> isolate.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Giardia duodenalis, Giardiavirus

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
istituto superiore di sanità

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
istituto superiore di sanità


