### Accession
PXD035005

### Title
The anti-metastatic effect of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 inhibition in bladder cancer via p-AKT, p-ERK, p-Src and p-JNK pathway

### Description
To confirm the anti-metastatic effect in bladder cancer cell lines, the PDK4 gene was knocked down and phosphorylated protein changes were compared through LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
bladder cancer cell pellets lysed and collected protein. For enzymatic labeling, peptide were labeled 18O labeling after in-solution trypsin digestion. The labeled peptide mixtures were enriched using TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and Clean-up kit (Thermo) refer to the manufacturer’s instructions. Additionally, for clean-up peptide, desalted through SDB and GC tips (GC Science, Tokyo, Japan) according to instruction manual. Peptide samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo) coupled with an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) software against the UniProt Homo sapiens proteome database (2018). For the phosphoproteomics data, searched parameters were set as follows; 16O was set as light labels and 18O was set as heavy labels. Trypsin/P was chosen as protease and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Variable modifications included acetyl (protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and phospho (STY). In addition, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Protein false discovery ratio (FDR) was set at 0.01. Using the iGPS 1.0 software, the kinase substrate phosphorylation network (KSPN) was constructed by submitting differentially expressed phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Bladder cancer is a common global cancer with a high percentage of metastases and high mortality rate. Thus, it is necessary to identify new biomarkers that can be helpful in diagnosis. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) belongs to the PDK family and plays an important role in glucose utilization in living organisms. In the present study, we evaluated the role of PDK4 in bladder cancer and its related protein changes. First, we observed elevated PDK4 expression in high-grade bladder cancers. To screen for changes in PDK4-related proteins in bladder cancer, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis using PDK4 knockdown cells. In bladder cancer cell lines, PDK4 silencing resulted in a lower rate of cell migration and invasion. In addition, a PDK4 knockdown xenograft model showed reduced bladder cancer growth in nude mice. Based on our results, PDK4 plays a critical role in the metastasis and growth of bladder cancer cells through changes in ERK, SRC, and JNK.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University,  80 Daehak-ro, Buk-gu, Daegu 41566 Korea
Kyungpook National Univertisy

### Submitter
Eunji Sung

### Lab Head
Dr SangKyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University,  80 Daehak-ro, Buk-gu, Daegu 41566 Korea


