### Accession
PXD016479

### Title
Cytokine-induced GBP1 release from human ovarian cancer cells

### Description
Background: In previous studies we showed that IL-27 shares several effects with IFN-γ in human cancer cells. To identify novel extracellular mediators, potentially involved in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) biology, we analyzed the effect of IL-27 or IFN-γ on the secretome of EOC cells in culture.  Methods: The secretome of cytokine-treated or untreated SKOV3 cells was analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS and eluting peptides by an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. Extracellular GBP1 was studied by ELISA, immunoprecipitation, GTP-agarose pull-down, and Western blotting. GBP and STAT proteins were analysed on cell lysates by Western blot. GBP1 was transfected using lipofectamine reagent and cell viability measured by MTT assay. Results: IL-27 and IFN-γ modulate the extracellular release of a limited fraction of proteins that were also induced in the whole cell. Among these proteins we focused our attention on GBP1, a guanylate-binding protein and GTPase, which is a mediator of several biological activities of IFNs. Interestingly GBP1, 2, and 5 were induced by cytokine treatment in EOC cells, but only GBP1 was secreted. ELISA and immuno-blotting analyses showed that cytokine-stimulated EOC cells release full-length GBP1 molecule in vitro, through non-classical pathways, not involving microvesicles. Moreover, soluble, full-length GBP1 accumulates in the ascites of most EOC patients, suggesting a potential role of extracellular GBP1 in the tumor environment. EOC cells enriched from ascites showed constitutive tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT3 proteins and GBP1 expression, supporting a role of STAT-activating cytokines in GBP1 induction in vivo. Data from the TCGA dataset of EOC indicate that high GBP1 gene expression correlates with a better overall survival.  Accordingly GBP1 transfection reduced SKOV3 cell proliferation, suggesting a potential anti-tumor activity of GBP1. Conclusions: Our data show for the first time that soluble GBP1 is released by cytokine-stimulated EOC cells in vitro and accumulates in EOC patients’ ascites. GBP1 expression may have anti-tumor effects, in EOC, as suggested by TCGA dataset analysis and in vitro transfection experiments. Further studies to identify the biological role of soluble GBP1 in the tumor environment of EOC are warranted.

### Sample Protocol
The cell supernatants were precipitated with acetone and pellets were re-suspended in 25 µl of lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mMTris pH8.5). The samples were reduced, alkylated and lastly digested in a single step and then loaded into StageTip (Kulak 2014). Peptides were analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC with EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and with a 180 minute non-linear gradient of 5-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instruments, Bremen, Germany). Orbitrap detection was used for both MS1 and MS2 measurements at resolving powers of 120 K and 30 K (at m/z 200), respectively. Data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 2 sec. cycle time, during which precursors detected within the range of m/z 375−1500 were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.4 m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s. Automatic gain control targets were 2.5 × 10^5 for MS1 and 5 × 10^4 for MS2, with 50 and 60 ms maximum injection times, respectively. The signal intensity threshold for MS2 was 1 × 10^4. HCD was performed using 30% normalized collision energy. One Microscan was used for both MS1 and MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were subsequently processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 (Cox 2008) and a human database downloaded from UniProt (release 2016_02). For all processing, the default settings have been maintained. Lastly, quantification was performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (Cox 2014), enabling the ‘Match between runs’ option (time window 1 min) in order to compensate the effect of missing values

### Publication Abstract
We showed that IL-27 shares several effects with IFN-&#x3b3; in human cancer cells. To identify novel extracellular mediators, potentially involved in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) biology, we analyzed the effect of IL-27 or IFN-&#x3b3; on the secretome of cultured EOC cells by mass-spectrometry (nano-UHPLC-MS/MS). IL-27 and IFN-&#x3b3; modulate the release of a limited fraction of proteins among those induced in the whole cell. We focused our attention on GBP1, a guanylate-binding protein and GTPase, which mediates several biological activities of IFNs. Cytokine treatment induced GBP1, 2, and 5 expressions in EOC cells, but only GBP1 was secreted. ELISA and immunoblotting showed that cytokine-stimulated EOC cells release full-length GBP1 in vitro, through non-classical pathways, not involving microvesicles. Importantly, full-length GBP1 accumulates in the ascites of most EOC patients and ex-vivo EOC cells show constitutive tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1/3 proteins and GBP1 expression, supporting a role for Signal Transducer And Activator Of Transcription (STAT)-activating cytokines in vivo. High GBP1 gene expression correlates with better overall survival in the TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) dataset of EOC. In addition, GBP1 transfection partially reduced EOC cell viability in an MTT assay. Our data show for the first time that cytokine-stimulated tumor cells release soluble GBP1 in vitro and in vivo and suggest that GBP1 may have anti-tumor effects in EOC.

### Keywords
Microenvironment., Interleukin-27, Interferon-, Secretome, Guanosyl binding protein 1, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


