### Accession
PXD023052

### Title
Protein profile of commercial soybean milks analyzed by label-free quantitative proteomics

### Description
This study compared the protein profile of 15 different commercial soy milks using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. Proteins related to nutrient reservoir activity, endopeptidase inhibitor activity, lipid binding, and seed maturation contribute the most in terms of percentage mass. Their associated Gene Oontology terms are also enriched. Samples could be clustered into three groups based on their protein composition, with glycinins and beta-conglycinins being the most influential for determining the clustering. Amino acid composition estimated from the proteomics data also reflects the clustering of samples. Twenty allergenic proteins varying in abundance were identified, with Gly m 5 and Gly m 6 being the predominantly abundant allergens.

### Sample Protocol
Commercially available soy-based milk beverages used for this study were manufactured and commercialized by different companies and purchased at local supermarkets. Starting from 100 µl of soy milk for each sample, proteins were precipitated using one volume of 72% trichloroacetic acid added to four volumes of the soy milk samples. Following incubation on ice for 10 minutes, samples were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 15 minutes. After washing twice with two volumes of cold acetone (-20 °C), the protein pellets were air-dried and suspended in buffer A (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Protein concentration was quantified by Bradford assay.  Protein digestion was carried out using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method strating with 40 µg of proteins from each sample. Reduction was performed wtih DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide.  Proteins were digested at 37 °C overnight with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides samples were acidified with 1 µl of formic acid (FA) and diluted to 1 ml with 0.1% FA, before desalting with C18 cartridges (Sep-Pack, C18, Waters) according to manufacturer’s instructions.   Mass spectrometry analysis was performed with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were suspended in 80 μl of 3% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA and for each sample 1 µl (corresponding to 0.5 µg of digested proteins) was loaded into a trap column (NanoEase Symmetry300, C18, 5 µm, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min. The peptide mixture was separated in a pico-frit capillary column (11 cm, 75 µl internal ID, 15 µm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 material (Aeris Peptide 3.6 μm XB-C18, Phenomenex), using a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a linear gradient of ACN/0.1% FA from 3 to 40% in 40 minutes. Ion source capillary was set to 200 °C and spray voltage was fixed at 1.5-1.6 kV. The instrument operated in a data-dependent mode, with a full scan in the Orbitrap (60000 resolution) in the 300-1700 m/z range, followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions acquired at lower resolution in the linear trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant software v.1.5.1.2. Proteins search was performed against the Soybean section of the UniProt database (Glycine max, version 2018-06-21), concatenated with the Cocoa section (Theobroma cacao, version 2018-06-21), and the Almond section (Prunus dulcis, version 2018-06-21). Trypsin was set as enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. A false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, both at the peptide and protein level, was used to filter the results. A minimum of two peptides was required for protein identification. To evaluate the relative protein abundance within samples, the Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) parameter calculated by the software waw used.

### Publication Abstract
The consumption of soy milk is increasing worldwide for its nutritional value and health benefits, however, its protein composition after commercialization is not well known. Technological and thermal treatments to which soy milk is subjected could affect the protein composition of the commercial products. This study compared the protein profile of 15 different commercial soy milks using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. Proteins related to nutrient reservoir activity, endopeptidase inhibitor activity, lipid binding, and seed maturation contribute the most in terms of percentage mass. Their associated Gene Ontology terms are also enriched. Samples clustered into three groups based on their protein composition, with glycinins and beta-conglycinins being the most influential for determining the clustering. Amino acid composition estimated from the proteomics data also reflects the clustering of samples. Twenty allergenic proteins varying in abundance were identified, with Gly m 5 and Gly m 6 being the predominantly abundant allergens.

### Keywords
Plant-based milk; soy milk; soy drink; proteomics; allergen; functional drink/beverage

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


