### Accession
PXD036904

### Title
Formation of ER-lumenal intermediates during export of Plasmodium proteins containing transmembrane-like hydrophobic sequences

### Description
REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:DSLE is exported and is diffusely localised in the red blood cell cytoplasm (Fig 3A). Mutation of the PEXEL sequence (REX3AQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:DSLE), results in the protein being retained in the parasite (Fig 3C), and addition of a C-terminal SDEL sequence (REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL) also leads to retention of the protein within the parasite (Fig 3B). Given that REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL is retained within the parasite, this indicates that the C-terminus of the protein is in the ER lumen. To determine the location of the N-terminal end of this ER-retained protein, it was purified for tryptic digestion and analysis by mass spectrometry. The most N-terminal peptides retrieved corresponded to N-acetylated and non-acetylated SEPVVEEQDLK and SEPVVEEQDLKK. These peptides correspond to the expected N-terminal sequence following PEXEL cleavage by Plasmepsin V, indicating that the N-terminus of this protein is also in the ER-lumen. These data indicate that both N- and C-terminal ends of REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL are located within the ER lumen and consequently that in the context of this protein, the putative transmembrane segment of Pf332 has a propensity to translocate into the ER lumen rather than integrate into the ER membrane.

### Sample Protocol
REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:DSLE is exported and is diffusely localised in the red blood cell cytoplasm (Fig 3A). Mutation of the PEXEL sequence (REX3AQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:DSLE), results in the protein being retained in the parasite (Fig 3C), and addition of a C-terminal SDEL sequence (REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL) also leads to retention of the protein within the parasite (Fig 3B). Given that REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL is retained within the parasite, this indicates that the C-terminus of the protein is in the ER lumen. To determine the location of the N-terminal end of this ER-retained protein, it was purified for tryptic digestion and analysis by mass spectrometry. The most N-terminal peptides retrieved corresponded to N-acetylated and non-acetylated SEPVVEEQDLK and SEPVVEEQDLKK. These peptides correspond to the expected N-terminal sequence following PEXEL cleavage by Plasmepsin V, indicating that the N-terminus of this protein is also in the ER-lumen. These data indicate that both N- and C-terminal ends of REX3RQLSE:Pf332:C-S11:SDEL are located within the ER lumen and consequently that in the context of this protein, the putative transmembrane segment of Pf332 has a propensity to translocate into the ER lumen rather than integrate into the ER membrane.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files (Waters) were searched using Progenesis using the following parameters: trypsin as the digestion enzyme, with up to 3 missed cleavages, and a parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Oxidation of Met and Acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl of Cys as a fixed modification for all searches.

### Publication Abstract
During the blood stage of a malaria infection, malaria parasites export both soluble and membrane proteins into the erythrocytes in which they reside. Exported proteins are trafficked via the parasite endoplasmic reticulum and secretory pathway, before being exported across the parasitophorous vacuole membrane into the erythrocyte. Transport across the parasitophorous vacuole membrane requires protein unfolding, and in the case of membrane proteins, extraction from the parasite plasma membrane. We show that trafficking of the exported Plasmodium protein, Pf332, differs from that of canonical eukaryotic soluble-secreted and transmembrane proteins. Pf332 is initially ER-targeted by an internal hydrophobic sequence that unlike a signal peptide, is not proteolytically removed, and unlike a transmembrane segment, does not span the ER membrane. Rather, both termini of the hydrophobic sequence enter the ER lumen and the ER-lumenal species is a productive intermediate for protein export. Furthermore, we show in intact cells, that two other exported membrane proteins, SBP1 and MAHRP2, assume a lumenal topology within the parasite secretory pathway. Although the addition of a C-terminal ER-retention sequence, recognised by the lumenal domain of the KDEL receptor, does not completely block export of SBP1 and MAHRP2, it does enhance their retention in the parasite ER. This indicates that a sub-population of each protein adopts an ER-lumenal state that is an intermediate in the export process. Overall, this suggests that although many exported proteins traverse the parasite secretory pathway as typical soluble or membrane proteins, some exported proteins that are ER-targeted by a transmembrane segment-like, internal, non-cleaved hydrophobic segment, do not integrate into the ER membrane, and form an ER-lumenal species that is a productive export intermediate. This represents a novel means, not seen in typical membrane proteins found in model systems, by which exported transmembrane-like proteins can be targeted and trafficked within the lumen of the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom
University College London

### Submitter
Georgina Charlton

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom


