### Accession
PXD041991

### Title
"Time-resolved quantitative proteomic analysis of the developing otic vesicle reveals putative congenital hearing loss candidates and a novel role for Tgfbi

### Description
A large number of congenital hearing loss cases have an unknown genetic etiology. So far, transcriptomic approaches have successfully identified many candidate regulators of otic development, little is known about the abundance of their protein products during the development of the inner eat. Herein we used a multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to determine temporal trends in protein abundances during inner ear (otic) development in Xenopus. Wild type Xenopus embryos were cultured to larval stages and their otic tissues were manually dissected at five stages that represent that represent key transitions in otic morphology. The samples were processed using a bottom-up proteomic workflow and analyzed using LC-MS3.The analysis revealed dynamic expression of proteins related to cytoskeletal regulation, integrin signaling, and the extracellular matrix as inner ear structures developed. We correlated the dynamically regulated proteins in our dataset with previously published putative downstream targets of syndromic hearing loss genes SIX1 and CHD7 to identify novel candidate genes for congenital hearing loss.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type Xenopus embryos were cultured to larval stages and their otic tissues were manually dissected at stages 34, 40, 42, 45, and 47 for shotgun MS analysis. Tissues were lysed and proteins were denatured and digested with trypsin. Peptides were labeled with isobaric mass tags per developmental stages and combined for multiplexed analysis. Labeled Peptide mixture was separated into seven fractiions using high pH reversed phase fractionation and each fraction was separated using reversed phase liquid chromatography.  Peptide ions were detected using a Orbitrap-quadrupole-ion trap tribrid high-resolution mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo) executing data dependent acquisition. Ions were surveyed at 60,000 FWMH resolution in the orbitrap mass analyzer (MS1) with following settings: maximum IT, 50 ms; AGC, 2×10 5 counts; microscans, 1. Tandem MS was activated with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in helium at 35% NCE. Fragment ions were detected in the ion trap with rapid scan rate with the following settings: maximum IT, 50 ms; AGC, 5×10 4 counts; microscans, 1. Multinotch MS3 fragmentation was triggered on the top 10 MS2 fragments with HCD in nitrogen (65% NCE). MS3 spectra were acquired at 15,000 FWMH in the Orbitrap (maximum IT, 120 ms; AGC, 1×105counts; microscans, 1). Fragment ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s before being reconsidered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.1 running the SequestHT search engine. The MS−MS/MS data were searched against the SwissProt Xenopus laevis proteome (downloaded from UniProt58on 10/15/2017) supplemented with the mRNA-derived PHROG database (version 1.0). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) against a reversed-sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Over 200 genes are known to underlie human congenital hearing loss (CHL). Although transcriptomic approaches have identified candidate regulators of otic development, little is known about the abundance of their protein products. We used a multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to determine protein abundances over key stages of <i>Xenopus</i> otic morphogenesis to reveal a dynamic expression of cytoskeletal, integrin signaling, and extracellular matrix proteins. We correlated these dynamically expressed proteins to previously published lists of putative downstream targets of human syndromic hearing loss genes: <i>SIX1</i> (BOR syndrome), <i>CHD7</i> (CHARGE syndrome), and <i>SOX10</i> (Waardenburg syndrome). We identified transforming growth factor beta-induced (Tgfbi), an extracellular integrin-interacting protein, as a putative target of Six1 that is required for normal otic vesicle formation. Our findings demonstrate the application of this <i>Xenopus</i> dataset to understanding the dynamic regulation of proteins during otic development and to discovery of additional candidates for human CHL.

### Keywords
Temporal, Xenopus laevis, Congenital hearing loss, Extracellular matrix, Otic development

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park
University of Maryland, College Park

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park


