### Accession
PXD035739

### Title
Effect of epinephrine on a Micrococcus luteus biofilm matrix proteome

### Description
The importance of the impact of human hormones on commensal microbiota and microbial  biofilms is established in lots of studies. In the present investigation, we studied the proteome of the biofilm matrix of the commensal actinobacterium  Micrococcus luteus C01. In our investigation, we tested the effect of epinephrine in concentration 4.9×10-9  M on immature (24 h ) and mature (72 h) biofilms in comparison with controls without the hormone administration. We investigated the temporal changes in the matrix proteome during the incubation in control samples and in samples with epinephrine.

### Sample Protocol
The matrix isolation. The biofilm biomass was transferred into 50 mL conical tubes (Corning, USA) and resuspended in distilled water. Then, the samples were placed into an ice bath and sonicated for 10 min with a Sonyprep 105 Plus (MSE, GB) using the appropriate titanium horn (rod or exponential, depending on the sample volume) at an amplitude of 7.3 or 10.1 µm, respectively. After sonication, the samples were transferred into polypropylene In review  ultracentrifuge tubes (Beckman, USA) and layered onto the CsCl gradient solution. The CsCl gradient was prepared as described previously (Gannesen et al., 2019). Briefly, four CsCl solutions (46%, 28%, 14%, and 7%) were layered, and the sample was added to the top of the tube. The samples were centrifuged in an Avanti-J30I (Beckman, USA) ultracentrifuge at 100000 g and RT for 1 h. After, to avoid the contamination of the matrix with cells, the supernatant was transferred into new conical tubes, and any cells carried over during the supernatant transfer were additionally removed by centrifugation at 3800g and RT for 20 min. Samples: AG-1 - AG-3 – control 24 h; AG-4 – AG-6 – epinephrine 24 h; AG-7 - AG-9 – control 72 h; AG-10 – AG-12 – epinephrine 72 h. The isolation of the matrix proteins. The matrix samples were dialyzed in bags with a pore size of 0.1- to 0.5 kDa (Spectrum Repligen, United States) to remove CsCl. Then, the samples were mixed with acetone (4 × volume) and incubated for 10 min at RT to precipitate the proteins. After precipitation, the samples were centrifuged at RT and 15,000 × g for 30 min to collect the proteins. The liquid supernatant was removed, and the samples were transferred into sterile microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, Germany) and air-dried at room temperature. Digestion of proteins with trypsin in solution  Reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins in solution were performed as described previously [Kulak NA et al., 2014, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2834] with minor modifications. Briefly, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer pH 8.5 contained 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide were added to a cell sample. The sample was heated for 10 min at 95oC, and the equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 20 g was loaded on three 14-gauge StageTip plugs, equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 400 g. After washing the StageTips with a 100 l of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 100 l of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 50 l of elution solution contained 50% acetonitrile, 45% water and 5% ammonia. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analyses peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA solution and sonicated for 2 min in ultrasonic water bath.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20x0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GL Sciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed (1) fused-silica column 300x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in a loading solution (98% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–35% solution B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 105 min; 35-55% B for 18 min, 55-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was reequilibrated with solution A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 10 min. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time – 30 msec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with HCD collision energy 29%, max injection time – 80 msec, AGC target – 1x105. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using in MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 (MQ) (1) and Perseus (2). The data was searched against Micrococcus luteus Uniprot Tremble database, containing canonical and isoform proteins, version from 15.03.2021 MaxQuant search was performed with the default parameter set, including Trypsin/p protease specificity, max 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation, Protein N-term acetylation and NQ deamidation as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, max 5 modifications per peptide, 1% PSM and protein FDR. The following options were turned on: second peptide, maxLFQ, match between runs. All runs were analyzed as independent experiments and processed in Perseus.  In Perseus the protein group results were filtered for contaminants, reverse and “identified only by site” proteins. Only the proteins with maxLFQ values min 3 in at least one group LC-MS runs were used. For them, missing values were imputed from normal distribution with 0.3 intensity distribution sigma width and 1.8 intensity distribution center downshift. Two-sample t-test with Permutation based FDR 5% was applied to search for significantly changing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epinephrine, Lc-msms, Micrococcus luteus

### Affiliations
Laboratory of viability of microorganisms, Federal research center “Fundamentals of biotechnology” of Russian Academy of sciences, Moscow, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Yury A. Nikolayev
Laboratory of viability of microorganisms, Federal research center “Fundamentals of biotechnology” of Russian Academy of sciences, Moscow, Russia


