### Accession
PXD008999

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human sclera tissue using high resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
The sclera is white, tough outer covering, known for providing structural support to the eyeball and the intraocular contents. Any abnormality in sclera results in disorders such as conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis and hence a proper investigation will help in preventing the same. In the current study, we carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of human sclera in which the proteins were extracted from the sclera tissue and subjected to both in-gel and in-solution digestion using trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme. The peptides were analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometerand the data acquired was searched against Human RefSeq 75 protein database using SEQUEST HT and Mascot which resulted in the identification of 4,493 non-redundant proteins.The outcome of this study will facilitate in discovery of potential candidate biomarkers aiding in curbing the scleral disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Sclera tissues from three healthy human donors were obtained and homogenized using liquid nitrogen. The tissues were further lysed using lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) and sonicated for extracting proteins. The amount of protein was estimated using bicinchoninic (BCA)acid assay and same amount of proteins from each specimen was pooled. 150 µg of protein was resolved in 10% SDS PAGE for in-gel digestion where the bands were excised and processed for trypsin digestion. Similarly, 300 µg was taken for in-solution digestion. In both in-gel and in-solution digestion cases, the proteins were subjected to reduction using 5mM and 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT), respectively for 20 min and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 10 min. It was further subjected to trypsin digestion at a final concentration of 1:20 (w/w). the in-solution digested samples were subjected tofractionation usingbasic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography. The samples were further subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data was searched using Human RefSeq 75 protein database database (consisting of 36,713 entries along with common contaminants) in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 with SEQUEST HT and Mascot search algorithms. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was given as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine was given as variable modifications. We searched our data with a precursor ion mass tolerance at 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da.The peptides identified were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated by searching the target database against the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Eye disorders and resulting visual loss are major public health problems affecting millions of people worldwide. In this context, the sclera is an opaque, thick outer coat covering more than 80% of the eye, and essential in maintaining the shape of the eye and protecting the intraocular contents against infection and the external environment. Despite efforts undertaken to decipher the scleral proteome, the functional and structural picture of the sclera still remain elusive. Recently, proteomics has arisen as a powerful tool that enables identification of proteins playing a critical role in health and disease. Therefore, we carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of the human scleral tissue using a high-resolution Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. We identified 4493 proteins using SequestHT and Mascot as search algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Importantly, the proteins, including radixin, synaptopodin, paladin, netrin 1, and kelch-like family member 41, were identified for the first time in human sclera. Gene ontology analysis unveiled that the majority of proteins were localized to the cytoplasm and involved in cell communication and metabolism. In sum, this study offers the largest catalog of proteins identified in sclera with the aim of facilitating their contribution to diagnostics and therapeutics innovation in visual health and autoimmune disorders. This study also provides a valuable baseline for future investigations so as to map the dynamic changes that occur in sclera in various pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Tandem mass spectrometry, Protein profiling, Omics technology, Eye proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya(Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya(Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018


