### Accession
PXD003326

### Title
Transgenic soybeans expressing human epidermal growth factor

### Description
Each year in the United States, more than 530,000 babies are born prior to full 37 weeks of gestation. One of the major problems associated with prematurity is the development of a condition known as necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). In 50% of infants with NEC a large amount of damaged and dead intestine must be surgically removed, often resulting in death or lifelong health problems. A growing body of experimental and clinical evidence supports a conclusion that deficient quantities of epidermal growth factor (EGF) leads to the development of NEC. The EGF peptide appears to be fundamental for normal intestinal development and repair. Soy-milk containing engineered EGF may be a suitable therapy if given to premature infants to prevent NEC. Human mature EGF is 6 kDa protein with three intramolecular disulfide bonds. To produce EGF a synthetic codon-optimized gene was transferred to soybean by biolistic transformation. The resulting transgenic lines were regenerated into somatic embryos that were screened by PCR and the production of EGF assayed by ELISA. Crude extracts of somatic embryos producing EGF were assessed for bioactivity by induction of phosphorylation of the EGF receptor in HeLa cells that showed soy-produced EGF exhibited the same activity as authentic EGF.  T0 transgenic EGF seeds have showed positive ELISA for EGF demonstrating the feasibility to produce a therapeutic soy-milk to mitigate the development of NEC by premature infants. The next stage of this project will test the efficacy of Soy/EGF in an animal model for short bowel syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from three technical replicates (50 mg each) of ground dry seeds from three biological replicates, Lines 4, 5 and 6 of EGF transgenic soybeans along with nontransgenic Jack seeds using 9 M urea, 5% SDS.  Protein was precipitated by adjusting the solution to 20% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid and allowed to sit at 4ºC overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted using centrifugation, washed twice with acetone, and then dried using vacuum centrifugation.  The commercial EGF was not filtered or precipitated, only dried. Dried pellets were rehydrated with the addition of 10 l 100 mM dithiothreitol (43819-5G, Sigma, St.Louis MO) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and placed at 85 ºC for 5 minutes to reduce disulphide bonds.  Samples were then alkylated with addition of 10 l iodoacetamide (I1149-5G, Sigma, St.Louis MO) in 100 mM ABC and placed at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes.   Two g trypsin (T6567-20UG, Sigma, St.Louis MO) in 200 l 100 mM ABC was added to each sample and placed at 37 ºC overnight for enzymatic digestion.  Post trypsin digest samples were desalted using a peptide reverse phase microtrap (Michrom BioResources), dried and ultimately resuspended in 2 l of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Separation of peptides was performed using a Dionex U3000 splitless nanoflow HPLC system operated at 333 nl minute using a gradient from 2-50% acetonitrile over 60 minutes, followed by a 15 minuted wash with 95% acetonitrile and a 15 minute equilibration with 2% acetonitrile.  The C18 column, an in-house prepared 75 m by 15 cm reverse phase column packed with Halo 2.7 m, 90Å C18 material (MAC-MOD Analytical) was located in the ion source just before a silica emitter.  A potential of 2100 volts was applied using a liquid junction between the column and emitter.  A Thermo LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer using a nanospray Flex ion source was used to analyze the eluate from the U3000.  Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 5 most intense peaks. MS/MS scans were performed in pairs, a CID fragmentation scan followed a HCD fragmentation scan of the same precursor m/z.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 sec of initial m/z measurement.  Spectra were collected over the entirety of each 90 minute chromatography run.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were converted to MGF format using MSConvert, part of the ProteoWizard software library (PMID: 1860660).  X!tandem 2013.09.01.1 (PMID: 14976030) and OMSSA (PMID: 15473683) algorithms were employed via the University of Arizona High Performance Computing Center to perform spectrum matching.  Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.2 Daltons for both OMSSA and X!tandem. Trypsin cleaveage rules were used for both algorithms with up to 2 missed cleavages.  Amino acid modifications searched consisted of single and double oxidation of Methionine, oxidation of Proline, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, deamidation of Asparagene and Glutamine and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine.  X!tandem xml and OMSSA xml results were filtered using Perl to remove any peptide matches with an E-value > 0.05 as well as proteins identified by a single peptide sequence.  The protein fasta database for Glycine max was downloaded on August 5, 2015 from NCBI RefSeq with the addition of the EGF amino acid sequence.  A randomized version of the Glycine max fasta was concatenated to the original as a way assess dataset quality.

### Publication Abstract
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is a devastating condition of premature infants that results from the gut microbiome invading immature intestinal tissues. This results in a life-threatening disease that is frequently treated with the surgical removal of diseased and dead tissues. Epidermal growth factor (EGF), typically found in bodily fluids, such as amniotic fluid, salvia and mother's breast milk, is an intestinotrophic growth factor and may reduce the onset of NEC in premature infants. We have produced human EGF in soybean seeds to levels biologically relevant and demonstrated its comparable activity to commercially available EGF. Transgenic soybean seeds expressing a seed-specific codon optimized gene encoding of the human EGF protein with an added ER signal tag at the N' terminal were produced. Seven independent lines were grown to homozygous and found to accumulate a range of 6.7 +/- 3.1 to 129.0 +/- 36.7 &#x3bc;g EGF/g of dry soybean seed. Proteomic and immunoblot analysis indicates that the inserted EGF is the same as the human EGF protein. Phosphorylation and immunohistochemical assays on the EGF receptor in HeLa cells indicate the EGF protein produced in soybean seed is bioactive and comparable to commercially available human EGF. This work demonstrates the feasibility of using soybean seeds as a biofactory to produce therapeutic agents in a soymilk delivery platform.

### Keywords
Ltq velos soybean glycine max hispida epidermal growth factor transgenic

### Affiliations
University of Arizona Department of Plant Sciences USA
Veterinary Science and Microbiology

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Monica Schnidt
University of Arizona Department of Plant Sciences USA


