### Accession
PXD012193

### Title
Glomerular filtrate proteins in acute cardiorenal syndrome

### Description
Acute cardiorenal syndrome (CRS-1) is a morbid complication of acute cardiovascular disease. Mechanistic investigations have focused on intrarenal cellular signaling induced by ischemia/reperfusion. Additional cardiorenal connector signals have been postulated, but investigation in CRS-1 has been limited by a paucity of animal models and technical limitations precluding discovery studies of glomerular filtrate. To address these limitations, we developed a translational model of CRS-1, cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CA/CPR) in mice. Quantitative proteomics using isobaric tagging (10-plex TMT reagents, Thermo Fisher) was performed on 24h urine collections from mice with deficient tubular endocytosis and from littermate controls, before and after CA/CPR.  Data acquisition used the SPS MS3 method on a Thermo Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer for accurate reporter ion signals. The findings confirmed CA/CPR-specific cardiac proteins in urine and identified a novel CA/CPR-specific filtrate component: Cardiac LIM protein (CSRP3).

### Sample Protocol
MICE Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Oregon Health & Science University and were conducted in accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. LRP2(fl/fl);apoE(Cre) mice were a kind gift from Thomas Willnow, Ph.D. Max Delbruck Institute, Berlin. These mice exhibit lifelong mosaic, proximal tubule-specific deletion of the primary protein endocytosis receptor for the proximal tubule, megalin, and demonstrate characteristic low-molecular weight proteinuria.     URINE COLLECTION AND PROCESSING Urine samples from LRP2(fl/fl);apoE(Cre) mice (with and without activation of Cre) were collected onto dry ice in metabolic cages with protease inhibition (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) for 24 hours before and 24 hours after CA/CPR (n=10 samples from 5 mice, 8-12 weeks old, male and ovariectomized female). Equal volumes were subjected to trichloroacetic acid precipitation, washed with acetone, centrifuged and air dried. The pellet was dissolved in 8M urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford Coomassie assay. 50 microgram of isolated protein from each sample were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin overnight. Digests were then solid-phase extracted in a C18 column, eluted, and dried.   TMT LABELING 25 microgram per sample was tandem mass tag (TMT)  labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher), pooled, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific).   LC ANALYSIS Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and separated by 2D reverse-phase LC. A 20-microliter sample (55.3 microgram) was injected onto a NanoEase XBridge BEH130 5-micron C18 300-micron x 50-mm column (Waters) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 50 and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliter/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2-cm NanoViper 5-micron C18 trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC 2-micron C18 75-micron x 25-cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate.  MASS SPECTROMETRY Data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65). Singly charged precursor ions were excluded and dynamic exclusion settings were 10 PPM m/z tolerances for 30 sec durations.

### Data Protocol
TMT DATA ANALYSIS RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 17 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mus musculus Swiss-Prot protein database downloaded July 2015 (16,716 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The large parent ion tolerance was used to increase the number of peptides being scored to improve discrimination of true versus false identifications. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software.    Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts available at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by q scores < 0.05, by delta masses less than 20 PPM (plus/minus 10 PPM), and a trimmed mean reporter ion intensity peak height greater than 700. An additional protein-level filter of at least one unique peptide matching a protein entry was also applied. The reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. The grand total reporter ion intensity for each channel was multiplied by a global scaling factor to adjust its total intensity to the average total intensity across the 10 channels. This corrected for sample loading and labeling reaction efficiency differences.   Differential protein abundance between groups was then determined by comparing the IRS-normalized total reporter ion intensities between groups using the Bioconductor package edgeR. Additional trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) normalization and Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrections were performed within edgeR.

### Publication Abstract
Acute cardiorenal syndrome (CRS-1) is a morbid complication of acute cardiovascular disease. Heart-to-kidney signals transmitted by "cardiorenal connectors" have been postulated, but investigation into CRS-1 has been limited by technical limitations and a paucity of models. To address these limitations, we developed a translational model of CRS-1, cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CA/CPR), and now report findings from nanoscale mass spectrometry proteomic exploration of glomerular filtrate 2 hours after CA/CPR or sham procedure. Filtrate acquisition was confirmed by imaging, molecular weight and charge distribution, and exclusion of protein specific to surrounding cells. Filtration of proteins specific to the heart was detected following CA/CPR and confirmed with mass spectrometry performed using urine collections from mice with deficient tubular endocytosis. Cardiac LIM protein was a CA/CPR-specific filtrate component. Cardiac arrest induced plasma release of cardiac LIM protein in mice and critically ill human cardiac arrest survivors, and administration of recombinant cardiac LIM protein to mice altered renal function. These findings demonstrate that glomerular filtrate is accessible to nanoscale proteomics and elucidate the population of proteins filtered 2 hours after CA/CPR. The identification of cardiac-specific proteins in renal filtrate suggests a novel signaling mechanism in CRS-1. We expect these findings to advance understanding of CRS-1.

### Keywords
Urine, Quantitative proteomics, Acute cardiorenal syndrome, Tandem mass tags, Cardiovascular disease, Isobaric labeling, Mouse model

### Affiliations
Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael P. Hutchens
Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


