### Accession
PXD024626

### Title
Treatment with sodium butyrate has therapeutic benefits for Machado-Joseph disease through the induction of autophagy

### Description
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by expansion of the trinucleotide repeat region within the ATXN3/MJD gene. Mutation of ATXN3 causes formation of neurotoxic ataxin-3 protein aggregates, neurodegeneration and motor deficits. Here we investigated the therapeutic potential and mechanistic activity of sodium butyrate (SB), the sodium salt of butyric acid, a metabolite naturally produced by gut microbiota, on cultured SH-SY5Y cells and transgenic zebrafish expressing human ataxin-3 containing 84 glutamine (Q) residues to model MJD. MJD SH-SY5Y cells were found to contain ataxin-3 oligomeric species and protein aggregates. Treatment with SB increased activity of the autophagy protein quality control pathway in the MJD cells, decreased presence of ataxin-3 aggregates and presence of ataxin-3 oligomers in an autophagy-dependent manner. Treatment with SB was also beneficial in vivo, improving swimming performance, increasing autophagy activity and decreasing presence of insoluble ataxin-3 protein species in the transgenic MJD zebrafish. Co-treating the MJD zebrafish with SB and chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, prevented the beneficial effects of SB on the zebrafish swimming, suggesting that the improved swimming performance was autophagy-dependent. To identify mechanism of the induction of autophagy by SB, we performed proteomic analysis of protein lysates from the SB treated and untreated MJD SH-SY5Y cells. We found that SB treatment had increased activity of Protein Kinase A and AMPK signaling. Immunoblot analysis confirmed that SB treatment had increased levels of acetylated FOXO1 protein. Further, co-treatment with an inhibitor of FOXO1 transcriptional activity (AS1842856) prevented the increase in autophagosome formation (LC3II/I) usually produced by SB treatment. Together our findings indicate that treatment with SB can increase activity of the autophagy pathway through a FOXO1-dependent process and that this has beneficial effects in vitro and in vivo. We propose that treatment with sodium butyrate warrants further investigation for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases underpinned by proteinopathy mechanisms, including MJD.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cell lysates expressing ATXN3-84Q were separated in 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen) in duplicate gels. One gel was Coomassie stained and de-stained in 7% acetic acid, 10% methanol while the second gel was transferred to nitrocellulose membrane and western blot analysis for ATXN3 was performed. Fraction 1-7 in the Coomassie stained gel were identified by comparison with the molecular weight of the ataxin-3-84Q band from the western blot results. The bands in the gel were excised and cut into 1-2 mm pieces and de-stained in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, followed by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile pH 8. The de-stained gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and the solution was removed to allow gel pieces to air dry. The proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively and digested with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl) overnight at 37oC as described [84].       Following overnight digestion, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and the tryptic peptides from the gel pieces were extracted twice with 50% acetonitrile/2% formic acid and combined with the supernatants. The tryptic peptides were vacuum centrifuged to remove acetonitrile and desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Omix tip. The eluted peptides were further dried under vacuum centrifugation. The peptide pellet was the resuspended in 12uL of 0.1% formic acid and 10 µl was loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis.      Tryptic peptides were separated using an UHPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (ThermoFisher, USA) equipped with a Thermo Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (75 µm diameter, 3 µm particle size, 150 mm length) employing a 60 min gradient (2%–26% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 40 mins followed by 50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 10 mins and 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid for 8 mins) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized into Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (ThermoFisher, USA) and maintained at 1.6 kV electrospray voltage. FTMS analysis was carried out with a 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS (m/z range 400-2000); and MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x104 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 30 and 50 milliseconds respectively. A top-10 method was employed for MS/MS selection, ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1x104 counts, isolation width of 2.0 Da, and dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo) against the Swissprot database (organism Homo sapiens, version 25/10/2017 with 42252 sequences) incorporating the Sequest search algorithm. Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FTMS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for maximum two missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3, also known as Machado Joseph disease) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by the expansion of the trinucleotide repeat region within the ATXN3/MJD gene. Mutation of ATXN3 causes formation of ataxin-3 protein aggregates, neurodegeneration, and motor deficits. Here we investigated the therapeutic potential and mechanistic activity of sodium butyrate (SB), the sodium salt of butyric acid, a metabolite naturally produced by gut microbiota, on cultured SH-SY5Y cells and transgenic zebrafish expressing human ataxin-3 containing 84 glutamine (Q) residues to model SCA3. SCA3 SH-SY5Y cells were found to contain high molecular weight ataxin-3 species and detergent-insoluble protein aggregates. Treatment with SB increased the activity of the autophagy protein quality control pathway in the SCA3 cells, decreased the presence of ataxin-3 aggregates and presence of high molecular weight ataxin-3 in an autophagy-dependent manner. Treatment with SB was also beneficial in&#xa0;vivo, improving swimming performance, increasing activity of the autophagy pathway, and decreasing the presence of insoluble ataxin-3 protein species in the transgenic SCA3 zebrafish. Co-treating the SCA3 zebrafish with SB and chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, prevented the beneficial effects of SB on zebrafish swimming, indicating that the improved swimming performance was autophagy-dependent. To understand the mechanism by which SB induces autophagy we performed proteomic analysis of protein lysates from the SB-treated and untreated SCA3 SH-SY5Y cells. We found that SB treatment had increased activity of Protein Kinase A and AMPK signaling, with immunoblot analysis confirming that SB treatment had increased levels of AMPK protein and its substrates. Together our findings indicate that treatment with SB can increase activity of the autophagy pathway process and that this has beneficial effects in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. While our results suggested that this activity may involve activity of a PKA/AMPK-dependent process, this requires further confirmation. We propose that treatment with sodium butyrate warrants further investigation as a potential treatment for neurodegenerative diseases underpinned by mechanisms relating to protein aggregation including SCA3.

### Keywords
Spinocerebellar ataxia 3, Flow cytometry, Sodium butyrate, Microbiota, Neurodegeneration, Trinucleotide repeat disease, Zebrafish, Machado-joseph disease, Autophagy, Polyq, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia


