### Accession
PXD002165

### Title
Cell differentiation in Trypanosoma brucei is a bistable developmental switch requiring new protein synthesis to achieve signal memory

### Description
The life cycle of Trypanosoma brucei involves several cell differentiation transitions that allow transmission, survival and proliferation of these parasites. One of these transitions, the differentiation of growth-arrested stumpy forms in the mammalian blood into proliferating insect-stage procyclic forms, can be induced synchronously in vitro by addition of cis-aconitate (CA). Using single-cell analysis by flow-cytometry to follow differentiation, we show that this transition is an irreversible bistable switch where cells commit to differentiation after 1-3 hours of exposure to CA. This irreversibility implies the existence of positive feedback mechanisms that allow commitment to differentiation: i.e. the establishment of “memory” of exposure to the differentiation signal. Such mechanisms probably depend on post-translational modifications (e.g. phosphorylation) and/or synthesis of regulatory proteins. Using the reversible protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, we find that protein synthesis is required for establishment of signal memory and normal commitment to differentiation. To characterize the ‘commitment proteome’, we performed SILAC phosphoproteomics to provide a detailed map of the protein expression and phosphorylation events during the early stages of differentiation in a synchronised parasite population. Using a rigorous candidate gene approach we have also demonstrated that the stumpy form enriched serine-throenine protein kinases TbNRKA/B stringently control the earliest events in differentiation identifying these kinases as major regulators of trypanosome development.

### Sample Protocol
Ex vivo stumpy form Trypanosoma brucei sample (5E8 cells) was supplemented by an equal cell number of a 1:1 mix of procyclic form and bloodstream form cells grown in heavy-SILAC media in vitro. To minimize variability, the heavy-SILAC cells from a single batch were used for the entire study. The combined cells were solubilized with SDS and tryptic peptides were generated by an adaptation of the filter aided sample preparation procedure. The resulting peptides were then split between proteomic (5%) and phosphoproteomic (95%) workflows. In the proteomic workflow, peptide were fractionated into 6 fractions by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography prior to analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry as described previously. In the phosphoproteomic workflow, phosphopeptides were enriched and fractionated into 6 fractions by SCX prior to further enrichment by TiO2 in the presence of 5% TFA and 1M glycolic acid..

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 usinga protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 9.0, 11,568 protein sequences, TriTrypDB  http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with the VSG221 sequence and frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and mammalian keratins). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. Phosphoproteomic analysis included phosophorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as additional variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length and a MaxQuant score >5, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. SILAC ratios were calculated where at least one peptide could be uniquely mapped to a given protein group, and required a minimum of two SILAC pairs. To account for any errors in the counting of the number of cell numbers mixed, the distribution of SILAC ratios was normalised within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of log2 ratios is zero, as described by Cox et al.   Prior to statistical analysis, the outputs from MaxQuant were filtered to remove known contaminants and reverse sequences, and phosphorylation sites with a MaxQuant localisation probability < 0.75 were discarded. SILAC ratios for phosphorylation sites were calculated using only data from the phosphoproteomic experiments, and SILAC ratios for proteins were calculated using only data from the proteomic experiments. Since the Heavy-SILAC labelled cells were derived from a single batch, the measured H/L ratios were used to calculate the changes in abundance between individual ex vivo samples i.e. Log2 LA/LB = Log2 H/LB – Log2 H/LA.

### Publication Abstract
The life cycle of Trypanosoma brucei involves developmental transitions that allow survival, proliferation, and transmission of these parasites. One of these, the differentiation of growth-arrested stumpy forms in the mammalian blood into insect-stage procyclic forms, can be induced synchronously in vitro with cis-aconitate. Here, we show that this transition is an irreversible bistable switch, and we map the point of commitment to differentiation after exposure to cis-aconitate. This irreversibility implies that positive feedback mechanisms operate to allow commitment (i.e., the establishment of "memory" of exposure to the differentiation signal). Using the reversible translational inhibitor cycloheximide, we show that this signal memory requires new protein synthesis. We further performed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture to analyze synchronized parasite populations, establishing the protein and phosphorylation profile of parasites pre- and postcommitment, thereby defining the "commitment proteome." Functional interrogation of this data set identified Nek-related kinase as the first-discovered protein kinase controlling the initiation of differentiation to procyclic forms.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Silac, Differentiation, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Lancaster University
Biomedical & Life Sciences, Lancaster University, UK.

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Daniel Urbaniak
Biomedical & Life Sciences, Lancaster University, UK.


