### Accession
PXD007634

### Title
A comparative analysis of the interactomes of viral accessory proteins exploiting DDB1 and Cullin Ubiquitin ligases

### Description
Viruses have an ambivalent relationship with the host proteome. While several host proteins are indispensable for replication, detrimental restriction factors need to be antagonized. This process is frequently catalysed by viral accessory proteins which exploit the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, DDB1, and Cullin Ubiquitin ligases for the degradation of restriction factors, like in the case of the mouse cytomegalovirus encoded interferon antagonist pM27 which exploits DDB1 for STAT2 degradation. pM27 homologous proteins are conserved in betaherpesviruses. DDB1 and Cullins also serve as essential co-factor for accessory proteins encoded by other virus families like Vpr (HIV-1- and -2-encoded), Vpx (HIV-2-encoded), HBx (HBV-encoded) and its woodchuck hepatitis virus homolog (WHx). To establish a comprehensive understanding of the complexes assembled by viral DDB1-interacting proteins and their targets, we performed immuno-affinity precipitations for a panel of viral proteins known or suspected to interact with DDB1 and/or Cullins. For each protein, we conducted four biological replicates and identified and quantified all co-precipitating proteins by mass spectrometry. Empty plasmids and the HCMV-encoded protein pUL42, which binds the unrelated ubiquitin ligase Itch, served as negative controls and outside group, respectively. This analysis confirmed previously described interactions (pM27 with STAT2), extended known interactions to paralogous proteins (e.g. HBx and WHx with different Spindlin proteins), and documented anticipated interactions for the first time (e.g. Vpr with Bax). The comparison revealed considerable differences concerning the interaction with DDB1 and Cullin 4A/B in terms of the general ability as well as the strength of interaction. On global level, the correlation of the interactomes fitted well with the phylogenetic relationship of the proteins but also highlighted a considerable overlap between the DDB1 interactors of non-related viruses (e.g. herpesviral and hepadnaviral).

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation Cells were washed three times with ice cold PBS and subsequently lysed by incubation for 1h on ice in the following buffer : 0.1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl;, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 20 mM HEPES [pH 7.4], 0.5% [v/v] NP-40, 0.1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT, 10 µM pepstatin A, 5 µM leupeptin, 0.1 mM Na-vanadate, Complete protease inhibitor [Roche]). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (30 min, 19357 g, 4°C) and afterwards the indicated antibody was added to the supernatant and incubated over night at 4°C in a rotating device. Protein-G-Sepharose (VWR) was added and incubated for 1 h at 4°C in a rotating device. The protein-G-Sepharose bound immune complexes were washed by 6 sequential rounds using lysis buffer containing the following NaCl concentrations (150, 250, 500, 500, 250, and 150 mM, respectively). Protein complexes were separated by SDS-PAGE and gels were silver-stained or analyzed by immunoblotting or mass spectrometry.  MS based analysis of viral interactomes Proteins from immunoprecipitation experiments were in gel digested with trypsin. The peptide concentration was determined by quantitative amino acid analysis performed on an ACQUITY-UPLC equipped with AccQ Tag Ultra-UPLC column (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). For calibration, Pierce Amino Acid Standard (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used. Of each sample, 350 ng tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer online-coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 ?m × 5 mm, C18, 5 ?m, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 30 ?L/min (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). After 7 min, peptides were transferred to the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 ?m × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 ?m, 100 Å). A 98 min gradient of 5% to 40% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) was applied to elute the peptides from the analytical column (flow rate 400 nL/min, column oven temperature 60 °C). Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a mass resolution of 60,000 (mass range 350-2000 m/z). Fragment mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode and recorded in the linear ion trap. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35% and an isolation width of 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted with Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Based on the human proteome file UP000005640 downloaded from Uniprot-KB (release 2015_05), a database was constructed containing 68,840 human protein sequences (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries), sequences of EGFP, HA-tagged proteins M27, HBx, WHx7, WHx8, R27, UL27, UL42 as well as FLAG-tagged proteins Vpr and Vpx. For database searches, Sequest HT algorithm was used as implemented in the respective version of Proteome Discoverer software. Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. One tryptic miscleavage and variable modifications of methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (propionamide) were allowed. Peptide confidence was estimated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator function implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Peptides with a false discovery rate < 1% were considered for analysis. Protein grouping function based on strict maximum parsimony principle was enabled in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses and hosts are situated in a molecular arms race. To avoid morbidity and mortality, hosts evolved antiviral restriction factors. These restriction factors exert selection pressure on the viruses and drive viral evolution toward increasingly efficient immune antagonists. Numerous viruses exploit cellular DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1)-containing Cullin RocA ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) to induce the ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of antiviral factors expressed by their hosts. To establish a comprehensive understanding of the underlying protein interaction networks, we performed immuno-affinity precipitations for a panel of DDB1-interacting proteins derived from viruses such as mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV, Murid herpesvirus [MuHV] 1), rat cytomegalovirus Maastricht MuHV2, rat cytomegalovirus English MuHV8, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Cellular interaction partners were identified and quantified by mass spectrometry (MS) and validated by classical biochemistry. The comparative approach enabled us to separate unspecific interactions from specific binding partners and revealed remarkable differences in the strength of interaction with DDB1. Our analysis confirmed several previously described interactions like the interaction of the MCMV-encoded interferon antagonist pM27 with STAT2. We extended known interactions to paralogous proteins like the interaction of the HBV-encoded HBx with different Spindlin proteins and documented interactions for the first time, which explain functional data like the interaction of the HIV-2-encoded Vpr with Bax. Additionally, several novel interactions were identified, such as the association of the HIV-2-encoded Vpx with the transcription factor RelA (also called p65). For the latter interaction, we documented a functional relevance in antagonizing NF-&#x3ba;B-driven gene expression. The mutation of the DDB1 binding interface of Vpx significantly impaired NF-&#x3ba;B inhibition, indicating that Vpx counteracts NF-&#x3ba;B signaling by a DDB1- and CRL-dependent mechanism. In summary, our findings improve the understanding of how viral pathogens hijack cellular DDB1 and CRLs to ensure efficient replication despite the expression of host restriction factors.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Viral interactome analysis, Cullin ubiquitin ligases, Mass spectrometry, Ddb1

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum Bochum, Germany
Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Dominik Andre Meger

### Lab Head
Dr Dominik A. Megger
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum Bochum, Germany


