### Accession
PXD030079

### Title
Autophagic vesicle content profiling from hippocampal slices LC-MSMS

### Description
Previous work demonstrated that the developmental pruning of dendritic spines requires autophagy. This developmental process is facilitated by long-term depression (LTD)-like mechanisms, inviting the speculation that LTD, a fundamental form of plasticity, itself requires autophagy. Here, we show that LTD-inducing activation of NMDA receptors or metabotropic glutamate receptors triggers the rapid initiation of autophagy in postsynaptic dendrites. Dendritic autophagic vesicles (AVs) act in parallel with the endocytic machinery to remove AMPAR subunits from the surface and rapidly degrade them and their scaffold PSD95. Moreover, during NMDAR-LTD, key postsynaptic proteins are sequestered for autophagic degradation, as revealed by quantitative proteomic profiling of purified AVs. In turn, pharmacological inhibition of AV biogenesis, or conditional ablation of atg5 in pyramidal neurons abolishes LTD and instead triggers sustained potentiation in the hippocampus. These deficits in synaptic plasticity are recapitulated by knockdown of atg5 specifically in postsynaptic pyramidal neurons in the CA1 area. Conducive to the role of synaptic plasticity in behavioral flexibility, mice with autophagy deficiency in excitatory neurons exhibit altered response in reversal learning. Therefore, local assembly of the autophagic machinery in dendrites ensures the degradation of postsynaptic components and facilitates LTD expression.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated brains from P22-P28 C57BL/6 mice were sectioned in 200μm thick coronal slices using a vibratome (Leica, VT1200S), in the presence of chilled (2-4°C) artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF), containing 124mM NaCl, 3mM KCl, 26mM NaHCO3, 1mM MgSO4, 2mM CaCl2, 1.25mM NaH2PO4 and 10mM glucose, equilibrated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 gas mixture at pH 7.4. The slices were stored in oxygenated aCSF, at a constant temperature of 31 ± 0.5°C, for at least 1hr and were treated with a NMDA pulse (50μM for 10 minutes). The sections were collected in 10ml of Buffer B (0.25M sucrose, 1mM EDTA pH 8.8, and 20mM HEPES pH 7.4) for homogenization using a glass homogenizer (15 dounces, on ice). Following a centrifugation for 2 minutes at 2.000g at 4°C, the post-nuclear supernatant (PNS) was collected and autophagic vesicles were purified as previously described10. For the validation of the NMDAR-LTD cargo, the purified vesicles were subjected to proteinase K (20μg/ml) treatment for 20 minutes on ice to digest externally associated proteins to the outer surface of the vesicle. Proteinase K was then inactivated with 4mM PMSF for 10 minutes on ice and the material was centrifuged at 16.000g for 20 minutes at 4°C to pellet the autophagic vesicles.

### Data Protocol
For the mass spectrometric comparison of purified AVs from control and LTD conditions, 30μg of lysates were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol 87,88. Here, samples were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10μl 15% formic acid and 30μl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 minutes at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200μl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested with 0.4μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40μl HEPES/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25mM TCEP and 5mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267) overnight at room temperature. Beads were separated, washed with 10μl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. Peptides were reconstituted in 10μl of H2O and reacted with 80μg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111) 89 label reagent dissolved in 4μl of acetonitrile for 1 hour at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4μl of an aqueous solution of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, 438227). Peptides were mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels. Mixed peptides were subjected to a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well μElution Plate, Waters #186001828BA) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scentific), as previously described 90.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cargo, Synaptic plasticity, Autophagosome, Long-term depression, Autophagy

### Affiliations
EMBL
Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Vassiliki Nikoletopoulou
Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


