### Accession
PXD029144

### Title
Proteomics and immunoproteomics of Anoplocephala perfoliata

### Description
Anoplocephala perfoliata is a common tapeworm in horse with an ability to cause colic and increase mortality. At present, current diagnostic methods are not sensitive enough to detect A. perfoliata and immunoreactive excretory/secretory (E/S) proteins produced by this parasite, which comprise the most promising candidates for diagnostic tests. Here, we compared the E/S proteins produced by A. perfoliata worms of two different physiological states (small- and large-sized worms) in vitro by label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics with protein database composed of proteins encoded by Hymenolepis diminuta, Echinococcus multilocularis/granulosus and Taenia aseatica for protein identifications. The quantitative proteomics data was complemented with one-dimensional gel electrophoresis combined with immunoblotting using antisera from horses diagnosed positive and negative for this tapeworm. Protein bands cross-reacting most efficiently with the anti-A. perfoliata antibodies were subjected to in-gel digestion with LC-MS/MS identification. Both the non-gel and gel-based proteomic results were compared to propose a list of candidate proteins for further studies. These proteins will be validated for their suitability as diagnostic markers specific to cestodes and A. perfoliata.

### Sample Protocol
Live morphologically identified A. perfoliata worms and horse sera were collected in one abattoir in Finland from horses slaughtered for human consumption (Aug 2019 to Aug 2021). Ethical approval was not needed as no live animals were included to the study and no animals were killed because of the study. A written approval from the abattoir was obtained for material collection. Altogether 71 horses were inspected for cestode infection; both caecum and colon of each horse were dissected and A. perfoliata worms collected and counted.  A. perfoliata worms originated from two horses: first had 21 small-sized worms (SWs) and from the second we collected 11 large-sized worms (LWs). Large and small worms were handled separately throughout the study. After collection, the worms were washed three times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and then once with PBS containing 0.1% v/v antibiotic antimycotic solution A5955 (Sigma-Aldrich Oy, Helsinki, Finland). During the transportation from the abattoir to the laboratory SWs and LWs were incubated separately in 100 ml of prewarmed RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich Oy, Helsinki, Finland) at +37 °C for three hours. After the three-hour transportation, the culture media was collected for analysis. The worms were transferred to fresh prewarmed RPMI-1640 culture medium for continued cultivation as follows. SWs were split into four cell culture flasks (volume 40 mL), three flasks containing four worms each and one flask containing nine very small worms. LWs were split into three separate culture flasks, two flasks contained four worms and one flask contained only three worms. Each cell culture flask contained 20 mL of RPMI-1640 culture medium. The flasks with the worms were incubated at +37 °C in 5% CO2 for additional five hours. This additional five-hour incubation only provided three replica samples from SWs and one from LWs, due to loss of viability observed among the large-sized worms.  Collected culture media were centrifugated to remove possible debris and bacterial cells (1800g, 15 min, +4 °C).  The culture supernatants were mixed with ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in a final concentration of 4% w/v to precipitate the E/S proteins. Proteins collected by centrifugation (8000g, 30 min, +4 °C) were washed twice with cold acetone (-20 °C), air-dried and solubilized in 0.1% w/v RapiGest™ SF (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5). The protein concentration was measured using the NanoDrop™ 2000/2000c Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland). Protein concentrations varied between 1.40 – 3.10 mg mL-1.  LFQ proteomics. For tryptic in-solution digestions, the proteins were first reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) in 100 mM TEAB for 45 min at +60 °C, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM TEAB for 60 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark and finally quenched with 20 mM DTT in 100mM TEAB. Trypsin (mass-spec grade, Promega) was added to each sample at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein ratio, w/w) and the reactions were incubated overnight at +37 °C. Digestions were stopped by adding trifluoroacetate (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich Oy, Helsinki, Finland) to a final concentration of 0.6 % v/v and the peptides were purified using ZipTip C18 (Millipore) and air-dried.  The peptides reconstituted in 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) were analyzed with Easy-nLC 1000 nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a Nanoelectrospray Ion Source (Easy-Spray, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The LC separation was performed using a C18 column (25-cm bed length 2-μm beads, 100 Å, 75-μm inner diameter) with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The peptides were eluted with a 2%–30% solvent gradient (100% acetonitrile/0.1% FA) over 60 min. The MS was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, with the 10 most abundant multiple-charged ions selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software v.1.6.7.0 for protein identification using a protein database combining all protein sequences from the following cestodes; Hymenolepis diminuta (Proteome ID, UP000321570, 18691 protein sequences), Taenia asiatica, (Proteome ID, UP000046400, 10327 protein sequences) and Echinococcus granulosus/multilocularis with (Proteome IDs, UP000019149/UP000019149, 34099 protein sequences). Mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm were applied for the first and main search, respectively. Trypsin digestion without proline restriction option was applied with two missed cleavages allowed. The minimal unique + razor peptide number was set to one, False Discovery Rate (FDR) to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification, and a label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
1d immunoblotting, Tapeworm, Maxquant, Perseus, E/s proteins, Horse, Parasite, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


