### Accession
PXD029328

### Title
Proteomic analysis of adipose tissue revealing differentially abundant proteins in highly efficient mid-lactating cows

### Description
The current situation of rising demand for animal products and sustainable resource usage, improving nutrient utilization efficiency in dairy cows is an important task. Understanding the biology of feed efficiency in dairy cows enables for the development of markers that may be used to identify and choose the best animals for animal production. Thus in this study, ten Holstein cows were evaluated for feed efficiency and adipose tissue samples from five high efficient and five low efficient dairy cows were collected for protein extraction, digestion and data were analyzed for differential abundant proteins enriched in feed efficiency pathways. Among the identified peptides, we found 110 DAPs and two protein networks significantly related to feed efficiency. Among the relative mRNA expression of genes involved in energy metabolism including transcription/translation (STAT2, DDX39A and RBM39) or protein transport (ITGAV), only RBM39 showed significant decrease in high efficient dairy cows. The findings presented here confirmed the Transferrin upregulated in pathways including acute phase response signaling, LXR/RXR activation, FXR/RXR activation of high efficient dairy cows supporting that these pathways are related to feed efficiency in dairy cows.

### Sample Protocol
The bicinchoninic acid assay was used to determine protein concentration in each AT sample, from 10 cows (5 per treatment from each fat depot) were chosen for proteomics analysis based on protein yield. The sample size for proteome analysis was calculated using data from earlier studies in dairy cows50. Using a modified filter-aided sample preparation process, samples were tryptic digested. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (16,000X g, 10 min) after lysing samples in 1 ml SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.6, DTT 100 mM) for 6 minutes at 95 °C. 50 µg of the supernatant was mixed with 200 µl of urea buffer I (8.0 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.0), loaded onto a 30-kDa molecular-weight-cutoff filter (vivacon 500, VN01H22, Sartorius, Göettingen, Germany), and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g, followed by one wash with urea buffer I and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. Iodoacetamide was then added to the filter, which was incubated for 10 minutes before being centrifuged for 20 minutes at 14,000 g. Using 200 micro liters of ammonium bicarbonate, two washes were performed. The samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight with trypsin (1 g) in 40 L ammonium bicarbonate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human sequences from UniprotKB version 11_2018, 73,101 sequences, and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N termini. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Detected proteins were considered with at least one peptide and at least one valid intensity value.

### Publication Abstract
The improvement of nutrient utilization efficiency in dairy cows represents an important task in view of the current rising demand for animal products and sustainable resource usage. In this perspective, the identification of appropriate markers to identify the most efficient animals for dairy production becomes a crucial factor. Residual feed intake (RFI), which represents the difference between predicted and actual intake, is used to define the efficiency of cows. In this study, subcutaneous adipose tissue (AT) was collected from five high efficient (HEF) and five low efficient (LEF) mid-lactation Holstein dairy cows, that represented subgroups of the 20% lowest RFI values (HEF) and highest 20% RFI values (LEF), out of a cohort of 155 cows that were examined for feed efficiency at the individual dairy barn at Volcani Institute, Israel. Adipose samples were examined for proteomic analysis by nano-LC/MS-MS and gene expression by RT-PCR. A total of 101 differential proteins (P&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.05 and fold change&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.5) and two protein networks related to feed efficiency were found between HEF and LEF cows. Among the enriched top canonical pathways, FAT10 signaling, EIF2 signaling, Sirtuin signaling, Acute phase response signaling, Protein ubiquitination and mTOR signaling pathways were related to feed efficiency in AT. Furthermore, abundance of transferrin (TF; FC&#x2009;=&#x2009;78.35, P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02) enriched pathways, including mTOR signaling, LXR/RXR and FXR/RXR activation was found in AT of HEF cows. Relative mRNA expression of RBM39, which is involved in energy metabolism, was decreased in AT of HEF versus LEF. The relationship found between the AT proteins and/or metabolic pathways and the feed efficiency demonstrates that AT may reflect metabolic adaptations to high efficiency, and suggests that these proteins together with their metabolic mechanisms are suitable candidates as biomarkers to identify efficient cows for dairy production.

### Keywords
Lactating, Bovine milk, Proteomics, Cows

### Affiliations
Department of Ruminant Science, Institute of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani Center, Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Maya Zachut
Department of Ruminant Science, Institute of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani Center, Israel


