### Accession
PXD041307

### Title
Characterization of antiviral extracellular vesicle cargo in epithelial cells

### Description
We set out to identify the contents of extracellular vesicles in epithelial cells and how they differ in vesicles with enhanced antiviral activity.

### Sample Protocol
Vesicles were isolated form 16HBE14o- cells and were lysed in 5% SDS buffer. Digested using S-traps with trypsin as the enzyme. Samples were further cleaned up by C18 desalting. Run on a Q Exactive HF MS and spectra were collected in a data dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human Uniprot database using PEAKS X software. Data from small and large EVs was merged into one dataset after processing.

### Publication Abstract
Miscommunication of antiviral and antibacterial immune signals drives worsened morbidity and mortality during respiratory viral-bacterial coinfections. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a form of intercellular communication with broad implications during infection, and here we show that epithelium-derived EVs released during the antiviral response impair the antibacterial activity of macrophages, an innate immune cell crucial for bacterial control in the airway. Macrophages exposed to antiviral EVs display reduced clearance of <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> as well as altered inflammatory signaling and anti-inflammatory metabolic reprogramming, thus revealing EVs as a source of dysregulated epithelium-macrophage crosstalk during coinfection. As effective epithelium-macrophage communication is critical in mounting an appropriate immune response, this novel observation of epithelium-macrophage crosstalk shaping macrophage metabolism and antimicrobial function provides exciting new insight and improves our understanding of immune dysfunction during respiratory coinfections.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth College, USA

### Submitter
Richard Cattley

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Bomberger
Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth College, USA


