### Accession
PXD033546

### Title
Conditional covalent lethality driven by oncometabolite accumulation

### Description
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome driven by mutation of the tumor suppressor fumarate hydratase (FH). Inactivation of FH causes accumulation of the electrophilic oncometabolite fumarate. In the absence of methods for reactivation, tumor suppressors can be targeted via identification of synthetic lethal interactions using genetic screens. Inspired by recent advances in chemoproteomic target identification, here we test the hypothesis that the electrophilicity of the HLRCC metabolome may produce unique susceptibilities to covalent small molecules, a phenomenon we term conditional covalent lethality. Screening a panel of chemically diverse electrophiles we identified a covalent ligand, MP-1, that exhibits FH-dependent cytotoxicity. Synthesis and structure-activity profiling identified key molecular determinants underlying the molecule’s effects. Chemoproteomic profiling of cysteine reactivity together with clickable probes validated the ability of MP-1 to engage an array of functional cysteines, including one lying in the Zn-finger domain of the tRNA methyltransferase enzyme TRMT1. TRMT1 overexpression rescues tRNA methylation from inhibition by MP-1 and partially attenuates the covalent ligand’s cytotoxicity. Our studies highlight the potential for covalent metabolites and small molecules to synergistically produce novel synthetic lethal interactions and raise the possibility of applying phenotypic screening with chemoproteomic target identification to identify new functional oncometabolite targets.

### Sample Protocol
To measure cysteine reactivity, cell pellets from MP-1 or vehicle treated UOK262 cells were lysed by sonication. 2 mg of MP-1 or vehicle treated UOK262 proteomes (1 mL, 2 mg/mL) were labeled with 100 μM of light (DMSO) or heavy (MP-1 treated) IA-alkyne (10 μ L; 10 mM stock in DMSO) for 1 hour at room temperature. For enrichment of MP-1-regulated cysteines, probe-labeled proteins were then conjugated to a diazobenzene biotin-azide(azo) tag by Cu(I)-catalyzed [3+2] cycloaddition. Proteomes labeled with heavy and light IA-alkyne were then combined pairwise and enriched on streptavidin beads, followed by on-bead reductive alkylation, tryptic digestion and release of labeled peptides by dithionite cleavage.  LC/LC-MS/MS was performed using standard MudPIT protocols on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data was analyzed by the SEQUEST algorithm. Both static (+57.0215 m/z, iodoacetamide alkylation) and differential IAL (+306.1481 m/z) and IAH (+312.1682 m/z) modifications on cysteine residues were specified. MS2 spectra matches were assembled into peptide identifications and filtered using DTASelect2.0. Quantification of L/H ratios were calculated using the cimage quantification package.

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) is a cancer predisposition syndrome driven by mutation of the tumor suppressor fumarate hydratase (FH). Inactivation of FH causes accumulation of the electrophilic oncometabolite fumarate. In the absence of methods for reactivation, tumor suppressors can be targeted via identification of synthetic lethal interactions using genetic screens. Inspired by recent advances in chemoproteomic target identification, here, we test the hypothesis that the electrophilicity of the HLRCC metabolome may produce unique susceptibilities to covalent small molecules, a phenomenon we term conditional covalent lethality. Screening a panel of chemically diverse electrophiles, we identified a covalent ligand, MP-1, that exhibits FH-dependent cytotoxicity. Synthesis and structure-activity profiling identified key molecular determinants underlying the molecule's effects. Chemoproteomic profiling of cysteine reactivity together with clickable probes validated the ability of MP-1 to engage an array of functional cysteines, including one lying in the Zn-finger domain of the tRNA methyltransferase enzyme TRMT1. TRMT1 overexpression rescues tRNA methylation from inhibition by MP-1 and partially attenuates the covalent ligand's cytotoxicity. Our studies highlight the potential for covalent metabolites and small molecules to synergistically produce novel synthetic lethal interactions and raise the possibility of applying phenotypic screening with chemoproteomic target identification to identify new functional oncometabolite targets.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Fumarate hydratase, Fumarate, Oncometabalite, Hlrcc, Trmt1

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA
Boston College

### Submitter
Daniel Bak

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA


