### Accession
PXD025822

### Title
The Phenyl Indole p97 inhibitor, UPCDC-30245, blocks endo-lysosomal degradation and coronavirus entry to host cells

### Description
Different modes of action small molecule inhibitors provide versatile tools for investigation of biology and development of therapeutics. However, to evaluate their exact mechanism of actions remains to be a challenging tas. We have identified two classes of p97 inhibitors, ATP competitive and allosteric inhibitors. We initially showed that the allosteric phenyl indole p97 inhibitor, UPCDC-30245, does not affect on two well-known cellular functions of p97, Endoplasmic-reticulum-associated protein degradation (EARD) and unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway dramatically, instead strongly increases the lapidated form of microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light chain 3B  (LC3-II). To evaluate the molecular mechanism of UPCDC-30245, we performed proteomic analysis of UPCDC-30245 treated cells. Our results revealed UPCDC-30245 blocks endo-lysosomal degradation via inhibiting the formation of early endosome and reducing the acidity of lysosome and this is aa potential off-target effect. More importantly, we demonstrated UPCDC-30245 exhibits promising ntiviral effects via blocking virus entry and this could be due to both on-target and off-target effect.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and spun down to remove the supernatant. LC-MS samples were prepared using the Thermo EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid solution, and peptide concentration was tested using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed by loading 1 μg sample onto an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) software, the Uniprot human database and SequestHT with Percolator validation. Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed). Peptide FDRs was set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed), with medium confidence and a minimum peptide length of 6. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification; oxidation (M) was set as a dynamic modification; acetyl (protein N-term), Met-loss (Protein N-term M) and Met-loss+acetyl (Protein N-term M) were set as dynamic N-Terminal modifications. Normalization was performed on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
The diverse modes of action of small molecule inhibitors provide versatile tools to investigate basic biology and develop therapeutics. However, it remains a challenging task to evaluate their exact mechanisms of action. We identified two classes of inhibitors for the p97 ATPase: ATP competitive and allosteric. We showed that the allosteric p97 inhibitor, UPCDC-30245, does not affect two well-known cellular functions of p97, endoplasmic-reticulum-associated protein degradation and the unfolded protein response pathway; instead, it strongly increases the lipidated form of microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light chain 3B (LC3-II), suggesting an alteration of autophagic pathways. To evaluate the molecular mechanism, we performed proteomic analysis of UPCDC-30245 treated cells. Our results revealed that UPCDC-30245 blocks endo-lysosomal degradation by inhibiting the formation of early endosome and reducing the acidity of the lysosome, an effect not observed with the potent p97 inhibitor CB-5083. This unique effect allows us to demonstrate UPCDC-30245 exhibits antiviral effects against coronavirus by blocking viral entry.

### Keywords
P97 inhibitor; proteomic; anti-virus

### Affiliations
Caltech
BBE, Caltech

### Submitter
Feng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
BBE, Caltech


