### Accession
PXD023292

### Title
N-degradomic analysis of proteolytic processing in WT1 heterozygous mice

### Description
N-degradomic analysis of proteolytic processing in WT1 heterozygous mice, suffering from genetically induced chronic kidney injury, compared to wild type

### Sample Protocol
Kidney cortices from WT1 heterozygous or control mice were removed, perfused with PBS, and snap-frozen. Proteins were solubilized under denaturing conditions and N-terminal peptides enriched by Terminal Amine Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) after differential primary amine labeling with formaldehyde labeling with isotopically light (12CH2O, wild type proteomes) and heavy (13CD2O, for WT1het proteomes) formaldehyde as described (Rinschen et al. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017; Demir et al Methods Mol Biol 2017).  Samples were desalted using home-made C18 STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al Nat Protocols 2007). An estimated 1µg of desalted enriched N-termini peptides were separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, particle size 3µm, ID 75µm, trap column length 2cm, analytical column length 25cm, Thermo) using a 60 min gradient (2% ACN to 30% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The nanoLC system was on-line coupled to an Impact II high resolution Q-TOF (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray nano ESI source (Bruker) essentially as described (Beck et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 2015). Nitrogen gas flow in the emitter device was saturated with acetonitrile as dopant using a nanoBooster device (Bruker) MS1 spectra with a mass range from m/z 200 to 1600 were acquired at 4 Hz, with the Top 15 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity-dependent spectra acquisition time between 2 and 20 Hz and stepped collision energy.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v.1.6.0.16  was used to match acquired spectra to peptide sequences in the UniProt mouse proteome database (release 2017-10) at a false discovery rate of 0.01 at the PSM level. Enzyme specificity set as semi-specific (free N-terminus) ArgC, Cys carbamidomethylation and Lys dimethylation (+28.031300) as fixed modifications and var N-terminal dimethylation (+28.031300), N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) or N-terminal pyroGlu formation from Glu (-18.010565) or Gln (-17.026549).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N termini, Mouse, Degradomics, Kidney injury, Kidney, Tails, Proteolytic processing

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Juelich


