### Accession
PXD011581

### Title
TGNap1 proteomic analysis -  TGNap1 is required for microtubule-dependent homeostasis of a subpopulation of the plant trans-Golgi network

### Description
TGNap1 coimmunoprecipitation from Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pull down performed using Dynabeads ProteinA immunoprecipitation kit.

### Data Protocol
The mascot output was analyzed using Scaffold v4.7.3

### Publication Abstract
Defining convergent and divergent mechanisms underlying the biogenesis and function of endomembrane organelles is fundamentally important in cell biology. In all eukaryotes, the Trans-Golgi Network (TGN) is the hub where the exocytic and endocytic pathways converge. To gain knowledge in the mechanisms underlying TGN biogenesis and function, we characterized TGNap1, a protein encoded by a plant gene of unknown function conserved with metazoans. We demonstrate that TGNap1 is a TGN protein required for the homeostasis of biosynthetic and endocytic traffic pathways. We also show that TGNap1 binds Rab6, YIP4 and microtubules. Finally, we establish that TGNap1 contributes to microtubule-dependent biogenesis, tracking and function of a TGN subset, likely through interaction with Rab6 and YIP4. Our results identify an important trafficking determinant at the plant TGN and reveal an unexpected reliance of post-Golgi traffic homeostasis and organelle biogenesis on microtubules in plants.

### Keywords
Proteomic analysis, Tgn, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Michigan State University, Plant Research Laboratory
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Luciana Renna

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Brandizzi
Michigan State University, Plant Research Laboratory


