### Accession
PXD029745

### Title
NAD metabolism modulates mitochondrial function and inflammation and prevents progression of diabetic kidney disease

### Description
Background: Diabetes mellitus is the leading cause of cardiovascular and renal disease in the United States. In spite of all of the beneficial interventions implemented in patients with diabetes, there remains a need for additional therapeutic targets in diabetic kidney disease (DKD). Mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation are increasingly recognized as important causes of the development and progression of DKD. However, the molecular connection between mitochondrial function, inflammation, and fibrosis remains to be elucidated. Methods: In the present studies we tested the hypothesis that enhancing NAD metabolism could increase mitochondrial sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) activity, improve mitochondrial function, decrease mitochondrial DNA damage, and prevent inflammation and progression of DKD.  Results: We found that treatment of db-db mice with type 2 diabetes with nicotinamide riboside (NR) prevented albuminuria, increased urinary KIM1 excretion, and several parameters of DKD. These effects were associated with increased SIRT3 activity, improved mitochondrial function, and decreased inflammation at least in part via inhibiting the activation of the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING) signaling pathway.  Conclusions: NR supplementation boosted the NAD metabolism to modulate mitochondrial function and inflammation and prevent progression of diabetic kidney disease.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen mouse kidney samples were lysed in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins were then reduced and alkylated followed by digestion with LysC (Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan) in the ratio of 1:100 (enzyme-to-protein, w/w) at 37°C for 3 hours. Subsequently, the proteins were further digested with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) in the ratio of 1:50 (enzyme-to-protein, w/w) at 37°C overnight after diluting the urea concentration from 8 M to 2 M. Proteins were then acidified, desalted, and lyophilized sequentially. The dried peptides were labeled with 16-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides was fractionated using basic pH RPLC for total proteome analysis as described previously 43.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS was analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The resulting spectra were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15 software package, Thermo Scientific) following standard procedures. Downstream analysis was performed with Perseus 44 using log2 normalized intensities of protein abundance. Absolute fold change of 1.5 and Bonferroni adjusted p-value of less than 0.05 was considered as significant change.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes mellitus is the leading cause of cardiovascular and renal disease in the United -States. Despite the beneficial interventions available for patients with diabetes, there remains a need for additional therapeutic targets and therapies in diabetic kidney disease (DKD). Inflammation and oxidative stress are increasingly recognized as important causes of renal diseases. Inflammation is closely associated with mitochondrial damage. The molecular connection between inflammation and mitochondrial metabolism remains to be elucidated. Recently, nicotinamide adenine nucleotide (NAD+) metabolism has been found to regulate immune function and inflammation. In the present studies, we tested the hypothesis that enhancing NAD metabolism could prevent inflammation in and progression of DKD. We found that treatment of db/db mice with type 2 diabetes with nicotinamide riboside (NR) prevented several manifestations of kidney dysfunction (i.e., albuminuria, increased urinary kidney injury marker-1 (KIM1) excretion, and pathologic changes). These effects were associated with decreased inflammation, at least in part via inhibiting the activation of the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING) signaling pathway. An antagonist of the serum stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and whole-body STING deletion in diabetic mice showed similar renoprotection. Further analysis found that NR increased SIRT3 activity and improved mitochondrial function, which led to decreased mitochondrial DNA damage, a trigger for mitochondrial DNA leakage which activates the cGAS-STING pathway. Overall, these data show that NR supplementation boosted NAD metabolism to augment mitochondrial function, reducing inflammation and thereby preventing the progression of diabetic kidney disease.

### Keywords
Nr, Diabetes, Dbdb, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Haifa
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC

### Submitter
Julia Panov

### Lab Head
Dr Moshe Levi
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC


