### Accession
PXD003317

### Title
Application of de novo sequencing to large-scale complex proteomics datasets

### Description
Dependent on concise, pre-defined protein sequence databases, traditional search algorithms perform poorly when analyzing mass spectra derived from wholly uncharacterized protein products. Conversely, de novo peptide sequencing algorithms can interpret mass spectra without relying on reference databases. However, such algorithms have been difficult to apply to complex protein mixtures, in part due to a lack of methods for automatically validating de novo sequencing results. Here, we present novel metrics for benchmarking de novo sequencing algorithm performance on large scale proteomics datasets, and present a method for accurately calibrating false discovery rates on de novo results. We also present a novel algorithm (LADS) which leverages experimentally disambiguated fragmentation spectra to boost sequencing accuracy and sensitivity. LADS improves sequencing accuracy on longer peptides relative to other algorithms and improves discriminability of correct and incorrect sequences. Using these advancements, we demonstrate accurate de novo identification of peptide sequences not identifiable using database search-based approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Three samples were analyzed in this study. A simple, nine-protein mixture was prepared from purified commercial sources, and mixed at approximately equal molar ratios. A complex protein mixture was prepared from bovine brain tissue. An existing dataset following protein expression in yeast after heat shock response was downloaded from ProteomeExchange using Accession ID PXD000409. Nine Protein and bovine brain samples were labelled using the 2MEGA labeling protocol.   Dried peptide mixtures for the nine protein mixture, and bovine brain samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid at approximately 1 ug/ul, and 1 ul was analyzed by microcapillary liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Samples were analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an in-house built nanospray source, an Agilent 1200 Series binary HPLC pump, and a MicroAS autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 125 um ID x 18 cm fused silica microcapillary column with an in-house pulled emitter tip with an internal diameter of approximately 5 um. The column was packed with ProntoSIL C18 AQ reversed phase resin (3 um particles, 200Å pore size; MAC-MOD, Chadds Ford, PA). The nine protein mixture and synthetic peptide samples were separated on a compressed two-step gradient of 7-25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 97.5% acetonitrile) over 30 minutes and 25-45% B over 7 minutes. Bovine brain samples were separated by applying a two-step gradient: 7% -25% buffer B over 2h; 25-45% B over 30 min. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, 2.5% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode in which a full MS scan was acquired in an Orbitrap30 (AGC: 5x105; resolution: 6x104; m/z range: 360-1600; maximum ion injection time, 500 ms), followed by up to 10 HCD31 MS/MS spectra, collected from the most abundant ions from the full MS scan. MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (AGC: 2x105; resolution: 7.5x103; minimum m/z: 100; maximum ion injection time, 1000 ms; isolation width: 2 Da; normalized collision energy: 40; default charge state: 2; activation time: 30 ms; dynamic exclusion time: 60 sec; exclude singly-charged ions and ions for which no charge-state could be determined). The mass calibration of the orbitrap analyzer was maintained to deliver mass accuracies of ±5 ppm without an external calibrant. The nine protein mixture was analyzed once, while three technical replicates of both the labeled and unlabeled bovine brain samples were analyzed to assess variability and strengthen statistics.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were analyzed using the database-dependent search algorithms Mascot3 (ver. 2.3) and SEQUEST4 (ver. 28 rev 12) and the de novo sequencing programs PEAKS17 (ver. 7) pNovo16 (ver 1.1) and Pepnovo+18 (ver. 3.1) and LADS (ver. 1.0) as indicated. Spectra were precursor mass corrected and analyzed by database search against appropriate protein sequence databases. The nine proteins comprising the 9P dataset, downloaded from NCBI Protein (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/) plus common contaminants were used for the nine protein dataset. The bovine proteome (Uniprot) plus common contaminants was used for bovine brain datasets. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome (SGD) plus common contaminants was used for the yeast dataset. Each of these sequence sets were concatenated with reversed decoy protein versions for target-decoy FDR estimation and control. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) was set as a static modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as variable modification for unlabeled samples, adding lysine guanidination (+42.02 Da) and N-terminal light dimethylation (+28.03 Da) as static modifications and N-terminal heavy dimethylation as a differential modification (+34.06 Da) for 2MEGA labeled samples, and lysine SILAC (+8.01) as a differential modification on the yeast samples. SEQUEST and Mascot searches were conducted with LysC for the yeast and bovine brain datasets and no enzyme specificity for the nine protein dataset. All searches were conducted with 50 ppm precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerances were 10 mmu for Mascot and 0.5Da for SEQUEST. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR by restricting precursor mass accuracy, peptide length, number of internal protease cleavage sites, primary score (XCorr for SEQUEST and Ion Score for Mascot), and primary score difference between the top-two ranked peptides. A high-confidence set of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was created by combining SEQUEST and Mascot results exceeding the 1% FDR threshold described above and discarding any spectra for which SEQUEST and Mascot disagreed. All spectra were precursor mass corrected and deisotoped prior to analysis by de novo sequencing algorithms. Static and differential modifications were set, consistent with SEQUEST and Mascot searches. De novo sequencing parameters were adjusted for each algorithm individually for optimal accuracy. PEAKS was run with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Daltons. PepNovo+ was run a 0.01 Dalton precursor mass tolerance and 0.05 dalton mass tolerance on fragment ions. PNovo was run with a 6 ppm precursor mass tolerance and a 25 ppm fragment ion tolerance. LADS was run with a 10ppm tolerance on both precursor and fragment ions. Returned de novo results were compared with database search results using either an exact string match allowing for I/L substitutions or a PRM-based metric where noted. False discovery rates (FDR) for de novo search algorithms were estimated based on the rates of returning peptide identifications with <100% identity with the high-confidence database-search results.

### Publication Abstract
Dependent on concise, predefined protein sequence databases, traditional search algorithms perform poorly when analyzing mass spectra derived from wholly uncharacterized protein products. Conversely, de novo peptide sequencing algorithms can interpret mass spectra without relying on reference databases. However, such algorithms have been difficult to apply to complex protein mixtures, in part due to a lack of methods for automatically validating de novo sequencing results. Here, we present novel metrics for benchmarking de novo sequencing algorithm performance on large-scale proteomics data sets and present a method for accurately calibrating false discovery rates on de novo results. We also present a novel algorithm (LADS) that leverages experimentally disambiguated fragmentation spectra to boost sequencing accuracy and sensitivity. LADS improves sequencing accuracy on longer peptides relative to that of other algorithms and improves discriminability of correct and incorrect sequences. Using these advancements, we demonstrate accurate de novo identification of peptide sequences not identifiable using database search-based approaches.

### Keywords
Yeast, Large-scale computational analysis, Bos, Proteomics, De novo peptide sequencing, Ms/ms, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Stanford University Chemical and Systems Biology
Stanford University Department of Chemical and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Arun Devabhaktuni

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E. Elias
Stanford University Department of Chemical and Systems Biology


