### Accession
PXD005502

### Title
HLA B-27 rats peptidome -  The HLA-B27 peptidome in vivo in spondyloarthritis-susceptible HLA-B27 transgenic rats and the effect of ERAP1 deletion

### Description
HLA-B27 is a class I major histocompatibility (MHC-I) allele that confers susceptibility to the rheumatic disease ankylosing spondylitis (AS) by an unknown mechanism. ERAP1 is an aminopeptidase that trims peptides in the endoplasmic reticulum for binding to MHC-I molecules. ERAP1 shows genetic epistasis with HLA-B27 in conferring susceptibility to AS. Male HLA-B27 transgenic rats develop arthritis and serve as an animal model of AS, whereas female B27 transgenic rats remain healthy. We used large-scale quantitative mass-spectrometry to identify over 15,000 unique HLA-B27 peptide ligands, isolated after immunoaffinity purification of the B27 molecules from the spleens of HLA-B27 transgenic rats. Heterozygous deletion of ERAP1, which reduced ERAP1 level to less than half, had no qualitative or quantitative effects on the B27 peptidome. Homozygous deletion of ERAP1 affected approximately one third of the B27 peptidome, but left most of the B27 peptidome unchanged, suggesting the possibility that some of the HLA-B27 immunopeptidome is not processed in the presence of ERAP1. Deletion on ERAP1 was permissive for the AS-like phenotype. Deletion of ERAP1 increased mean peptide length, and increased the frequency of C-terminal hydrophobic residues and of N-terminal Ala, Ser or Lys. The presence of ERAP1 increased the frequency of C-terminal Lys and Arg, of Glu and Asp at intermediate residues, and of N-terminal Gly. Several peptides of potential interest in AS pathogenesis, previously identified in human cell lines, were isolated. However, rats susceptible to arthritis had B27 peptidomes similar to those of non-susceptible rats, and no peptides were found to be uniquely associated with arthritis. Whether specific B27-bound peptides are required for AS pathogenesis remains to be determined.

### Sample Protocol
Rat spleens were resected after sacrifice with CO2 and immediately frozen in liquid N2. The spleens were kept at -80ºC until thawed in lysis buffer. Solubilization was carried out on ice in lysis buffer containing PBS, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Octyl-β-D glucopyranoside, 1:200 Protease inhibitor (PI) cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340) and 1 mM PMSF, as described in (Milner et al. 2013). The splenic extracts were clarified by centrifugation for 60 min at 4ºC and 48,000g. The HLA molecules were immunoaffinity-purified using the B1.23.2 mAb covalently linked to AminoLink Agarose resin (Thermo-Scientific) as described in (Bassani-Sternberg et al. 2010). The HLA molecules with their bound peptides were eluted with 1 % TFA, which induces dissociation of the HLA-β2m-peptide complexes. The released peptides were separated from the HLA heavy subunit, the β2m and from other bound proteins using disposable reversed-phase MicroTip C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) columns, and eluted in 30% and acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA, as previously described (Milner et al. 2013). The peptides were analyzed by a capillary HPLC chromatography on pulled capillaries of 0.075 mm ID and about 20 cm long (Ishihama et al. 2002) packed with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 micron beads (Reprosil-C18-Aqua, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatography was performed with the UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC system (Thermo-Scientific) which was coupled by electrospray to tandem mass spectrometry on Q-Exactive-Plus (Thermo-Scientific) using the same parameters as in (Bourdetsky, Schmelzer, and Admon 2014). The HLA peptides were eluted with a linear gradient over 2 hours from 5 to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent ‘top 10’ method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The full scan MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3x106 ions. Ions were accumulated to AGC target value of 105 with maximum injection time of 100 msec. No fragmentation was performed for peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states or charge states of four and above. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented masses were dynamically excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
. Peptides were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant software tool (Cox and Mann 2008) version 1.5.0.25 with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011) using the rat section of the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2014_11,  containing 27,311 entries). Peptides were identified in the database assuming no specific enzyme proteolysis. The peptides precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to eight amino acid residues. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for 0.05 for MHC peptides. The LC-MS-MS data files of separate sets of peptidomes immunoaffinity purified and analyzed separately by LC-MS-MS were analyzed independently by the MaxQuant software in order to reduce misidentifications by the ‘match between runs’ subroutine. Graphical and statistical analysis of the results was performed with Perseus (Tyanova et al. 2016). Assignment of HLA scores to the different identified peptides were done by NetMHC, which ranks the peptides according to their fitness to one of the HLA allomorphs, with peptides ranking below 2% relative to 400,000 different peptides in the NetMHC database (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHC/) considered as intermediate affinity ligands of the particular HLA (Andreatta and Nielsen 2016, Nielsen et al. 2003). Additionally, peptides were assigned with B27 scores according to the BIMAS MHC peptides database (http://www-bimas.cit.nih.gov/) (Parker, Bednarek, and Coligan 1994).

### Publication Abstract
HLA-B27 is a class I major histocompatibility (MHC-I) allele that confers susceptibility to the rheumatic disease ankylosing spondylitis (AS) by an unknown mechanism. ERAP1 is an aminopeptidase that trims peptides in the endoplasmic reticulum for binding to MHC-I molecules. ERAP1 shows genetic epistasis with HLA-B27 in conferring susceptibility to AS. Male HLA-B27 transgenic rats develop arthritis and serve as an animal model of AS, whereas female B27 transgenic rats remain healthy. We used large scale quantitative mass spectrometry to identify over 15,000 unique HLA-B27 peptide ligands, isolated after immunoaffinity purification of the B27 molecules from the spleens of HLA-B27 transgenic rats. Heterozygous deletion of Erap1, which reduced the Erap1 level to less than half, had no qualitative or quantitative effects on the B27 peptidome. Homozygous deletion of Erap1 affected approximately one-third of the B27 peptidome but left most of the B27 peptidome unchanged, suggesting the possibility that some of the HLA-B27 immunopeptidome is not processed in the presence of Erap1. Deletion of Erap1 was permissive for the AS-like phenotype, increased mean peptide length and increased the frequency of C-terminal hydrophobic residues and of N-terminal Ala, Ser, or Lys. The presence of Erap1 increased the frequency of C-terminal Lys and Arg, of Glu and Asp at intermediate residues, and of N-terminal Gly. Several peptides of potential interest in AS pathogenesis, previously identified in human cell lines, were isolated. However, rats susceptible to arthritis had B27 peptidomes similar to those of non-susceptible rats, and no peptides were found to be uniquely associated with arthritis. Whether specific B27-bound peptides are required for AS pathogenesis remains to be determined. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005502.

### Keywords
Transgenic rats, Human leukocytes antigen, Ankylosing spondylitis, Hla-b27, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology
Technion

### Submitter
Dganit Melamed Kadosh

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology


