### Accession
PXD007055

### Title
Chromokinesin KIF4A teams up with STMN1 to regulate abscission in a SUMO-dependent manner

### Description
Cell division ends when two daughter cells physically separate via abscission, the cleavage of the intercellular bridge. It is currently less clear how the anti-parallel microtubule bundles bridging daughter cells are severed. Here, we provide evidence for a novel abscission mechanism. We found that the chromokinesin KIF4A accumulates adjacent to the midbody during cytokinesis and is required for efficient abscission. KIF4A interacts with the microtubule destabilizer STMN1 as identified by mass spectrometry, providing mechanistic insight. This interaction is enhanced by SUMOylation of KIF4A. We mapped lysine 460 in KIF4A as SUMO acceptor site and employed CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome editing to block SUMO conjugation of endogenous KIF4A, resulting in a delay in cytokinesis. Combined, our work provides novel insight in abscission regulation by a KIF4A, STMN1 and SUMO triad.

### Sample Protocol
An in vitro SUMOylation reaction was performed for 3 hours at 4°C with 10 µg recombinant WT or K460R GST-KIF4A in buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, 3 µg SUMO E1, 10 µg SUMO E2 and 20 µg SUMO K0. The same buffer conditions, except for the absence of SUMO K0, were used as an additional negative control. Samples were incubated with Glutathione Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare) for one hour at 4°C, followed by washing twice with buffer 6 (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl). Subsequently, samples were incubated for two hours at 4°C with U2OS cell lysate. Lysates were prepared in buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton-X100, 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM, Sigma) and protease inhibitors with EDTA. After washing three times with buffer 6, samples were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma) and eluted for 30 minutes at RT and 1200 rpm in ABC complemented with 20 mM glutathione (Sigma).  Samples were passed through pre-washed 0.45 µm filter columns to remove the beads and digested by incubation with 2 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C and 500 rpm. To acidify the samples, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 2%. Stage tips containing C18 (Sigma) were activated by passing HPLC-grade methanol (Sigma), washed with 80% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma) in 0.1% formic acid (FA, Sigma) and equilibrated with 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded on these stage tips, washed twice with 0.1% FA and eluted twice with 80% ACN. Finally, samples were vacuum dried using a SpeedVac RC10.10 (Jouan), redissolved in 0.1% FA and transferred to autoloader vials before measurement by mass spectrometry. Four independent experiments were performed and all samples were measured by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon) connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using Max Quant Software version 1.5.3.30 with its integrated search engine Andromeda. The search was performed against the in silico digested proteome containing 92180 entries of Homo sapiens from UniProt (24th March 2016). Label-free quantification was performed using LFQ settings with fast LFQ disabled to quantify all identified peptides. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined to a single protein group by Max Quant. These protein groups were further analysed using Perseus Software version 1.5.2.4. Proteins identified in the categories ‘potential contaminant’, ‘reverse’ or ‘only identified by site’ were removed. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and the experimental replicates for each condition were assigned together in an experimental group. Subsequently, all proteins that were not identified in each experimental replicate of at least one experimental group were removed. Missing values were imputed based on the total matrix, using normally distributed values with a randomized 0.3 width (log2) and a 1.8 down shift (log2). Two-samples Student T-tests were performed between the indicated samples to obtain p values and differences for each protein. These values were visualized in a volcano plot, showing p values (as -Log10(p)) on the y-axis and differences (as Log2FC (fold change)) on the x-axis. All proteins with a p value below 0.05 were considered to bind significantly different between the two indicated experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Mitosis, Kif4a, Stmn1, Lc-ms/ms, Cytokinesis, Abscission

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Sabine Cuijpers

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C. O. Vertegaal
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, the Netherlands


