### Accession
PXD023664

### Title
Identification of a TOR-regulated phosphoproteome and the regulation of cellular protein synthesis

### Description
We describe an in depth analysis in fission yeast of changes in the phosphoproteome after inhibition of the TOR protein kinases. A total of 756 phosphosites on 316 proteins showed significant and rapid changes in phosphorylation levels after TOR kinase inhibition when the rate of protein synthesis reduced by 90%. These proteins were involved in a range of cellular processes including 4 that featured strongly: signalling-related processes, translation, cell polarity and actin cytoskeletal organisation, and vesicle-mediated transport and autophagy. We propose that these processes have major roles in TOR regulated cellular growth control. We also show that the S6 protein kinases have no role in immediate TOR regulated cellular protein synthesis, but in contrast there is a role for Tif471, the translation initiation factor homologue of eIF4G. This protein becomes rapidly phosphorylated after TORC1 inhibition in particular, but if that phosphorylation is prevented, as demonstrated by mutations on the specific phosphosites, the inhibition of protein synthesis rate is reduced. We propose that this factor is a downstream target of the TOR pathway, with a role in partially regulating global cellular protein synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
300 μg of each protein sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 25 minutes at 56°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, then quenched with 7.5 M DTT. Samples were diluted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to reduce the urea concentration to < 2 M, prior to trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C. Peptides were then acidified and desalted using a C18 SepPak column under vacuum and dried. The samples were arranged in sets of ten and labeled using the TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher), as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Following labeling and mixing, multiplexed samples were again desalted using a C18 SepPak column. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography (SMOAC, ThermoFisher) with initial enrichment using the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit followed by the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Scientific) for the non-bound flowthrough fractions. Phosphopeptides were eluted, desalted using a C18 StageTip and analyzed in triplicate on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation. Each run consisted of a three hour gradient elution from a 75 μm × 50 cm C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.13) was used for all data processing. The data was searched against a UniProt extracted S. pombe proteome FASTA file, amended to include common contaminants. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with Phospho(STY) being added as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Fission yeast, S. pombe, Tor, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Nurse
The Francis Crick Institute


