### Accession
PXD022757

### Title
Budding yeast relies on qualitative G1 cyclin specificity to couple cell cycle progression with morphogenetic development

### Description
Two models have been put forward for cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) control of the cell cycle. In the qualitative model, cell cycle events are ordered by distinct substrate specificities associated with successive waves of G1, S and mitotic cyclins. Alternatively, the gradual quantitative rise of Cdk activity from G1 phase to mitosis could lead to ordered substrate phosphorylation at sequential thresholds. Here, we study the relative contributions of qualitative and quantitative Cdk control in the budding yeast S. cerevisiae. S-phase cyclins can be replaced by a single mitotic cyclin, albeit at the cost of reduced fitness. The single cyclin can in addition replace G1 cyclins to support ordered cell cycle progression, fulfilling key predictions of the quantitative model. However, single-cyclin cells fail to polarize or grow buds and thus cannot sustain proliferation. Our results suggest that budding yeast has become dependent on G1 cyclin specificity to couple cell cycle progression to essential morphogenetic events.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken in 10 minute intervals from 0 – 90 minutes and fixed in trichloroacetic acid. Cells were washed with acetone, resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM EDTA pH 7.5, 8 M urea) and broken by glass bead beating. Extracts were cleared by centrifugation.  Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. The alkylation reaction was quenched with an additional 10 mM dithiothreitol, and then each sample was diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to digestion. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by the addition of 4 μg LysC (WAKO) and incubated at 37°C for 2.5 h followed by the addition of 10 μg trypsin (Pierce) and overnight incubation at 37°C. After acidification, C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) were used to clean up the digested peptide solutions and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 0.8 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in acetonitrile. Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine, and a pool was made of each set of samples. Acetonitrile content was removed from the pooled TMT solution by vacuum centrifugation and then acidified before using a Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) to clean up the labelled peptide pool prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. The eluted TMT-labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptide enrichment was subsequently carried out using the sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) strategy with High Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of the SMOAC Fe-NTA  flowthough corresponding to approximately 100ug was fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). Dried TMT-labelled peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50-cm, 75-μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a 3-h gradient run at 40°C, eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was run in data-dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Injections were made with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies described [1]. 1. Jiang X, Bomgarden R, Brown J, Drew DL, Robitaille AM, Viner R, et al. Sensitive and Accurate Quantitation of Phosphopeptides Using TMT Isobaric Labeling Technique. J Proteome Res. 2017 Nov 3;16(11):4244–52. pmid:29022350

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant [2] (version 1.6.2.10) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae canonical sequences from UniProtKB (UP000002311 reference proteome release 2019_04). Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file. Other parameters were used as preset in the software. The MaxQuant output file PhosphoSTY Sites.txt, an FDR-controlled site-based table compiled by MaxQuant from the relevant information about the identified peptides, was imported into Perseus (v1.4.0.2) for data evaluation. 2. Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec 30;26(12):1367–72. pmid:19029910  3. Vizcaíno JA, Côté RG, Csordas A, Dianes JA, Fabregat A, Foster JM, et al. The Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE) database and associated tools: status in 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Nov 29;41(D1):D1063–9.

### Publication Abstract
Two models have been put forward for cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) control of the cell cycle. In the qualitative model, cell cycle events are ordered by distinct substrate specificities of successive cyclin waves. Alternatively, in the quantitative model, the gradual rise of Cdk activity from G<sub>1</sub> phase to mitosis leads to ordered substrate phosphorylation at sequential thresholds. Here, we study the relative contributions of qualitative and quantitative Cdk control in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> All S phase and mitotic cyclins can be replaced by a single mitotic cyclin, albeit at the cost of reduced fitness. A single cyclin can also replace all G<sub>1</sub> cyclins to support ordered cell cycle progression, fulfilling key predictions of the quantitative model. However, single-cyclin cells fail to polarize or grow buds and thus cannot survive. Our results suggest that budding yeast has become dependent on G<sub>1</sub> cyclin specificity to couple cell cycle progression to essential morphogenetic events.

### Keywords
Cyclin-dependent kinase, Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Cell cycle, Lc-ms/ms, Cyclin, Tmt, Cdk

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Chromosome Segregation Laboratory The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road  NW1 1AT UK

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Uhlmann
Chromosome Segregation Laboratory The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road  NW1 1AT UK


