### Accession
PXD004265

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Bombyx mori prothoracic glands from day 0 and day 6 of the 5th instar

### Description
The project aim was to identify the proteins expressed by the prothoracic gland cells during the final larval stage of the model insect, Bombyx mori.

### Sample Protocol
Prothoracic glands from day 0 and day 6 (onset of wandering stage) of the 5th instar were used to analyze the protein expression profiles of B. mori PG cells. Larvae were anesthetized by submersion in water and PGs were dissected rapidly (~2 min/animal) from each larva in sterile saline (0.85% NaCl). The glands were pre-incubated in Grace’s medium (Invitrogen) for 15–30 minutes and meticulously cleared of any associated tissue or debris. Then, glands were pooled and successively transferred to gradually diminishing volumes of Grace’s medium drops (n=5) before being snap frozen in dry ice and stored at -80oC.  Lysis of prothoracic glands Prothoracic glands were resuspended in 150 μl lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 4% SDS and freshly made 100 mM DTT. Samples were incubated for 3 min at 95 °C, followed by 20 minute incubation in a sonication water bath in order to shear the DNA. Finally, the samples were centrifuged at 17000xg for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes.  Protein Digestion The protein extracts were processed according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol using spin filter devices with 10kDa cutoff (Sartorius, VN01H02).  150 μl lysate were diluted in 8 M Urea/100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, the filters were extensively washed with the urea solution and treated with 10 mg/ml iodoacetamide in the urea solution and incubated for 30 min in the dark for the alkylation of cysteines. The proteins on the top of the filters were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally the proteins were digested adding 1 μg trypsin/LysC mix in 80 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (Mass spec grade, Promega) and incubated over night at 37 °C. Next day the peptides were eluted by centrifugation and followed by speed-vac-assisted solvent removal, reconstitution of peptides in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water and transferred into LC-MS glass sample vials. Peptide concentration was determined by nanodrop absorbance measurement at 280 nm.  Ultra High Pressure nanoLC 2.5  μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μl/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column ((Acclaim PepMap100, 100μmx2cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and solution B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% in 450 min for a 8-h gradient run with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35 °C.  LC-MS/MS The purified peptides were analyzed by HPLC MS/MS using coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanospray source.  Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode and data-dependent acquisition with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for internal calibration. Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software tools. The Orbitrap raw data (peak S/N threshold was set to 1.5) were searched using SEQUEST HT against the uniprot Bombyx mori entries  with strict trypsin specificity and with maximum two missed cleavages and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagines residues and acetylation of the N-terminus. The peptides were filtered based on their Xcorr values versus peptide charge states (XCorr >1.9 for charge state +2 and XCorr >2.5 for charge state +3).

### Publication Abstract
The cells of prothoracic glands (PG) are the main site of synthesis and secretion of ecdysteroids, the biochemical products of cholesterol conversion to steroids that shape the morphogenic development of insects. Despite the availability of genome sequences from several insect species and the extensive knowledge of certain signalling pathways that underpin ecdysteroidogenesis, the spectrum of signalling molecules and ecdysteroidogenic cascades is still not fully comprehensive. To fill this gap and obtain the complete list of cell membrane receptors expressed in PG cells, we used combinatory bioinformatic, proteomic and transcriptomic analysis and quantitative PCR to annotate and determine the expression profiles of genes identified as putative cell membrane receptors of the model insect species, Bombyx mori, and subsequently enrich the repertoire of signalling pathways that are present in its PG cells. The genome annotation dataset we report here highlights modules and pathways that may be directly involved in ecdysteroidogenesis and aims to disseminate data and assist other researchers in the discovery of the role of such receptors and their ligands.

### Keywords
Ecdysteroid, Proteomic analysis, Bombyx mori, Prothoracic glands

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Skarlatos Dedos

### Lab Head
Dr Skarlatos G. Dedos
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece


