### Accession
PXD043954

### Title
Atmospheric and Room Temperature Plasma (ARTP) Mutagenesis Improved the Anti-MRSA Activity of Brevibacillus sp. SPR20

### Description
Brevibacillus sp. SPR20 produced potentially antibacterial substances against MRSA. The synthe-sis of these substances is controlled by their biosynthetic gene clusters. Several mutagenesis methods are used to overcome the restriction of gene regulations when genetic information is ab-sent. Atmospheric and room temperature plasma (ARTP) is a powerful technique to make random mutagenesis for microbial strain improvement. This study utilized an argon-based ARTP to conduct the mutations on SPR20. The positive mutants of 40% occurred. The M27 mutant exhib-ited an increase in anti-MRSA activity when compared to the wild-type, by which the MIC values were 250500 and 500 g/mL, respectively. M27 had genetic stability because it exhibited con-stant activity throughout 15 generations. This mutant had similar morphology and antibiotic susceptibility to the wild-type. Comparative proteomic analysis identified some specific proteins that were upregulated in M27. These proteins were involved in the metabolism of amino acids, cell structure and movement, and catalytic enzymes. These might result in the enhancement of the anti-MRSA activity of the ARTP-treated SPR20 mutant. This study supports the ARTP technology to increase the production of valuable antibacterial agents.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the protein expression profiles of the mutant and wild-type strains of SPR20, the protein extraction was followed by a previous study [47]. Briefly, the cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer (0.1x PBS buffer pH 7.4, 1% SDS, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM PMSF) and lysed by an ultrasonic probe (Sonics VCX-500 processor, Sonics & Materials. Inc., Newtown, CT, USA) at 60% amplitude for 30 s. The lysed cells were centrifuged at 10,000 g, 4 C for 20 min, and the proteins in the supernatant were precipitated using ice-cold acetone and stored at -20 °C for 16 h. The protein pellets were reconstituted in 0.25% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured by Bradford test using bovine serum albumin as a standard. The total protein of 25 µg was subjected to trypsin digestion in which the protein samples were reduced the sulfhydryl bonds by utilizing 5 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 90 C for 15 min, and then the alkylation of sulfhydryl was done at room temperature for 25 min in the dark. The solution was cleaned up by a Zeba-Spin desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The flow-through solution was enzymatically digested by trypsin (Promega GmbH, Walldorf, Germany) at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37 C for 6 h. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and transferred to a TruView LCMS vial (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). A total amount of peptides (1.25 g) was subjected to LC-MS/MS. The spectrum data was collected in a positive mode on an Orbitrap HF hybrid mass spectrometer combined with an EASY-nLC1000 nano-liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with a nano C18 column. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) were utilized in the LC condition as the following; the linear gradient from 245% B for 105 min, and the regeneration at 90% B for 10 min, and the re-equilibration at 5% B for 35 min. The peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent acquisition method, followed by a higher-energy collisional dissociation at a collision energy of 28. A full-scan mass spectra (MS) were acquired from the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) between 400 and 1600 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3 × 106 ions and a resolution of 120,000. MS/MS scan was initiated when the ACG target reached 105 ions and a resolution of 15,000. The raw mass spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and identified against the UniProt protein database (Organism: brevibacillus database; 195,729 sequences retrieved on 22 Oct 2021). To identify and quantify proteins, the following parameters were used: peptide tolerance (20 ppm), fragment tolerance (0.05 Da), minimum fragment ion matches per peptide (2), digest enzyme (trypsin), fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identification was set to 1%. The relative protein abundances ratio was normalized using the software's normalization algorithm (total intensity count) by considering the total peptide amount across all LC runs (n = 12) [48].

### Data Protocol
To identify the differentially expressed protein list, the Proteome Discoverer software utilized multiple consensus workflows to compile peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) into peptide groups, protein database matches, and non-redundant protein groups. This compilation was based on the principle of strict parsimony, as defined by the software's default settings. The heterogeneity of variation in two experimental conditions was investigated using PCA to visualize differences among intra- and inter-group replicates. Microsoft Word 365 was used to create Venn diagrams that grouped the identified proteins from different species, highlighting both unique and common proteins. To ensure error-free log transformation for pathway over-representation analysis, all protein expression values were transformed into relative expression data by adding "1" to each expression value. A gene ontology enrichment analysis was manually performed using the web-based software tools, a Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot) (retrieved on 22 Oct 2021)) [49].

### Publication Abstract
<i>Brevibacillus</i> sp. SPR20 produced potentially antibacterial substances against methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (MRSA). The synthesis of these substances is controlled by their biosynthetic gene clusters. Several mutagenesis methods are used to overcome the restriction of gene regulations when genetic information is absent. Atmospheric and room temperature plasma (ARTP) is a powerful technique to initiate random mutagenesis for microbial strain improvement. This study utilized an argon-based ARTP to conduct the mutations on SPR20. The positive mutants of 40% occurred. The M27 mutant exhibited an increase in anti-MRSA activity when compared to the wild-type strain, with the MIC values of 250-500 and 500 &#x3bc;g/mL, respectively. M27 had genetic stability because it exhibited constant activity throughout fifteen generations. This mutant had similar morphology and antibiotic susceptibility to the wild type. Comparative proteomic analysis identified some specific proteins that were upregulated in M27. These proteins were involved in the metabolism of amino acids, cell structure and movement, and catalytic enzymes. These might result in the enhancement of the anti-MRSA activity of the ARTP-treated SPR20 mutant. This study supports the ARTP technology designed to increase the production of valuable antibacterial agents.

### Keywords
Atmospheric and room temperature plasma (artp); anti-mrsa activity; brevibacillus sp.; muta-genesis; proteomic analysis; strain improvement.

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
School of Pharmacy, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80161, Thailand

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Apichart Atipairin
School of Pharmacy, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80161, Thailand


