### Accession
PXD013592

### Title
The jasmonate regulome: Reconstructing a hormone signalling pathway from transcription factor activity to phenotypic outputs

### Description
We have investigated the genome regulatory network that controls responses to the hormone jasmonate in seedlings. There is much interest currently in understanding the systems-level actions of transcription factors. However, such studies can provide much greater biological insight if set in the context of the signal transduction pathway that initiates gene expression changes and the downstream organismal phenotypes they control. We have generated an integrated framework of the response to jasmonate that spans from signal perception and transduction, through activity of master and secondary-regulatory transcription factors, to gene expression outputs and chromatin remodelling. We make use of genome-wide target maps for hundreds of transcription factors, dynamic histone modification analysis, global proteome and phosphoproteome analyses, massively multiplexed protein-protein interactome data and time series transcriptome analysis. This enables us to predict previously unknown components of the jasmonate regulatory mechanism and validate them through targeted mutant studies. The result is a comprehensive understanding of how a plant hormone remodels cellular function and plant behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Three-day old dark-grown wild-type and myc2 seedlings were treated for two hours with/without gaseous methyl jasmonate, harvested and ground in liquid nitrogen.  Ground tissue was lysed in YeastBuster (Millipore Sigma, product number 71186). Proteins (100 ug per sample) were precipitated using methanol- chloroform. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were then trypsin digested overnight at 37 °C. The digested peptides were labeled with TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo catalog number 90309 (lot TE264412) and combined.  One hundred micrograms (the pre-enriched sample) was fractionated by basic reverse phase (Thermo 84868). Phosphopeptides were enriched from the remaining sample (900 ug) using High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo catalog number A32992). The TMT labeled samples were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 μm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 μm C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nLC 1200 (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 90% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1–20% B over 180 min, an increase to 40% B over 30 min, an increase to 100% B over another 20 min and held at 90% B for a final 10 min of washing was used for 240 min total run time. Column was re-equilibrated with 20 μL of buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Lumos was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120000 resolution. The cycle time was set to 3 s, and within this 3 s the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap. MS3 analysis with multinotch isolation (SPS3) was utilized for detection of TMT reporter ions at 60000 resolution. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter (ref1) and searched with ProLuCID (ref2) against an Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (www.araport.org Araport11_Release_201606). The search space included all fully- and half-tryptic candidates. For the phosphopeptide enriched samples, the search space included up to 3 differential modifications of 79.966331 on serine, threonine or tyrosine. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT labels on N terminus and lysine were considered as static modifications. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 600 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Identified proteins were filtered to using DTASelect (ref3) and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to control the protein false discovery rate to 1% (ref 4). Quantification was done using Census (ref 5).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the systems-level actions of transcriptional responses to hormones provides insight into how the genome is reprogrammed in response to environmental stimuli. Here, we investigated the signalling pathway of the hormone jasmonic acid (JA), which controls a plethora of critically important processes in plants and is orchestrated by the transcription factor MYC2 and its closest relatives in Arabidopsis thaliana. We generated an integrated framework of the response to JA, which spans from the activity of master and secondary regulatory transcription factors, through gene expression outputs and alternative splicing, to protein abundance changes, protein phosphorylation and chromatin remodelling. We integrated time-series transcriptome analysis with (phospho)proteomic data to reconstruct gene regulatory network models. These enabled us to predict previously unknown points of crosstalk of JA to other signalling pathways and to identify new components of the JA regulatory mechanism, which we validated through targeted mutant analysis. These results provide a comprehensive understanding of how a plant hormone remodels cellular functions and plant behaviour, the general principles of which provide a framework for analyses of cross-regulation between other hormone and stress signalling pathways.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Regulome, Jasmonic acid, Myc2

### Affiliations
Salk Institute of Biological Studies Howard Hughes Medical Institute
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph R. Ecker
Salk Institute of Biological Studies Howard Hughes Medical Institute


