### Accession
PXD013113

### Title
Proteomic analysis of 3D cultures of fibroblasts and Ras-transformed HaCaT keratinocytes

### Description
HaCaT, and its three retrovirally c-Ha-ras-transformed subclones, A5, II-4 and RT3 (abbreviated as ras-HaCaTs in the text) that exhibit benign, invasive and malignant phenotypes, respectively, were cultured as 3D monocultures and co-cultures with fibroblasts. After hypotonic lysis of the cells, the insoluble proteins were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins from 3D culture were dissolved in 50 µl of 8 M Urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The cysteines were reduced in 10 mM dithiotreitol at 37°C for 1 h and alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 h. The proteins were digested with LysC/Trypsin mixture (Promega), at 650 rpm at 37°C for 4 h, after dilution of the digestion mixture to 0.8 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, the digestion was continued for additional 16 h, and subsequently filtrated by a Microcon ultrafiltration device with 10 kDa cutoff (Merck-Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The peptides were desalted by StageTips (Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Anal Chem. 2003 Feb 1;75(3):663-70) and vacuum dried before the LC-MS/MS run. The peptides were dissolved in 1 % formic acid, and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 µ;m 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 46 min gradient from 7 to 25 % of solvent B followed by 4 min gradient from 25 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 5 min and kept there for 5 min. Full MS scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-1750 with a resolution of 140,000 followed by data dependent acquisition of with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was performed. The top 10 ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000 with a resolution of 17,500. After the MS2 scan for each of the top 10 ions had been obtained, a new full mass spectrum scan was acquired and the process repeated until the end of the 60-min run.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) against a database containing reviewed (SwissProt) human sequences, of UniProtKB release 2017_06. Peptide-spectrum-match- and protein-level false discovery rate thresholds were set to 0.01. Carbamidomethyl (C), as a fixed modification, and oxidation (MKP) as dynamic modifications were included. A maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin (also before P) was allowed. The LC-MS profiles were aligned (within 20 min), and the identifications were transferred to non-sequenced or non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs (within 0.7 min).

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the most common metastatic skin cancer, with increasing incidence worldwide. The molecular basis of cSCC progression to invasive and metastatic disease is still incompletely understood. Here, we show that fibroblasts and transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling promote laminin-332 synthesis in cancer cells in an activated H-Ras-dependent manner, which in turn promotes cancer cell invasion. Immunohistochemical analysis of sporadic UV-induced invasive human cSCCs (n&#x202f;=&#x202f;208) revealed prominent cSCC cell specific immunostaining for laminin-332 &#x3b3;2 chain, located in the majority of cases (90%, n&#x202f;=&#x202f;173) in the invasive edge of the tumors. To mimic the progression of cSCC we established 3D spheroid cocultures using primary skin fibroblasts and HaCaT/ras-HaCaT human keratinocytes. Our results indicate that in 3D spheroids, unlike in monolayer cultures, TGF-&#x3b2; upregulates laminin-332 production, but only in cells that harbour oncogenic H-Ras. Accumulation of laminin-332 was prevented by both H-Ras knock down and inhibition of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling by SB431542 or RAdKD-ALK5 kinase-defective adenovirus. Furthermore, fibroblasts accelerated the invasion of ras-HaCaT cells through collagen I gels in a Ras/TGF-&#x3b2; signaling dependent manner. In conclusion, we demonstrate the presence of laminin-332 in the invasive front of cSCC tumors and report a new Ras/TGF-&#x3b2;-dependent mechanism that promotes laminin-332 accumulation and cancer cell invasion.

### Keywords
Hacat, Hras, Fibroblast keratinocyte

### Affiliations
Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland


