### Accession
PXD020870

### Title
Nuclear phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) triphosphate interactome uncovers an enrichment in nucleolar proteins

### Description
Polyphosphoinositides (PPIn) play essential functions as lipid signalling molecules and many of their functions have been elucidated in the cytoplasm. However, PPIns are also intranuclear where they contribute to chromatin remodelling, transcription and mRNA splicing. The PPIn, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) has been mapped to the nucleus and nucleoli but its role remains unclear in this subcellular compartment. To gain further insights into the nuclear functions of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, we applied a previously developed quantitative mass spectrometry-based approach to identify the targets of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 from isolated nuclei. We identified 179 potential PtdIns(3,4,5)P3-interacting proteins and gene ontology analysis for the biological functions of this dataset revealed an enrichment in RNA processing/splicing, cytokinesis, protein folding and DNA repair. Interestingly, about half of these interactors were common to nucleolar protein datasets, some of which had dual functions in rRNA transcription and DNA repair, including Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1 (PARP1),. PARP1 was found to interact directly with PPIns and to co-localise with PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 in the nucleolus. Focusing on another factor involved in RNA processing, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U (hnRNPU/SAF-A) was also identified and validated as a direct PPIn-interacting protein. Deletion of the polybasic motif in its DNA binding domain prevented PPIn interaction. In conclusion, the PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 interactome reported here identified several nucleolar proteins and splicing factors and further pointed to roles for this lipid in these processes.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion was performed as described (112) with some modifications. Briefly, the Coomassie brilliant blue-stained protein bands were excised, and following several washes, the gel pieces were subjected to a reduction step using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) buffer for 45 min at 56°C. Alkylation was performed with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Digestion was performed with 10 μl of trypsin (10 mg/l in 50 mM NH4HCO3) overnight at 370C. Eluted peptides were recovered, and the gel pieces were subsequently washed in 2.5% formic acid/80% acetonitrile for 30 min at 370C. The acid wash was combined with the original peptide eluate and dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analysed directly by nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptide mixtures were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed using a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano-LC system (Dionex). Optimal separation conditions resulting in maximal peptide coverage were achieved using an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) (Dionex) with an internal diameter of 75 μm and capillary length of 25 cm. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used with a solvent gradient of 5% B to 45% B in 85 min followed by increasing the gradient to 95% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% DMSO in water, whereas the composition of solvent B was 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% DMSO in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode using an Nth order double-play method to automatically switch between Full scan acquisition of peptide precursor ions and HCD generated fragments both using the Orbitrap mass analyser. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from 400 to 1,600 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution (R) 60,000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 charges). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the 10 most intense ions for fragmentation, depending on signal intensity, using HCD at a target value of 20,000 charges and resolution of 30,000. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Unassigned and 1+ charges were excluded from fragmentation selection. General MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 2.5 kV with no sheath or auxiliary gas flow, an ion selection threshold of 2,000 counts for MS/MS, an activation Q value of 0.25, activation time of 12 ms, capillary temperature of 2000C, and an S-Lens RF level of 60% were also applied. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 were excluded. Raw MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v.2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Processed files were searched against the SwissProt human database using the Mascot search engine version 2.3.0. Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing up to one missed cleavage and a tolerance on mass measurement of 10 ppm in MS mode and 20 ppm for MS/MS ions. Structure modifications allowed were oxidized methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues, which were searched as variable modifications. Using a reversed decoy database, false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1%. Only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides (and including at least 1 unique peptide) and common to the two replicate runs were kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
5)p3 interactome, 4, Ptdins (3, Poly(adp-ribose) polymerase 1 (parp1), Nuclear phosphoinisitides, Nucleolus, Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein u (hnrnpu/saf-a)

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Aurélia E. Lewis
University of Bergen


