### Accession
PXD031119

### Title
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein regulates tumorigenic and metastatic properties of colorectal cancer cells driving liver metastasis

### Description
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP), a putative positive intermediary in aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated signaling, is overexpressed in highly metastatic human KM12SM CRC cells, with high metastatic capacity to liver, and other highly metastatic CRC cells. Meta-analysis and immunohistochemistry were used to assess the relevance of this protein in CRC. Cellular functions and signaling mechanisms mediated by AIP were assessed by gain-of-function experiments and in vitro and in vivo experiments. A significant association of high AIP expression with poor CRC patients’ survival was observed. Gain-of-function and quantitative proteomics experiments demonstrated that AIP increased tumorigenic and metastatic properties of isogenic KM12C (poorly-metastatic) and KM12SM CRC cells. AIP overexpression dysregulated epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) markers and induced several transcription factors and Cadherin-17 activation. The former induced the signaling activation of AKT, SRC, and JNK kinases to increase adhesion, migration and invasion of CRC cells. In vivo, AIP expressing KM12 cells induced tumor growth and liver metastasis. Furthermore, KM12C (poorly-metastatic) cells ectopically expressing AIP became metastatic to liver. Our data reveal new roles for AIP in regulating proteins associated with cancer and metastasis to induce tumorigenic and metastatic properties in colon cancer cells driving liver metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
For identification and quantification by TMT of the AIP-associated proteome, 25 μg of protein extracts of each sample in 100 μL RIPA buffer were reduced with 10 μL 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) for 45 min at 37ºC and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 minutes at room temperature and 600 rpm and in darkness. Next, samples were incubated with 100 µL of Sera-Mag magnetic beads mix (50% hydrophilic beads – 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) and 200 μL of acetonitrile 100% for 35 min at room temperature and 600 rpm to allow protein binding to beads. Then, supernatants were discarded, and magnetic beads were washed twice with ethanol 70% and once with acetonitrile 100%. Finally, supernatants were discarded and protein digested overnight at 37ºC and 600 rpm by incubating each sample with 80 μl 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 μg porcine trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific). The next day, samples were sonicated and the supernatant was collected. All peptides from the four samples and both pools were separately labeled with ten different Tandem Mass Tags (Thermo Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA, lot UG288073) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Finally, the content of the tubes was pooled and dried under speed-vacuum before separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce). In brief, dehydrated samples were reconstituted in 300 μl H2O, TFA 0.1% and applied to the columns and peptides eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Six fractions were collected in total, and directly dried under speed-vacuum and stored at -80ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific) and eluted in an RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 μm inner diameter and 2 μm particle size (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 0%-35% solvent B for 90 min, 35%-100% solvent B for 4 min, 100% solvent B for 8 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected.  For ionization, 2000 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature were used. The full scan method employed an m/z 400-1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2019 database (20962 protein entries) using Reporter ion MS2 type. Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, acetylation N-terminal and Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Reporter ion intensities were bias-corrected for the overlapping isotope contributions from the TMT tags according to the manufacturer’s certificate. Unique and Razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction with a FDR threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cadherin-17, Colorectal cancer, Aip, Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein, Liver metastasis, Cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, E-28220 Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, E-28220 Madrid, Spain


