### Accession
PXD044161

### Title
Investigating the mechanism(s) underlying tryptamine and phenethylamine inhibition on insulin signaling

### Description
To investigate the mechanism(s) underlying tryptamine inhibition on insulin signaling, we employed a phospho-proteomics approach to capture the molecular components that are significantly altered by tryptamine.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were fasted for 4 hours and orally administered with tryptamine or vehicle. The WAT tissues were collected for the phosphoproteomics study. Mice tissue samples used for the TMT-labeled phosphoproteomics study were prepared as previously reported. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.038786

### Data Protocol
An Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50ï­m x 15cm) was used to separate the TMT-labelled peptides. The mobile phase used in LC-MS-Orbitrap was A: water with 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 20% water with 0.1% formic acid. The elution gradient was set as 0-5 min in 0-6% buffer B, 5-45 min in 6-28% buffer B, 45-50 min in 28%-38% buffer B, 50-55 min 38-100% buffer B and maintained during 50-60 min in 100% buffer B. The obtained MS/MS spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched using MASCOT engine 2.6. All protein sequences were aligned to the Mus musculus database downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org). The proteins with a fold change >1.2 or <0.8 and a p-value <0.05 were considered as differentially expressed proteins. KEGG pathway annotation was performed using KOALA (KEGG Orthology And Links Annotation) to identify the significantly enriched pathways.

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of metabolic syndrome is significantly higher in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but the mechanisms involved remain unclear. Gut microbiota is causatively linked with the development of both metabolic dysfunctions and gastrointestinal disorders, thus gut dysbiosis in IBS may contribute to the development of metabolic syndrome. Here, we show that human gut bacterium Ruminococcus gnavus-derived tryptamine and phenethylamine play a pathogenic role in gut dysbiosis-induced insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes (T2D) and IBS. We show levels of R. gnavus, tryptamine, and phenethylamine are positively associated with insulin resistance in T2D patients and IBS patients. Monoassociation of R. gnavus impairs insulin sensitivity and glucose control in germ-free mice. Mechanistically, treatment of R. gnavus-derived metabolites tryptamine and phenethylamine directly impair insulin signaling in major metabolic tissues of healthy mice and monkeys and this effect is mediated by the trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1)-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling axis. Our findings suggest a causal role for tryptamine/phenethylamine-producers in the development of insulin resistance, provide molecular mechanisms for the increased prevalence of metabolic syndrome in IBS, and highlight the TAAR1 signaling axis as a potential therapeutic target for the management of metabolic syndrome induced by gut dysbiosis.

### Keywords
Mouse adipose tissue lc-ms

### Affiliations
Hong Kong Baptist University
School of Chinese Medicine,  Hong Kong Baptist University

### Submitter
Lixiang Zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Lixiang Zhai
School of Chinese Medicine,  Hong Kong Baptist University


