### Accession
PXD001574

### Title
Phospho-iTRAQ -  Phospho-iTRAQ: Assessing Isobaric Labels for the Large-Scale Study Of Phosphopeptide Stoichiometry

### Description
One of the most extensively studied protein modifications is phosphorylation, a reversible posttranslational modification (PTM) with a central role in a broad range of cellular processes such as cell metabolism, homeostasis, transcription and apoptosis. Due to their transient character, phosphorylations initiate and propagate signal transduction pathways, making these fundamental to inter- and intracellular communication. Detection of phosphorylation is nevertheless challenging considering the dynamic regulation, low stoichiometry and heterogeneous character of the phosphosites. Numerous dedicated phosphoproteomics workflows have therefore been developed in order to unravel phosphorylation networks and the activity of their modulating enzymes. In these workflows, phosphopeptides are typically enriched prior to mass spectrometry analysis to remove the strong background interference caused by the bulk of non-phosphorylated peptides (3). Apart from requiring thorough optimization and a corresponding high level of expertise of the analyst however, enrichment is also responsible for sample loss and limited quantitation accuracy (4). Subsequent mass spectrometry analysis is furthermore confounded by low ionization efficiency and inferior fragmentation of phosphopeptides. Conventional MS/MS analysis with collision-induced dissociation predominantly results in the neutral loss of the phosphate group, leading to poor sequence coverage due to reduced backbone fragmentation. An additional stage of fragmentation in MS3 or the use of alternative fragmentation technologies such as higher energy C-trap dissociation or electron transfer dissociation can partially facilitate the detection and identification of phosphopeptides (5, 6).  In order to draw accurate biological conclusions it is mandatory to obtain quantitative information on the phospho-modifications. Most quantitative approaches aim to elucidate the relative phosphorylation changes between samples, employing direct label-free comparisons of phospho-enriched fractions, or metabolic or chemical labeling methods such as SILAC, iTRAQ or tandem mass tag (TMT) (4, 6, 7). Such methods however, forego the investigation of phosphorylation stoichiometry, also known as occupancy, since such analysis requires the simultaneous monitoring of the unphosphorylated counterpart (8).  One interesting labeling strategy that is specifically designed to quantify occupancy circumvents the common difficulties of standard phosphopeptide detection by focusing on the non-phosphorylated counterparts of the phosphopeptides (11). Herein, a peptide sample is briefly split in two identical parts which are differentially labeled, preceding a phosphatase treatment of one part and mock-treatment of the other. Immediately afterwards the two parts are recombined for the subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Dephosphorylation of a phosphopeptide will  induce a 79.979 mass shift resulting in a skewed label ratio in the unphosphorylated peptide’s reporter region which now specifies the phosphorylation stoichiometry (12). Although the principle has been described previously (12-19), only one phosphatase-based workflow was adapted specifically for the large-scale study of a complete lysate whereby known phosphopeptides present in a database were quantified by isotopic labels (20). Here we extend for the first time the isobaric tag equivalent of this approach for the large-scale quantitative phospho-analysis of complex mixtures. The technique was validated on three different instrument platforms on epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated HeLa cells (23). We discuss a novel data analysis approach for the discovery of high stoichiometry phosphopeptides in complex peptide mixtures and present a way to interpret the sizable dataset without matching the peptide identifications to a phospho-database. Because all peptides and not only the phosphorylated fraction of the proteome is measured in this approach, instruments with high-speed acquisition capabilities and adequate resolution for accurate reporter quantitation are indispensable. Still, because of the minimal technical variation that is introduced throughout the workflow (as for Wu et.al. (20)), implementation of extensive fractionation and purification steps such as protein gel-electrophoresis and 2DLC at the peptide level allows for more in-depth coverage of the (phospho) proteome. What makes this approach even more attractive, is that the iTRAQ multiplexing allows for a replicate measurement within one experiment, creating a new data analysis workflow that meets the stringent requirements of peptide quantitation. All three instrument panels were able to annotate a large set of known phosphoproteins. Extending the latter sample fractionation and using novel methodologies to avoid dilution of reporter ratios in MSMS will allow for the annotation of increasing numbers of phosphopeptide with increasingly low stoichometries in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Phospho-iTRAQ protocol: a peptide sample is briefly split in two identical parts and differentially labeled preceding the phosphatase treatment of one part. Afterwards, samples are immediately recombined and split into three parts for the LC-MS/MS analysis on three different instruments (SynaptG2 Si, TripleTOF 5600 and QExactive). Data Analysis: Raw data was processed by the respective vendor’s software before it was made available to the authors (in the context of a demo) and MGF-files were searched against the SwissProt Human database using Mascot. Exported DAT-files were imported into Rover for ranking the iTRAQ ratios and further analyzed in Excel. Data: Initially phosphorylated peptides have skewed iTRAQ ratios and arise out of the center of the log-normal distribution of the whole precursor population. The mean of the log-normal ratio distribution is located around zero as the vast majority of the peptides in the data has equal 114/115 or 116/117 reporters.  Experimental workflow: In the “in-solution” approach, the  soluble protein extracts (R1) of control and EGF-stimulated HeLa cells was spiked with an internal peptide standard (IS2) of heavy phosphopeptides and compared by Phospho-iTRAQ. When only one sample is mined (EGF), the flexibility of the protocol allows for gel purification and fractionation and thus for complementing the soluble protein extract (R1) with the hydrophobic fraction diluted in strongly denaturing buffer (R3) to increase the number of annotated phosphopeptides (“in-gel” approach). The EGF-stimulated cells were here spiked with a phosphoprotein internal standard (IS1) before fractionation on a 1D PAGE into four molecular weight fractions followed by Phospho-iTRAQ. Next, the labeled peptides 114-116 and 115-117 were combined into two separate vials. To the 115-117 sample dephosphorylating enzyme cocktail and to the 114-116 sample only the buffers were added for simultaneous incubation. After the inhibition of the phosphatases, all parts were pooled.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition, recording and pre-processing was carried out with software of the respective mass spectrometer manufacturers. Equally, the raw data was processed by specialized software packages of the vendors: ProteinPilot™ 4.0.8085 for the TripleTof 5600 of ABSciex, Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for the Thermo Scientific QExactive, and PLGS 3.0.1 for the SYNAPT G2-Si of Waters Cooperation. The same software packages were used to export the created peak lists in the MGF format. The database searches of these MGF files were performed with Mascot 2.4.0. (Matrix Science) against the SwissProt Human database (59.084 sequences, supplemented with the sequences of the internal standards). Initially, the prevalence of the most common modifications was explored by an Error Tolerant database search (25). Details an search parameters can be found in Supporting Information 3. The  result files of these searches were exported as Mascot-DAT file formats (Peptide e-value < 0.05), and each run was then imported separately in the Rover software for individual processing (https://code.google.com/p/compomics-rover/) (26). After obtaining Rover statistics on the 114/115 and 116/117 ratios, the data were filtered in order to export the log2 ratios and z-scores of unique or “razor” peptides for consecutive data validation. Data validation and frequency plot distribution of Z-scores (at a bin size of  0.1) was done in Excel, whereby the Z-scores of the four molecular weight fractions of the “R1+R3 extracts” were combined. Additional database searches were performed by changing the variable modifications in order to annotate the “heavy” internal standard phosphopeptides (see Supporting information 3). Phosphoprotein enrichment in the obtained protein lists was assessed by a right-sided Fisher enrichment test at a significance level of 5%. Known phosphoproteins in human were obtained from the PhosphoSitePlus database (www.phosphosite.com). The total number of proteins known in human was estimated based on the described proteins in the PFAM database. Proteins involved in the EGF pathway were identified by querying the BioCarta database.  To assess the relative amount of phosphopeptides present in the lists generated by the Phospho-iTRAQ approach, these lists were compared to the known phosphopeptides present in the PhosphoSitePlus database by means of a protein blast as integrated in the NCBI blast 2.2.28 package. The procedure allowed for partial mappings between Phospho-iTRAQ peptides and the phosphopeptides. That is, stretches of at least 5 amino acids in both peptide sequences had to map unambiguously to each other (irrespective of overhangs that result from e.g. tryptic miscleavages), i.e. no gaps or mutations were allowed in the procedure.  To assess a threshold for filtering out phosphopeptides, we first extracted the Z-scores of all annotated peptides that cannot be phosphorylated: peptides with no serine, threonine or tyrosine (No STY). On the No STY distribution, Z-scores at different quantile levels (1 to 25% on the left site of the distribution), were chosen as a cutoff value (Figure 3, upper panels). To select the phosphopeptides in the data, these Z-score cutoffs were subsequently transposed to the ranked Z-scores of the peptides that have the ability to be phosphorylated (with an STY in the sequence). Different levels, going from the left percentile to the quantiles of the distribution were applied to set the threshold on the 114/115-control sample and the 116/117-EGF treated sample.

### Publication Abstract
The ability to distinguish between phosphopeptides of high and low stoichiometry is essential to discover the true extent of protein phosphorylation. We here extend the strategy whereby a peptide sample is briefly split in two identical parts and differentially labeled preceding the phosphatase treatment of one part. Our use of isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) marks the first time that isobaric tags have been applied for the large-scale analysis of phosphopeptides. Our Phospho-iTRAQ method focuses on the unmodified counterparts of phosphorylated peptides, which thus circumvents the ionization, fragmentation, and phospho-enrichment difficulties that hamper quantitation of stoichiometry in most common phosphoproteomics methods. Since iTRAQ enables multiplexing, simultaneous (phospho)proteome comparison between internal replicates and multiple samples is possible. The technique was validated on multiple instrument platforms by adding internal standards of high stoichiometry to a complex lysate of control and EGF-stimulated HeLa cells. To demonstrate the flexibility of Phospho-iTRAQ with regards to the experimental setup, the proteome coverage was extended through gel fractionation, while an internal replicate measurement created more stringent data analysis opportunities. The latest developments in MS instrumentation promise to further increase the resolution of the stoichiometric measurement of Phospho-iTRAQ in the future. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001574.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Pitraq, Itraq

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Deforce
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


