### Accession
PXD024909

### Title
OpenCell: Proteome-scale endogenous tagging enables the cartography of human cellular organization

### Description
Mapping the global proteome circuitry of the human cell is one of the central goals of the post-genomic era. Here, we combine high-throughput genome engineering of ~1,300 cell lines endogenously tagged with fluorescent protein fusions, 3D live-cell imaging, mass spectrometry (MS)-based high-speed interactomics and advanced machine learning to decode the interaction and localization architecture of the human proteome. We delineate interacting protein families and facilitate unbiased biological discovery by unsupervised clustering, while hierarchical analyses of the interactome superimposed to localization uncover principles that template cellular organization. Furthermore, we discover that localization patterns alone are often enough to predict molecular interactions. ‘OpenCell’ is a global proteome-scale resource for human protein localization and interaction at endogenous expression levels. Our analytical methods are open-source and our data set is presented as an advanced interactive website (‘OpenCell’.czbiohub.org) to empower the community with the quantitative cartography of human cellular organization at proteome level.

### Sample Protocol
12-well cell culture plates were seeded the night before the pulldown with 5.4E5 cells. Next day, cells were washed twice with 1 ml of D-PBS (w/o Ca2+, Mg2+). 200µl ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KOAc, 5 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgOAc, 1 mM CaCl2, 1.5 % Digitonin, Protease- and Phophatase inhibitor) were added to each well, cells were lysed by strong pipetting and the solution was transferred into a pre-chilled 96-well Eppendorf twin-tec plate. Per 96-well plate, 330 µl mNG-Trap slurry was washed three times with buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KOAc, 5 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgOAc, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1 % Digitonin) and resuspended in 1,050 µl Buffer A. The cell lysate was incubated for 1 h at 4 °C on a rotor.  The insoluble cell fraction was pelleted for 30 min at 3,000 rpm in a table-top centrifuge at 4 °C, followed by supernatant transfer into a new plate pre-loaded with 10 µl of the washed and activated bead slurry per well and incubation on a rotor for 2 h at 4 °C. Beads with the bound target bait-proteins and background proteome were pelleted with a magnet plate and the supernatant was removed. The plate was removed from the magnet and beads were resuspended in 200 µl buffer B, followed by incubation for 5 min at 4 °C on a rotor. The plate was then moved onto the magnet, supernatant was removed after the solution cleared up and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl buffer B. Beads were again pelleted on the magnet plate, the supernatant was removed and beads were washed with 200 µl buffer C (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KOAc, 5 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgOAc, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1% GDN (Glyco-diosgenin)) per well. Beads were pelleted on the magnet plate, the supernatant was removed and 25 µl of digestion buffer 1 (8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT, 10 ng/µl LysC) was added to each well, followed by overnight digestion at RT without shaking. Next day, 65 µl digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM IAA) was added to each well and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark without shaking. The digestion was finally quenched with 10 µl of 10 % TFA. Quenched samples were vortexed, flash-frozen and stored at -80 °C until further use for LC-MS analysis preparation.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43)3,4, which extracts features from four-dimensional isotope patterns and associated MS/MS spectra, on a computing cluster (SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15 SP2) utilizing UltraQuant. Files were processed in several batches of appriximately 1000 files each and searched against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa). False-discovery rates were controlled at 1% both on peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein levels. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,600 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to LysC cleaving c-terminal to lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were searched as default for TIMS-DDA data and the main search tolerance was reduced to 20 ppm. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (MBR) with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window. Protein quantification was performed by label-free quantification using a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High-throughput proteomics; high-speed proteomics; interaction proteomics; human interactome; global human interactome map

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany


