### Accession
PXD041207

### Title
A conserved tryptophan in the acylated segment controls β2- integrin-independent cell penetration of RTX toxins

### Description
The post-translationally acylated Repeats in ToXins (RTX) leukotoxins, such as the adenylate cyclase (CyaA) or α-hemolysin (HlyA), bind β2-integrins of leukocytes, but also penetrate cells lacking these receptors. We show that the indole of conserved tryptophans within the acylated segments, e.g. W876 in CyaA and W579 in HlyA, is crucial for β2-integrin-independent membrane penetration of toxins. Substitutions of W876 by aliphatic or aromatic residues did not affect acylation, folding or activities of CyaA W876L/F/Y toxin variants on CR3-expressing cells. In contrast, toxin activity of CyaA W876L/F/Y on cells lacking CR3 was strongly impaired. Similarly, a W579L substitution selectively reduced HlyA W579L cytotoxicity towards cells lacking β2-integrins. Intriguingly, the W876L/F/Y substitutions increased the thermal stability (Tm) of CyaA by 4 to 8 °C. In addition, the hydrogen-deuterium exchange revealed structural changes in the acylated segment of the CyaA W876F variant, compared to intact CyaA. The substitution of W876 with a polar glutamine (W876Q), not increasing the Tm, or combining of the W876F substitution with a cavity-filling V822M substitution, decreasing the Tm of CyaA W876F+V822M to a value closer to that of CyaA, yielded a milder defect of toxin activity on erythrocytes lacking CR3. Furthermore, the activity of CyaA was selectively impaired on erythrocytes when the interaction of the pyrrolidine of P848 with the indole of W876 was ablated. These results suggest that the bulky indole of the W876 of CyaA, or W579 of HlyA, rules the local structural flexibility of the acylated segment. This may facilitate adoption of a membrane-penetrating conformation of the toxins in the absence of β2-integrin-mediated positioning of the toxin towards the cell membrane.

### Sample Protocol
The H/D exchange was performed at  21 °C by a PAL DHR robot (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland) controlled by Chronos software (AxelSemrau, Sprockhoevel, Germany). Protein in 8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2mM EDTA was diluted by 50mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 4mM CaCl2 buffer to lower the urea concentration to 2.4M and induce protein folding through the addition of Ca2+. Next the protein was diluted by the HEPES buffer containing 2.4M urea to a final 5 µM protein concentration. The exchange was started by a 5-fold dilution of this protein solution with a D2O-based buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 2.4M urea, 4mM CaCl2). Four exchange times (20s, 1m, 20m, 2h) were followed and two-time points, 20 sec and 20 min, were replicated (n=4 and n=3, respectively). Exchange was by stopped by 1:1 (vol:vol) mixing of the exchange reaction with of the quench buffer (5.6M urea, 1M glycine-HCl pH 2.3). Samples were immediately injected onto the LC system consisting of a temperature-controlled box and Agilent Infinity II UPLC (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) coupled to an ESI source of timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The LC setup was cooled to 0 °C to minimize the back-exchange and consisted of immobilized pepsin custom-made column (bed volume 66 µL), trap column (SecurityGuard™ ULTRA Cartridge UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18, 2.1mm ID, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and an analytical column (Luna Omega Polar C18, 1.6 µm, 100 Å, 1.0x100 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Samples were digested and peptides desalted by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water delivered by the 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump at 100 µL.min-1. Water-acetonitrile gradient (10%–45%; solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1%FA, 2% water in ACN) followed by a step to 99% B was used to elute and separate the desalted peptides. The solvents were driven by the 1290 Infinity II LC system pumping at 40 µL.min-1. Mass spectrometer operated in the MS mode with 1Hz data acquisition rate and with the tims turned off.

### Data Protocol
The H/D exchange was performed at  21 °C by a PAL DHR robot (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland) controlled by Chronos software (AxelSemrau, Sprockhoevel, Germany). Protein in 8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2mM EDTA was diluted by 50mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 4mM CaCl2 buffer to lower the urea concentration to 2.4M and induce protein folding through the addition of Ca2+. Next the protein was diluted by the HEPES buffer containing 2.4M urea to a final 5 µM protein concentration. The exchange was started by a 5-fold dilution of this protein solution with a D2O-based buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 2.4M urea, 4mM CaCl2). Four exchange times (20s, 1m, 20m, 2h) were followed and two-time points, 20 sec and 20 min, were replicated (n=4 and n=3, respectively). Exchange was by stopped by 1:1 (vol:vol) mixing of the exchange reaction with of the quench buffer (5.6M urea, 1M glycine-HCl pH 2.3). Samples were immediately injected onto the LC system consisting of a temperature-controlled box and Agilent Infinity II UPLC (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) coupled to an ESI source of timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The LC setup was cooled to 0 °C to minimize the back-exchange and consisted of immobilized pepsin custom-made column (bed volume 66 µL), trap column (SecurityGuard™ ULTRA Cartridge UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18, 2.1mm ID, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and an analytical column (Luna Omega Polar C18, 1.6 µm, 100 Å, 1.0x100 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Samples were digested and peptides desalted by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water delivered by the 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump at 100 µL.min-1. Water-acetonitrile gradient (10%–45%; solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1%FA, 2% water in ACN) followed by a step to 99% B was used to elute and separate the desalted peptides. The solvents were driven by the 1290 Infinity II LC system pumping at 40 µL.min-1. Mass spectrometer operated in the MS mode with 1Hz data acquisition rate and with the tims turned off.

### Publication Abstract
The acylated Repeats in ToXins (RTX) leukotoxins, the adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA) or &#x3b1;-hemolysin (HlyA), bind &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins of leukocytes but also penetrate cells lacking these receptors. We show that the indoles of conserved tryptophans in the acylated segments, W876 of CyaA and W579 of HlyA, are crucial for &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin-independent membrane penetration. Substitutions of W876 by aliphatic or aromatic residues did not affect acylation, folding, or the activities of CyaA W876L/F/Y variants on cells expressing high amounts of the &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin CR3. However, toxin activity of CyaA W876L/F/Y on cells lacking CR3 was strongly impaired. Similarly, a W579L substitution selectively reduced HlyA W579L cytotoxicity towards cells lacking &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins. Intriguingly, the W876L/F/Y substitutions increased the thermal stability (T<sub>m</sub>) of CyaA by 4 to 8 &#xb0;C but locally enhanced the accessibility to deuteration of the hydrophobic segment and of the interface of the two acylated loops. W876Q substitution (showing no increase in T<sub>m</sub>), or combination of W876F with a cavity-filling V822M substitution (this combination decreasing the T<sub>m</sub> closer to that of CyaA), yielded a milder defect of toxin activity on erythrocytes lacking CR3. Furthermore, the activity of CyaA on erythrocytes was also selectively impaired when the interaction of the pyrrolidine of P848 with the indole of W876 was ablated. Hence, the bulky indoles of residues W876 of CyaA, or W579 of HlyA, rule the local positioning of the acylated loops and enable a membrane-penetrating conformation in the absence of RTX toxin docking onto the cell membrane by &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins.

### Keywords
Trp-pro interaction, Β2-integrins, Acylated segment, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Rtx toxin, Cytotoxicity, Tryptophan residue, Α-hemolysin, Adenylate cyclase toxin, Thermal stability

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology - BioCeV, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Faculty of Science, Charles University

### Submitter
Zuzana Kalaninova

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Man
Institute of Microbiology - BioCeV, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic


