### Accession
PXD041870

### Title
PARP7-mediated ADP-ribosylation stabilizes FRA1 and restrains IRF3/IRF1-dependent apoptosis and immune signaling and in cancer cells

### Description
PARP7 inhibitors suppress tumor growth in a cell autonomous manner and by activating the immune system through restoring immune signaling. Nevertheless, the targets of PARP7-mediated ADP-ribosylation that regulate innate immune signaling and cancer cell survival remain elusive. Here, we identified PARP7 as a nuclear and cysteine-specific mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase that modified proteins critical for regulating transcription, such as the AP-1 transcription factor FRA1. Loss of FRA1 ADP-ribosylation via PARP7 inhibition by RBN-2397 or mutation of the ADP-ribosylation site C97 increased FRA1 degradation by PSMC3 and the proteasome. We found that the reduction in FRA1 protein levels promoted IRF3 and IRF1-dependent innate immune signaling and CASP8-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, we demonstrated that high PARP7 expression are critical for inducing apoptosis in FRA1-positive cancer cells using the PARP7 inhibitor. Collectively, our findings highlight the connected roles of PARP7 and FRA1 and emphasize the clinical potential of PARP7 inhibitors for FRA1-driven cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and tissues were lysed in lysis buffer (6M GndHCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0), sonicated and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark at 30 °C for 10.  For whole proteome analyses, 50µg of proteins were prepared for digestion using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology (Ostasiewicz et al. 2010) and digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (1:25; Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The samples were then acidified with TFA and salts removed using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore Corp.). The peptides were eluted with 15 µl of 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried to completion and then re-dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to a final peptide concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed either on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatographs (Waters). Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. For ADP-ribosylome analyses, 15mg of proteins were diluted 1:30 with in PARG buffer (Martello et al., 2016) and digested with modified Porcine Trypsin (1:25; Sigma) overnight at 37 °C. ADPr-Peptide enrichments were carried out as previously described (Nowak et al., 2020; Martello et al., 2016) with the following protocol modifications. Following PARG-mediated PAR-to-MAR peptide ADPr-modification reduction, the peptides were enriched using Af1521-WT (Martello et al., 2016) and eAF1521 (Nowak et al., manuscript under revision) macrodomain affinity enrichment for 2 h at 4ºC. The enriched samples were then prepared for MS analysis as described previously (Martello et al., 2016).  Identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides from mouse skeletal muscle was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters). The ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD (Bilan et al., 2017) was applied, which includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADPr fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the initial HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
For ADP-ribosylome data analysis, MS and MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer, v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For the multiple fragmentation techniques (HCD and EThcD) were utilized, separate MGF files were created from the raw file for each type of fragmentation. Mascot searches were carried out as previously described (Bilan et al., 2017) with the following protocol modifications. The MGFs were searched against the UniProtKB mouse database (taxonomy 10090, version 20160902), which included 24’905 Swiss-Prot, 34’616 TrEMBL entries, 59’783 decoy hits, and 262 common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Finally, S, R, K, D, E, H, C, T, and Y residues were set as variable ADP-ribose acceptor amino acids. The neutral losses of 249.0862 Da, 347.0631 Da, and 583.0829 Da from the ADP-ribose were scored in HCD fragment ion spectra (Gehrig et al., 2021).  For label-free quantification analyses, MS1-based LFQ was performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics) with default settings and the following exceptions. Peptide ions were filtered for charges ranging from +2 to +5. A maximum of the five top-ranked MS/MS spectra per peptide ion were exported with the most intense 200 peaks per spectrum with activated charge-deconvolution and deisotoping options as a Mascot generic formatted file (MGF). For ADP-ribosylome the MS/MS spectra were searched with Mascot as described above and Mascot was also used to search the MS/MS spectra for proteome analyses. The Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold and filtered for protein and peptide FDR values of 1% and 1%, respectively. When multiple precursors were observed for the same peptide, the values were summed up to obtain the total intensity level of the peptide.  Statistical significances were determined using log10-transformed and normalized MS1 signal intensities of four technical replicates and compared using a two-sided Student’s T-test. GO analysis of PARP7 protein targets was performed using Web-Gestalt (Release date 01.04.2019). The online STRING database (version 11.5) was used for the generation of protein interaction networks, and Cytoscape (version 3.9.1) was used for manual annotation and visualization of the STRING networks. Venn diagrams were generated using BioVenn.

### Publication Abstract
PARP7 was reported to promote tumor growth in a cell-autonomous manner and by repressing the antitumor immune response. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of how PARP7-mediated ADP-ribosylation exerts these effects in cancer cells remains elusive. Here, we identified PARP7 as a nuclear and cysteine-specific mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase that modifies targets critical for regulating transcription, including the AP-1 transcription factor FRA1. Loss of FRA1 ADP-ribosylation via PARP7 inhibition by RBN-2397 or mutation of the ADP-ribosylation site C97 increased FRA1 degradation by the proteasome via PSMC3. The reduction in FRA1 protein levels promoted IRF1- and IRF3-dependent cytokine as well as proapoptotic gene expression, culminating in CASP8-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, high PARP7 expression was indicative of the PARP7 inhibitor response in FRA1-positive lung and breast cancer cells. Collectively, our findings highlight the connected roles of PARP7 and FRA1 and emphasize the clinical potential of PARP7 inhibitors for FRA1-driven cancers.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Lung cancer, Parp7, Fra1

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


