### Accession
PXD010924

### Title
Altered patterns of global protein synthesis and translational fidelity in RPS15-mutated chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
Genomic studies have recently identified RPS15 as a new driver gene in aggressive and chemorefractory cases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). RPS15 encodes a ribosomal protein whose conserved C-terminal domain extends into the decoding center of the ribosome. We demonstrate that mutations in highly conserved residues of this domain affect both protein stability —by increasing its ubiquitin-mediated degradation— and cell proliferation rates. On the other hand, we show that mutated RPS15 can be loaded into the ribosomes, directly impacting on global protein synthesis and/or translational fidelity in a mutation-specific manner. Quantitative mass-spectrometry analyses suggest that RPS15 variants may induce additional alterations in the translational machinery as well as a metabolic shift at the proteome level in both HEK293T and MEC-1 cells. These results indicate that CLL-related RPS15 mutations might act following patterns known for other ribosomal diseases, likely switching from a hypo- to a hyperproliferative phenotype driven by mutated ribosomes. In this scenario, loss of translational fidelity causing altered cell proteostasis can be proposed as a new molecular mechanism involved in CLL pathobiology.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing GFP-RPS15WT (2 clones), GFP-RPS15P131S (2 clones) and GFP-RPS15S138F (4 independent clones) in which we had partially (GFP-RPS15S138F) or totally ablated endogenous RPS15, or MEC1 cells stably expressing GFP-RPS15WT, GFP-RPS15P131S, GFP-RPS15G132S, GFP-RPS15T136A, GFP-RPS15H137Y and GFPRPS15S138F (3 independent clones per variant), were lysed in 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS pH 8.0, 75 mM NaCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitors [Roche]) and protein content was quantified by BCA. Then, disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and finally quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. 200 μg of protein were precipitated with methanol/chloroform, resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, and digested overnight at room temperature with LysC (1:100, LysC:protein). The day after, trypsin was added (1:75, trypsin:protein) and incubated 5 extra hours at 37 ˚C. After digestion, peptide concentration was calculated using the quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce) and 25 μg of peptides were labeled with the TMT-10 plex reagents (Pierce). A peptide pool (bridge sample) from all 8 (HEK293T clones) or 18 (MEC1 clones) samples was also made by adding an equal amount of each one, and labeled with the last TMT tag (131 m/z). Equal amounts of labeled peptides were combined (10 samples per TMT) and fractionated in a basic pH reverse phase chromatography. All 96 fractions collected were combined into 24, 12 of which were desalted via StageTip and dried down in a SpeedVac. Finally, cleaned peptides were dissolved in 3% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile (ACN), and separated by reversed phase chromatography using a C18 (Accucore 150 2.6 μm) column mounted in a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) in a SPS-MS3 mode. In the mass spectrometer, MS1 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap (mass range: 350-1400 m/z, 120k resolution, maximum injection time of 100 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) 5x105). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a TopSpeed of 2 seconds, isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, fragmented by CID (normalized collision energy, NCE, of 35%) and detected in the ion trap (AGC 2x104, maximum injection time 150 ms). For TMT quantification, the synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS)-MS3 method was used, where the 10 most intense fragments ions of each MS2, were further isolated, fragmented by HCD (NCE of 65%), and detected in the Orbitrap (50k of resolution, maximum injection time of 250 ms, AGC of 2x105).

### Data Protocol
All raw files obtained from the mass spectrometer were analyzed using in-house software based on SEQUEST. All searches were performed against the human Uniprot database (February 2014), including the decoy reverse database and the most common contaminants. Precursor and product ion tolerances were set up to 20 ppm and 0.9 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0215 Da) and TMT labeling (+229.1629 Da) on lysines and peptide N-termini were included as static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant analysis. Moreover, proteins were further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1% and assembled by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Relative quantification values of each peptide were obtained by subtracting the intensities of the TMT report ions from the MS3 spectra. Only those peptides with a summed signal-to-noise ratio higher than 100 were used for protein quantification. Finally, quantifications were normalized assuming equal protein loading for all ten samples (per TMT).

### Publication Abstract
Genomic studies have recently identified <i>RPS15</i> as a new driver gene in aggressive and chemorefractory cases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). <i>RPS15</i> encodes a ribosomal protein whose conserved C-terminal domain extends into the decoding center of the ribosome. We demonstrate that mutations in highly conserved residues of this domain affect protein stability, by increasing its ubiquitin-mediated degradation, and cell-proliferation rates. On the other hand, we show that mutated RPS15 can be loaded into the ribosomes, directly impacting on global protein synthesis and/or translational fidelity in a mutation-specific manner. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses suggest that <i>RPS15</i> variants may induce additional alterations in the translational machinery, as well as a metabolic shift at the proteome level in HEK293T and MEC-1 cells. These results indicate that CLL-related RPS15 mutations might act following patterns known for other ribosomal diseases, likely switching from a hypo- to a hyperproliferative phenotype driven by mutated ribosomes. In this scenario, loss of translational fidelity causing altered cell proteostasis can be proposed as a new molecular mechanism involved in CLL pathobiology.

### Keywords
Rps15, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Cll, Proteostasis, Ribosomal decoding center, Translational fidelity

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab - Cell Biology Department - Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J Finley
Finley and Gygi lab - Cell Biology Department - Harvard Medical School


