### Accession
PXD013687

### Title
Identification of a novel haem-binding protein produced by Haemophilus haemolyticus

### Description
Characterization of a novel haem-binding protein that is secreted by two Haemophilus haemolyticus isolates, BW1 and RHH122, and that inhibits the growth of the pathogen non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned growth medium from stationary phase cultures of BW1 and RHH122 was fractionated by ammonium sulfate precipitation and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Active fractions from SEC were subject to reversed-phase HPLC (RP-HPLC) and fractions with peak activity from RP-HPLC were digested with trypsin and analysed by HPLC/MS. RP-HPLC fractions, matched for elution time, were obtained from two control strains (BW39 and BWOCT3) that did not produce NTHi-inhibitory activity and were also analysed by HPLC/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into MaxQuant and searched against searched against H. haemolyticus sequences downloaded from NCBI on 19-09-2016 (37, 881 entries), leading to identification of a major protein present in inhibitory isolates and absent in controls (non-inhibitory isolates BW39 and BWOCT3).

### Publication Abstract
Commensal bacteria serve as an important line of defense against colonisation by opportunisitic pathogens, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly explored. Here, we show that strains of a commensal bacterium, Haemophilus haemolyticus, make hemophilin, a heme-binding protein that inhibits growth of the opportunistic pathogen, non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) in culture. We purified the NTHi-inhibitory protein from H. haemolyticus and identified the hemophilin gene using proteomics and a gene knockout. An x-ray crystal structure of recombinant hemophilin shows that the protein does not belong to any of the known heme-binding protein folds, suggesting that it evolved independently. Biochemical characterisation shows that heme can be captured in the ferrous or ferric state, and with a variety of small heme-ligands bound, suggesting that hemophilin could function under a range of physiological conditions. Hemophilin knockout bacteria show a limited capacity to utilise free heme for growth. Our data suggest that hemophilin is a hemophore and that inhibition of NTHi occurs by heme starvation, raising the possibility that competition from hemophilin-producing H. haemolyticus could antagonise NTHi colonisation in the respiratory tract.

### Keywords
Haemophilus haemolyticus, Haem, Non-typeable haemophilus influenzae (nthi)

### Affiliations
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


