### Accession
PXD022244

### Title
Medicago truncatula Seed Protein Plasticity in Response to the Environment

### Description
Because extreme environmental events are expected to increase with climate change, identifying candidate genes for stabilizing the protein composition of legume seeds or optimizing it in a given environment becomes increasingly important. To elucidate the genetic determinants of seed protein plasticity, major seed proteins from 200 ecotypes of Medicago truncatula grown in four contrasted environments were quantified after one-dimensional electrophoresis. Major protein bands were excised from the seed protein profile of five genotypes to identify protein variants.

### Sample Protocol
For each environment, between 30 and 50 seeds were crushed in liquid nitrogene. Storage proteins were extracted from the seed powder in a Tris-HCl lysis buffer. For each sample, crude protein extracts were fractionated by 1D-SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250.  From the seed protein profile of five genotypes (A17, HM083, HM160, HM079, HM187) major protein bands were analysed by a qualitative bottom-up proteomic approach in order to identify protein variants. A total of 20 protein bands were excised and washed before protein reduction and alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were in-gel digested with bovine trypsin. Peptides mixtures were analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, thermofisher) coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LTQ Velos Orbitrap, thermofisher).

### Data Protocol
Protein data identification was performed using Mascot search engine version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) combined to Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), against a homemade database from Medicago truncatula taxon. The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Identified proteins were subjected to Scaffold v4.8.3 software (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) for validation. Protein identification was validated when at least two peptides were identified and when the probability was at least 95% and 99%, as specified by the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
As the frequency of extreme environmental events is expected to increase with climate change, identifying candidate genes for stabilizing the protein composition of legume seeds or optimizing this in a given environment is increasingly important. To elucidate the genetic determinants of seed protein plasticity, major seed proteins from 200 ecotypes of Medicago truncatula grown in four contrasting environments were quantified after one-dimensional electrophoresis. The plasticity index of these proteins was recorded for each genotype as the slope of Finlay and Wilkinson's regression and then used for genome-wide association studies (GWASs), enabling the identification of candidate genes for determining this plasticity. This list was enriched in genes related to transcription, DNA repair and signal transduction, with many of them being stress responsive. Other over-represented genes were related to sulfur and aspartate family pathways leading to the synthesis of the nutritionally essential amino acids methionine and lysine. By placing these genes in metabolic pathways, and using a M.&#xa0;truncatula mutant impaired in regenerating methionine from S-methylmethionine, we discovered that methionine recycling pathways are major contributors to globulin composition establishment and plasticity. These data provide a unique resource of genes that can be targeted to mitigate negative impacts of environmental stresses on seed protein composition.

### Keywords
Medicago truncatula, Climate change, Seed development

### Affiliations
INRAE
INRAE Dijon UMR Agroécologie - 1347

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Le Signor
INRAE Dijon UMR Agroécologie - 1347


