### Accession
PXD013217

### Title
Gel LC-MS/MS analyses of MMP cleavage of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase

### Description
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase was incubated by MMPs, cleavage products were resolved on SDS-PAGE. Cleavage products were trypsin digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase was incubated with MMPs. Cleavage products were resolved using SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained with Coomassie and bands were excised. Gel plugs were destained, lyophilized, rehydrated, and digested with trypsin overnight. Centrifuged gel plugs were discarded and supernatants were desalted. After desalting the peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-Q-TOF (Bruker Impact II) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to .mgf using DataAnalysis v4.3 and searched using the Mascot search algorithm (MatrixScience) against a human Uniprot database (Oct 2014). Parameters were 25 ppm MS1 tolerance, 0.08 Da MS2 tolerance, semi-tryptic enzyme specificity. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), propionamide (C), N-terminal ammonia loss and N-terminal cyclization at Gln and Glu. Result files were imported into Scaffold v4.8.7 and searched using X!Tandem filtered for a 0.01 False discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (WRS) is a cytosolic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase essential for protein synthesis. WRS is also one of a growing number of intracellular proteins that are attributed distinct noncanonical "moonlighting" functions in the extracellular milieu. Moonlighting aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases regulate processes such as inflammation, but how these multifunctional enzymes are themselves regulated remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that WRS is secreted from human macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells in response to the proinflammatory cytokine interferon &#x3b3; (IFN&#x3b3;). WRS signaled primarily through Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in macrophages, leading to phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of NF-&#x3ba;B with associated loss of NF-&#x3ba;B inhibitor &#x3b1; (I&#x3ba;B-&#x3b1;) protein. This signaling initiated secretion of tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1; (TNF&#x3b1;) and CXCL8 (IL8) from macrophages. We also demonstrated that WRS is a potent monocyte chemoattractant. Of note, WRS increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in the conditioned medium of macrophages in a TNF&#x3b1;-dependent manner. Using purified recombinant proteins and LC-MS/MS to identify proteolytic cleavage sites, we demonstrated that multiple MMPs, but primarily macrophage MMP7 and neutrophil MMP8, cleave secreted WRS at several sites. Loss of the WHEP domain following cleavage at Met<sup>48</sup> generated a WRS proteoform that also results from alternative splicing, designated &#x394;1-47 WRS. The MMP-cleaved WRS lacked TLR signaling and proinflammatory activities. Thus, our results suggest that moonlighting WRS promotes IFN&#x3b3; proinflammatory activities, and these responses can be dampened by MMPs.

### Keywords
Mmp, Protease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UBC
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research

### Submitter
Parker Jobin

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark Overall
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research


