### Accession
PXD006672

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis reveals cytoskeletal remodelling via CDC42-PAK signaling in lung mucoepidermoid cells upon chronic exposure to cigarette

### Description
Despite the fact that smoking is the major cause of lung cancer, there is no clear mechanism detailing how chronic exposure of cigarette smoke alters the global signaling in lung cells. To investigate the altered signaling in lung cells, in this study, we carried out SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of H292 cells chronically exposed to cigarette smoke. Using high resolution Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, we identified hyperphosphorylation of 493 sites which corresponds to 341 proteins and 195 hypophosphorylated sites mapping to 142 proteins, upon smoke exposure (2.0-fold). Bioinformatics analysis revealed differentially phosphotylated proteins were involved in multiple cellular processes including cellular polarity, cytoskeletal remodelling, cellular migration, protein synthesis, autophagy and apoptosis. The present study will significantly improve the current knowledge of smoke mediated signaling in lung cells, which in turn may aid in the development of targeted therapies specially for smokers.

### Sample Protocol
NCI-H292 lung cancer cells were grown in DMEM medium and adapted to SILAC media. Cells maintained in light media were treated with 0.1% cigarette smoke condensate for 12 months, while untreated cells were grown in 13C6-lysine/13C6-arginine-containing heavy media. The cells were then washed with cold PBS following serum starvation and lysed in urea lysis buffer. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Equal amount of protein from both conditions were mixed followed by reduction and alkylation using dithiothreitol (5mM) and iodoacetamide (10mM) respectively. Urea concentration in sample was bought to <2M by diluting it with HEPES buffer (20 mM) and digested overnight at 370C using trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp). Immunoaffinity enrichment of tyrosine containing phosphopeptides was done using P-Tyr-1000 beads. In addition, other set of digested proteins fractionated using bRPLC chromatography and each fraction was considered separately for the enrichment of serine and threonine containing phosphopeptides using TiO2 - based enrichment method. Further, enriched peptide were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The spectrometry data (.raw) was searched against a Human RefSeq database (RefSeq 59) appended with frequently observed contaminants using MASCOT (v 2.2) and SEQUEST search algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For both algorithms, the search parameter included maximum of one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labels 13C6-Lysine; 13C6-Arginine as dynamic modifications. The precursor mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da was considered during analysis. The data was also searched against a decoy database and peptides<1% FDR were considered further for protein identification. The phosphorylation probability at each S/T/Y site was calculated using the PhosphoRS node (Version 3.0) in the Proteome Discoverer and peptides with more than 75% site localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics analysis of chronic cigarette smoke exposure is a rapidly emerging postgenomics research field. While smoking is a major cause of lung cancer, functional studies using proteomics approaches could enrich our mechanistic understanding of the elusive lung cancer global molecular signaling and cigarette smoke relationship. We report in this study on a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of a human lung mucoepidermoid carcinoma cell line, H292 cells, chronically exposed to cigarette smoke. Using high resolution Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, we identified the hyperphosphorylation of 493 sites, which corresponds to 341 proteins and 195 hypophosphorylated sites, mapping to 142 proteins upon smoke exposure (2.0-fold change). We report differential phosphorylation of multiple kinases, including PAK6, EPHA4, LYN, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and phosphatases, including TMEM55B, PTPN14, TIGAR, among others, in response to chronic cigarette smoke exposure. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the molecules differentially phosphorylated upon chronic exposure of cigarette smoke are associated with PI3K/AKT/mTOR and CDC42-PAK signaling pathways. These signaling networks are involved in multiple cellular processes, including cell polarity, cytoskeletal remodeling, cellular migration, protein synthesis, autophagy, and apoptosis. The present study contributes to emerging proteomics insights on cigarette smoke mediated global signaling in lung cells, which in turn may aid in development of precision medicine therapeutics and postgenomics biomarkers.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Nsclc, Smoking, In vivo labelling

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India


