### Accession
PXD025743

### Title
VHL inhibitor binding increases intracellular level of VHL

### Description
The von–Hippel Lindau (VHL) protein is a tumour suppressor protein frequently mutated in the VHL disease, which functions as substrate recognition subunit of a Cul2 E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL2VHL). CRL2VHL plays an important role in oxygen sensing, by binding and targeting Hypoxia Inducible Factor-alpha subunits (HIF-alpha) for ubiquitination and degradation. VHL is also commonly hijacked by heterobifunctional degrader molecules known as proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs). In previous work we reported the structure-based design and functional characterisation of VHL inhibitors (VH032 and VH298) that induce the HIF response in cells. Here, we use unbiased quantitative mass spectrometry to identify the proteomic changes elicited by the VHL inhibitor and compare this to hypoxia or broad-spectrum prolyl-hydroxylase domain (PHD) enzyme inhibitor IOX2. Our results demonstrate the VHL inhibitor selectively activates the HIF response that vastly overlaps with hypoxia- and IOX2-induced proteomic changes. Interestingly, VHL inhibitors were found to selectively upregulate a single protein, which is VHL itself. Our analysis revealed that this occurs via protein stabilisation of VHL isoforms and not via changes in transcript levels. Increased VHL levels upon VH298 treatment resulted in turn to reduced levels of HIF-1α protein. Our results demonstrate the high specificity of VHL inhibitors and suggest that use of these inhibitors would not produce overtly side effects due to prolonged HIF stabilisation. They also exemplify the concept that small-molecule binding induced protein stabilisation can increase protein levels inside cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were quantified using a micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 200 microgram of each sample was processed and digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The samples were then desalted using a 7-mm, 3-ml C18 SPE cartridge column (Empore, 3M) and labelled with TMT 10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Following labelling, the peptides were pooled together in equal proportion. The pooled sample was fractionated using high pH reverse-phase chromatography on a XBridge peptide BEH column (130 Å, 3.5 micrometers, 2.1 × 150 mm, Waters) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Column temperature was set to 20 °C. The peptides were separated using a mix of buffers A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% CH3CN, pH 10). The peptides were eluted from the column using a flow rate of 200 microlitres/min and a linear gradient from 2% to 60% buffer B in 45 min. The peptides eluted from the column were separated into 40 fractions before concatenation into 22 fractions by noncontiguous pooling based on the UV signal of each fraction. All the fractions were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and resuspended in 10 microlitres of 5% formic acid and were then diluted to 1% before MS analysis. Analysis of peptides was performed on an Q-exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following:  buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 15 μL of each sample were loaded at 5 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 98% buffer A. The trap column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 95% buffer A to 40% buffer B in 122 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 132 min. The column was then washed with 95% buffer B for 15 min and re-equilibrated in 98% buffer A for 32 min. Q-exactive-HF was used in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 1.2 Da, resolution at 60000, maximum ion injection time at 200 ms and AGC 1e5.

### Data Protocol
Raw ms data from 22 fractions were searched against  human protein sequences from Sprot using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, Version 2.2) through proteome discovery software (version 1.4). Parameters for database search were as fellow MS1 Tolerance: 10ppm, MS2 Tolerance: 0.06da, fixed modification:  Carbamidomethyl (C)Variable Modification:  Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M),   Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), hydroxy(P), TMT 10(N-term and K), Maximum missed cleavage: 2 and target FDR 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is characterized by frequent mutation of VHL protein, a tumor suppressor that functions as the substrate recognition subunit of a Cullin2 RING E3 ligase complex (CRL2<sup>VHL</sup>). CRL2<sup>VHL</sup> plays important roles in oxygen sensing by targeting hypoxia-inducible factor-alpha (HIF-&#x3b1;) subunits for ubiquitination and degradation. VHL is also commonly hijacked by bifunctional molecules such as proteolysis-targeting chimeras to induce degradation of target molecules. We previously reported the design and characterization of VHL inhibitors VH032 and VH298 that block the VHL:HIF-&#x3b1; interaction, activate the HIF transcription factor, and induce a hypoxic response, which can be beneficial to treat anemia and mitochondrial diseases. How these compounds affect the global cellular proteome remains unknown. Here, we use unbiased quantitative MS to identify the proteomic changes elicited by the VHL inhibitor compared with hypoxia or the broad-spectrum prolyl-hydroxylase domain enzyme inhibitor IOX2. Our results demonstrate that VHL inhibitors selectively activate the HIF response similar to the changes induced in hypoxia and IOX2 treatment. Interestingly, VHL inhibitors were found to specifically upregulate VHL itself. Our analysis revealed that this occurs via protein stabilization of VHL isoforms and not via changes in transcript levels. Increased VHL levels upon VH298 treatment resulted in turn in reduced levels of HIF-1&#x3b1; protein. This work demonstrates the specificity of VHL inhibitors and reveals different antagonistic effects upon their acute versus prolonged treatment in cells. These findings suggest that therapeutic use of VHL inhibitors may not produce overt side effects from HIF stabilization as previously thought.

### Keywords
Hela, Tmt-labelling, Human cells

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery James Black Centre Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH United Kingdom

### Submitter
Julianty Frost

### Lab Head
Dr Alessio Ciulli
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery James Black Centre Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH United Kingdom


