### Accession
PXD015129

### Title
Excretory-secretory proteins released by Schistosoma mansoni-resistant, susceptible and naïve Biomphalaria glabrata

### Description
Schistosomiasis is one of the most socioeconomically harmful neglected tropical diseases in the world. It occurs following infection from parasites of the Schistosoma genus, such as Schistosoma mansoni, which must transition within a molluscan and mammalian host to survive. Previous chemical analyses of schistosome-molluscan interactions indicate that schistosomes orientate towards potential hosts partially through chemosensation, displaying a preference for naïve (uninfected) hosts. Recent advances in proteomic techniques enable sophisticated comparative analyses between infected and naïve snail host proteins. This study aimed to compare the snail-conditioned water (SCW) released by F1 resistant, infected and naïve Biomphalaria glabrata to identify potential attractants and deterrents.

### Sample Protocol
At QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, B. glabrata snails (50 each) were washed four times with freshly prepared carbonate conditioned Milli Q water to remove any contaminants from the tank and separated into two 200 mL beakers, each containing 25 snails (Figure 1). Snails were incubated in 20 mL of pH-neutral spring water at room temperature for 2 h. Snails were removed and returned to the aquarium, 20 mL of methanol was added to the water samples and mixed thoroughly. The mixture was filtered through a 0.45 µm Durapore PVDF filter (Bedford, MA, USA) to remove contaminants. Filtered samples were immediately frozen on dry ice until lyophilisation using a Savant SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The protein concentrations of the lyophilised samples were measured by Nanodrop 2000c (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) before being resuspended in 100 µL of 6M urea and mixed with 100 µL of sample buffer [95% of 2 × Laemmli buffer (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and 5% of β-mercaptoethanol]. The mixture was heated at 95°C for 5 min and loaded onto a preconditioned 4-15% Mini-PROTEAN®TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-RAD). The gel was run in a Mini-PROTEAN® Dodeca Cell for 60 min under 200 volts. The gel was stained using Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 for 1 h, rinsed in water for 30 min and placed in the fridge at 4°C overnight. The image of the gel was scanned with the wavelengths of 700 nm for 40 min using an Odyssey CLx (Li-Cor) and visualised with Image Studio 4.0 (Li-Cor).  The entire gel lanes were excised into pieces using a scalpel blade and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as described elsewhere [38]. Briefly, the gel pieces were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and repeatedly washed in 500 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, incubated for 5 min and removed. A 500 µL volume of 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 30 % acetonitrile was added to remove Coomassie stain. Pieces were incubated in a sonicating water bath for 15 min and centrifuged using pulse centrifugation before the excess liquid was extracted. A 200 µL volume of acetonitrile was added to each tube to shrink the gel pieces, incubated for 15 min and spun down using pulse centrifugation before the liquid was removed. Samples were vacuum centrifuged for 10 min. Pieces were swelled with 50 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3 before being incubated at 56°C for 1 h. Samples were spun down using pulse centrifugation after cooling to room temperature and the excess liquid was extracted. A volume of 200 µL of acetonitrile was added to each sample, incubated for 15 min and pulse centrifuged before the liquid was removed. A 50 µL volume of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 was added and the pieces were incubated in the dark for 45 min. The solution was removed, 100 µL of 5 mM NH4HCO3 was added and incubated for 10 min before being removed. The pieces were shrunk using 200 µL of acetonitrile and incubated from 15 min before pulse centrifugation. The liquid was removed, and the gel pieces were vacuum centrifuged for 10 min. A 10 µL aliquot of 10 ng/µL trypsin in 5 mM NH4HCO3 was added to each tube and incubated overnight (~16 h) at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were extracted from gel pieces by sonication in a water bath for 15 min after adding 20 µL of 50% acetonitrile containing 1% formic acid. The samples were spun down by pulse centrifugation and the excess liquid was transferred into the final sample tube. The gel pieces were shrunk by 50 µL of 100% acetonitrile and the liquid was collected into the corresponding tubes after 15 min sonicating in a water bath. The volume of the liquid in each tube was reduced to about 1 µL with SpeedVac and transferred into the final sample tube. This was reconstituted in 5 µL of 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and stored at -20°C for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was imported to PEAKS studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0) with the assistance of MSConvert module of ProteoWizard (3.0.1). The ESPs of naïve B. glabrata have been analysed using a similar protocol with a previous version the genome (Ver 1.2) [40]. For the current study, the proteomic data was reanalysed with the most up-to-date database (BglaB1.6) to provide a better comparison between naïve B. glabrata ESPs and those released by the susceptible and resistant snails (https://www.vectorbase.org/organisms/biomphalaria-glabrata) [40]. Meanwhile, MS/MS spectra of proteins extracted from susceptible B. glabrata conditioned water were analysed with reference to the S. mansoni protein database (https://parasite.wormbase.org/Schistosoma_mansoni_prjea36577/Info/Index). De novo sequencing of peptides, database search and characterising specific PTMs were used to analyse the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and [-10*log(p)] was calculated accordingly where p was the probability that an observed match was a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisotopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including lysine acetylation, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and conversion of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schistosoma mansoni, Biomphalaria glabrata, Proteomics, Ppi, Miracidia, Excretory-secretory proteins

### Affiliations
School of Science and Engineering, Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland, Australia.
University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
School of Science and Engineering, Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland, Australia.


