### Accession
PXD038935

### Title
The structural basis of the multi-step allosteric activation of Aurora B kinase

### Description
Aurora B, together with IN-box, the C-terminal part of INCENP, forms an enzymatic complex that ensures faithful cell division. The [Aurora B/IN-box] complex is activated by autophosphorylation in the Aurora B activation loop and in IN-box, but it is not clear how these phosphorylations activate the enzyme. We used a combination of experimental and computational studies to investigate the effects of phosphorylation on the molecular dynamics and structure of [Aurora B/IN-box]. In addition, we generated partially phosphorylated intermediates to analyze the contribution of each phosphorylation independently. We found that the dynamics of Aurora and IN-box are interconnected, and IN-box plays both positive and negative regulatory roles depending on the phosphorylation status of the enzyme complex. Phosphorylation in the activation loop of Aurora B occurs intramolecularly and prepares the enzyme complex for activation, but two phosphorylated sites are synergistically responsible for full enzyme activity.

### Sample Protocol
Two data set were deposited, dataset0 and dataset1. In dataset0    the HDX of  Aurora B/IN-box in the Fully phosphorylated ( All-P) and No phosphorylated (NO-P) states was determined at four different times (3, 10, 30 and 90  minutes)  .  In dataset1  the HDX of Aurora B/IN-box in the following states was determined All-P*,NO-P*, Loop-P and IN-P at 3, 10, 30, 90 and 300  minutes . The asterisk means that all the constructs of dataset1 contains a mutation where PHE845 of the IN-box was changed to CYS845.  The Loop-P construct is an intermediate phosphorylated where  threonine 248, in the activation loop, is phosphorylated but no the TSS motif of the IN-box. The IN-P construct is phosphorylated only in the TSS motif of the IN-box. Both Loop-P and IN-P intermediates were obtained by intein mediated protein ligation ( for details see the The structural basis of the multi-step allosteric activation of Aurora B kinase ) and therefore the PHE845 to CYS mutation take place as a consequence of the protein ligation.   The temperature of the exchange reaction was 20 oC and the on-exchange reaction was started by diluting 8 uM of  [Aurora B/IN-box] enzymatic complex 1:20 in the on-exchange buffer (20 mM HEPES pD 7.0, 300 mM NaCl, 2mM DTT, 1 mM ADP, and 2 mM MgCl2, in D2O) so that the final D2O concentration was 95%. The on-exchange reaction was quenched at different time points by mixing 50 µl of the reaction with equal volume of ice-cold quench buffer (250 mM potassium phosphate pD 2.3).Then 20 picomoles of the quenched samples were injected on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system with HDX technology (Waters, Milford USA). After online pepsin digestion, peptide trapping and separation in a C18 column , the peptides were directed to a mass spectrometer (Synapt G2-Si, Waters, Milford USA) in order to measure the deuterium uptake. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion electrospray mode, with the ion mobility function to minimize spectral overlap using the HDMSE acquisition mode (50-2000 M/Z). Lock mass correction with the Leu-ENK peptide was used to ensure mass accuracy determination. The samples were measured in triplicate. Peptide identification from non-deuterated samples were performed by tandem mass spectrometry (CID)  A library of non-deuterated peptides was created using the ProteinLynx Global server 3.0 (PLGS) (Waters, Milford, MA) using the following requirements:  1.) A mass error for the peptide has to be below 10 ppm for the precursor ion, 2.) The peptide has to have at least two fragmentation products 3.) The peptide has to be identified in at least 75% of the non-deuterated runs, where at least three replicates were used and 4.) a minimun intensity of 5000. The level of deuteration in the peptides was determined with DynamX 3.0 (Waters) and the average deuterium exchange in each peptide was measured relative to undeuterated control peptides. A manual inspection of all the assignment was conducted to confirm the data or discard the noisy or overlapping spectra. The software Deuteros 2.0 was used to generate Woods plots with peptide level significance testing.

### Data Protocol
A library of non-deuterated peptides was created using the ProteinLynx Global server 3.0 (PLGS) (Waters, Milford, MA) using the following requirements:  1.) A mass error for the peptide has to be below 10 ppm for the precursor ion, 2.) The peptide has to have at least two fragmentation products 3.) The peptide has to be identified in at least 75% of the non-deuterated runs, where at least three replicates were used and 4.) a minimun intensity of 5000. The level of deuteration in the peptides was determined with DynamX 3.0 (Waters) and the average deuterium exchange in each peptide was measured relative to undeuterated control peptides. A manual inspection of all the assignment was conducted to confirm the data or discard the noisy or overlapping spectra. The software Deuteros 2.0 was used to generate Woods plots with peptide level significance testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Xenopus laevis, Aurora b

### Affiliations
Researcher
Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway

### Submitter
Dario Segura-Pena

### Lab Head
Dr Nikolina Sekulic
Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway


