### Accession
PXD010845

### Title
Combining transcriptome and proteome analysis to identify and characterize the RpoS regulon in Pseudomonas fluorescens

### Description
Background: Microorganisms are the major cause of food spoilage during storage, processing and distribution. Pseudomonas fluorescens is a typical spoilage bacterium that contributes to a large extent to the spoilage process of proteinaceous food. RpoS is considered an important global regulator involved in stress survival and virulence in many pathogens. Our previous work revealed that RpoS contributed to the spoilage activities of P. fluorescens by regulating resistance to different stress conditions, extracellular acylated homoserine lactone (AHL) levels, extracellular protease and total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N) production. However, RpoS-dependent genes in P. fluorescens remained undefined. Results: RNA-seq transcriptomics analysis combined with quantitative proteomics analysis basing on multiplexed isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed for the P. fluorescens wild-type strain UK4 and its derivative carrying a rpoS mutation. A total of 375 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 212 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in these two backgrounds. The DGEs were further verified by qRT-PCR tests, and the genes directly regulated by RpoS were confirmed by 5’-RACE-PCR sequencing. The combining transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed a role of this regulator in several cellular processes, including polysaccharide metabolism, intracellular secretion and extracellular structures, cell well biogenesis, stress responses, ammonia and biogenic amine production, which may contribute to biofilm formation, stress resistance and spoilage activities of P. fluorescens. Moreover, in this work we indeed observed that RpoS contributed to the production of the macrocolony biofilm’s matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and culture conditions Wild-type P. fluorescens strain UK4 and the rpoS in-frame deletion mutant (Liu et al., 2018) were grown aerobically at 28°C with shaking at 220 rpm in Nutrient Broth (NB) medium, and growth was monitored spectrophotometrically at OD600. Cultures were grown in triplicate and the bacterial cells at stationary-phase (OD600 ≈ 1.5) were harvested by centrifugation at 7,000 g for 10 min and were frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to RNA and protein isolation.  Illumina library preparation and RNA-seq  Three biological repeats were prepared for the wild type strain and the rpoS mutant. The total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) and was treated with RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen, Germany) to remove the contaminating DNA. The concentration and quality were determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, USA). Then, rRNA from the total RNAs was removed using a Ribo-Zero Magnetic Kit (Epicentre, USA) for Gram-Negative bacteria per the manufacturer’s protocol. Fragmentation buffer was added to cleave the mRNA into short fragments. Strand-specific RNA sequencing libraries were prepared by following a modified deoxy-UTP (dUTP) strand-marking protocol described previously [63]. Briefly, first strand cDNA was synthesized using random hexamer primer and M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase (NEB, USA). Double-stranded cDNA was subsequently synthesized with dUTP incorporation into the second strand. Illumina TruSeq adaptors were ligated to the ends of the cDNA fragments and amplified according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina, USA). In order to select cDNA fragments of preferentially 150~200 bp in length, the library fragments were purified with AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, USA). Then the dUTP-marked strand was selectively degraded with USER enzyme (NEB, USA) and the remaining strand was amplified to generate a cDNA library suitable for sequencing. Following validation with the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent, USA), the cDNA library was sequenced on a flow cell using high-throughput 150-bp pair-end mode on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform (Illumina, USA).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data processing The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the genome database of P. fluorescens UK4 containing 5321 proteins in Genbank (http://www.pseudomonas.com/). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation on Met and Acetylation on protein N-term were specified as variable modifications. For protein quantitation, Protein quantitative ratios were weighted and normalized relative to the median ratio in Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com). Only proteins with significant quantitative ratios between the two strains (p < 0.05) and with fold changes >1.2 or <0.83 were considered to be differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial contamination is considered the main cause of food spoilage. <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i> is a typical spoilage bacterium contributing to a large extent to the spoilage process of proteinaceous foods. RpoS is known as an alternative sigma factor controlling stress resistance and virulence in many pathogens. Our previous work revealed that RpoS contributes to the spoilage activities of <i>P</i>. <i>fluorescens</i> by regulating resistance to different stress conditions, extracellular acylated homoserine lactone (AHL) levels, extracellular protease and total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N) production. However, RpoS-dependent genes in <i>P</i>. <i>fluorescens</i> remained undefined. RNA-seq transcriptomics analysis combined with quantitative proteomics analysis based on multiplexed isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed in the <i>P</i>. <i>fluorescens</i> wild-type strain UK4 and its derivative carrying an <i>rpoS</i> mutation. A total of 375 differentially expressed coding sequences (DECs) and 212 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. The DECs were further verified by qRT-PCR. The combined transcriptome and proteome analyses revealed the involvement of this regulator in several cellular processes, mainly including polysaccharide metabolism, intracellular secretion, extracellular structures, cell wall biogenesis, stress responses, and amino acid and biogenic amine metabolism, which may contribute to the biofilm formation, stress resistance, and spoilage activities of <i>P</i>. <i>fluorescens</i>. Moreover, we indeed observed that RpoS contributed to the production of the macrocolony biofilm's matrix. Our results provide insights into the regulatory network of RpoS and expand the knowledge about the role of RpoS in the functioning of <i>P. fluorescens</i> in food spoilage.

### Keywords
Regulon, Rpos, Transcriptome, Proteome, Pseudomonas fluorescens

### Affiliations
School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, P.R.China
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxiang Liu
School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, P.R.China


