### Accession
PXD000936

### Title
iTRAQ based quantify for pseudomonas

### Description
The iTRAQ-LC–MS/MS strategy was used for quantitative analysis to reveal the global response of P. aeruginosa SJTD-1 to the stimuli of C18 alkane in this study. As a result, 476 proteins were identified with a significant different expression levels for the growth on n-octadecane, accounting for 8.4% of the 5618 predicted or hypothetical proteins encoded by the strain SJTD-1 genome. These differently expressed proteins were believed to play an important role in multiple biochemical pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins of P. aeruginosa SJTD-1 was prepared, followed being reduced and alkylated. Trypsin was used to hydrolysis alkylated proteins. The resultant peptide mixture was labeled using 4plex iTRAQ reagent kit as the manufacturer's protocols. High pH reverse phase liquid chromatography were used to fractionate the peptide mixture using a Survey HPLC system, followed by analyzed using an LC system coupled with an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Compass Data Analysis version 4.1. Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) was set up to search the NCBI_SJTD1_20140411 database (5618 entries) which was established according to genome sequence available at the IMG database. Scaffold Q+ (version _4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantify the isobaric tag peptide and protein identifications

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa sjtd-1, Proteomics, Itraq, N-octadecane

### Affiliations
instrumental analysis center
Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghaijiaotong university

### Submitter
Jingli Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Jingli Hou
Instrumental Analysis Center of Shanghaijiaotong university


