### Accession
PXD018075

### Title
Dissecting the Roles of Mitochondrial Complex I Intermediate Assembly (MCIA) Complex Factors in the Biogenesis of Complex I

### Description
Mitochondrial Complex I harbors 7 mitochondrial and 38 nuclear-encoded subunits. Its biogenesis requires the assembly and integration of distinct intermediate modules, mediated by numerous assembly factors. The Mitochondrial Complex I Intermediate Assembly (MCIA) complex, containing assembly factors NDUFAF1, ECSIT, ACAD9, and TMEM126B, is required for building the intermediate ND2-module. The role of the MCIA complex and the involvement of other proteins in the biogenesis of this module is unclear. Cell knockout studies reveal that while each MCIA component is critical for complex I assembly, a hierarchy of stability exists centred on ACAD9. We also identify TMEM186 and COA1 as bona fide components of the MCIA complex with loss of either resulting in MCIA complex defects and reduced complex I assembly. TMEM186 enriches with newly translated ND3, while COA1 enriches with ND2. Our findings provide new functional insights into the essential nature of the MCIA complex in complex I assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was performed as described (Dibley et al., 2020; Stroud et al., 2016). BioID proteomics was performed as previously described (Osellame et al., 2016). Affinity enrichment proteomic analysis was performed as previously described (Thompson et al., 2018). Peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and transferred to autosampler vials for analysis by online nano-HPLC/electrospray ionization-MS/MS on either a Thermo-Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid or Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion-Trap instrument as follows: NDUFAF1BirA*, TMEM186Flag and COA1Flag AE-MS were acquired on an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion-Trap instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18 trap column 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm, particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 3 min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (PepMap C18 analytical column 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed at 300 nL/min using a 90 min non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A [0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) ACN, 5% DMSO] and buffer B [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN, 5% DMSO]. Data was collected in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using m/z 300 - 1650 as MS scan range, rCID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Other instrument parameters were: MS scan at 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1E6, CID at 30% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGC target of 5,000. For COA1KO mitochondria, data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18 trap column 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm, particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 3 min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (PepMap C18 analytical column 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation of peptides for was performed at 300 nL/min using a 90 min non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A [0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) ACN, 5% DMSO] and buffer B [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN, 5% DMSO]. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. Lockmass of 401.92272 from DMSO was used. Data were collected using the Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 350-1550 at 120000 resolution with AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 sec cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2-5 were isolated with isolation window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision (HCD) mode with stepped collision energy of 30 ±5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform (Tyanova et al., 2016a) version 1.6.5.0 searching against the UniProt human database containing reviewed, canonical entries (January 2019) and a database containing common contaminants. For label-free (LFQ) AE-MS experiments, default search parameters were used with “Label free quantitation” set to “LFQ” and “Match between runs” enabled. For SILAC experiments, default search parameters were used with multiplicity set to 2 (Lys8, Arg10) and “Match between runs” enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial complex I harbors 7 mitochondrial and 38 nuclear-encoded subunits. Its biogenesis requires the assembly and integration of distinct intermediate modules, mediated by numerous assembly factors. The mitochondrial complex I intermediate assembly (MCIA) complex, containing assembly factors NDUFAF1, ECSIT, ACAD9, and TMEM126B, is required for building the intermediate ND2-module. The role of the MCIA complex and the involvement of other proteins in the biogenesis of this module is unclear. Cell knockout studies reveal that while each MCIA component is critical for complex I assembly, a hierarchy of stability exists centered on ACAD9. We also identify TMEM186 and COA1 as bona fide components of the MCIA complex with loss of either resulting in MCIA complex defects and reduced complex I assembly. TMEM186 enriches with newly translated ND3, and COA1 enriches with ND2. Our findings provide new functional insights into the essential nature of the MCIA complex in complex I assembly.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mcia complex, Oxidative phosphorylation, Assembly factors, Nadh-ubiquinone dehydrogenase, Complex i

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, 3000, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Arthur Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, 3000, Melbourne, Australia


