### Accession
PXD008108

### Title
Interacting protein identification

### Description
Identification of interacting proteins with Herpes Simplex Virus

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were resolved on SDS-PAGE and digested by in-gel digestion with reduction / alkylation and trypsin. Peptides were desalted and analyzed by LC tandem mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by Maxquant and Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS raw data was searched against the Uniprot human database concatenated with Herpes Simplex Virus KOS strain fasta database.

### Publication Abstract
Cell fate transitions involve rapid gene expression changes and global chromatin remodeling, yet the underlying regulatory pathways remain incompletely understood. Here, we identified the RNA-processing factor Nudt21 as a novel regulator of cell fate change using transcription-factor-induced reprogramming as a screening assay. Suppression of Nudt21 enhanced the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells, facilitated transdifferentiation into trophoblast stem cells, and impaired differentiation of myeloid precursors and embryonic stem cells, suggesting a broader role for Nudt21 in cell fate change. We show that Nudt21 directs differential polyadenylation of over 1,500 transcripts in cells acquiring pluripotency, although only a fraction changed protein levels. Remarkably, these proteins were strongly enriched for chromatin regulators, and their suppression neutralized the effect of Nudt21 during reprogramming. Collectively, our data uncover Nudt21 as a novel post-transcriptional regulator of cell fate and establish a direct, previously unappreciated link between alternative polyadenylation and chromatin signaling.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lcms

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities


