### Accession
PXD041369

### Title
A chemoproteomics approach to discover regulators of innate immune signaling

### Description
Viral dsRNA binds to Retinoic acid Inducible Gene I (RIG-I) Like Receptors (RLRs), promoting the production of Interferon (IFN). Interferon then stimulates the innate and adaptive immune system in an autocrine and paracrine manner. Outside of conical pathways, regulators of the interferon (IFN) activation/response system are poorly characterized. In this study, we used a discovery-biased approach to identify Kinases that are part of the interferon system. Differential changes in phosphorylation sites, in the context of dsRNA RIG-I stimulation, were identified with unbiased mass-spec biased phospho-proteomics. We then computationally identified several Kinases upregulated after RIG-I stimulation from phospho-proteomics data. A Chemoproteomics screen was then used to characterize the altered interferon response in the presence of Kinases inhibitors for the upregulated kinases. Combining unbiased phosphoproteomics with a chemoproteomics screen, we identified several potentially novel regulators of the Interferon system whose inhibition blocked the production of Interferon Stimulated Genes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells culture. A549 human lung epithelial cells (A549, ATCC®, CCL-185) were cultured in in Dubebcco’s Modified Eagle Medium (Corning) supplemented with 10% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 I.U./mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Corning).  Poly(I:C) transfection time course proteomics. A549 cells were transfected with poly(I:C) (HMW, Invivogen) using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Thermo Scientific). One set of plates was lysed prior to transfection for an untransfected negative control. Transfected plates were lysed at 5 min, 30 min, 2 hrs, and 24 hrs post-transfection in 1 mL of 8M Urea (Sigma), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), 150 mM NaCl (Sigma), supplemented with a protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (HALT, Thermo Scientific) and prepared in Optima LC/MS grade water (FisherSci). Samples were prepared for quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome analysis using a previously described method [ref Xtine]. Inhibitor treatment and poly(I:C) transfection for proteomics. Inhibitors used for this study were obtained from Selleck Chemicals: ERK1/2: Ravoxertinib (GDC-0994, Cat. # S7554), ERK2: Ulixertinib (BVD-523, Cat. # s7854), AURKA: Alisertib (MLN8237, Cat. # S1133), AURKB: Barasertib (AZD1152-HQPA, Cat. # S1147), JNK1/2/3: Tanzisertib (CC-930, Cat. # S8490), p38a: Ralimetinib (LY2228820, Cat. # S1494), p38a/b: Losmapimod (GW856553X, Cat. # S7215), ATM: KU-55933 (Cat. # S1092), ATR: VX-803 (M4344, Cat #. S9639), PLK1: Volasertib (BI6727, Cat. #S2235), mTOR: Rapamycin (AY-22989, Cat. # S1039), GSK3A/B: Laduviglusib (CT99021, Cat. # S1263), AMPKA1: Dorsomorphin (Compound C, Cat. # S7840), TBK1/iKKε: MRT67037 HCl (Cat. # S7948). A549 cells were pretreated with inhibitors at 10uM or an equal volume of DMSO in biological triplicate. One hour after inhibitor treatment, cells were transfected with poly(I:C) / Lyovec (HMW, Invivogen) at 0.5 µg/mL concentration. 24 hours after poly(I:C) transfection cells were lysed in 0.025% RapiGest (Waters), 2M Urea (Sigma), 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), 150 mM NaCl (Sigma), supplemented with a prote-ase/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (HALT, Thermo Scientific) and prepared in Optima LC/MS grade water (Fisher Scientific). Samples were prepared for quantitative proteome analysis using a previously described method [ref Xtina]. siRNA transfection and poly(I:C) transfection proteomics. SiGENOME SMARTpool siRNAs  for ATM (M-003201-04-0005), ATR (M-003202-05-0005), PLK1 (M-003290-01-0005), AMPKA1 (M-005027-02-0005), and non-targeting control (D-001206-13-20) were obtained from Horizon Discovery. siRNA pools were transfected into A549 cells with lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent (Thermo Scientific). 48 hours after siRNA transfection, cells were transfected with poly(I:C) / Lyovec (HMW, Invivogen) at 0.5 µg/mL concentration. 24 hours after poly(I:C) transfection, cells were lysed in 100 µL 0.025% RapiGest (Waters), 2M Urea (Sigma), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), 150 mM NaCl (Sigma), in Optima LC/MS grade water (Fisher Scientific). Samples were prepared for proteomics analysis as described previously [ref Xtina].

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Methods All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EasynLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. For all analyses, 1uL of sample containing  0.5 ug of digested peptides were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30 cm x 75 μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over (120 minutes for Poly(I:C) transfection time course, 60 minutes for siRNA transfection proteomics and 30 minutes for Inhibitor treatment proteomics) followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 3 μL of mobile phase A.  To build a spectral library, samples from each set of biological replicates were pooled and acquired in data dependent manner. Protein abundance for Poly(I:C) transfection time course proteomics were fractionated with Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spec-trometry (FAIMS) fractionation with a FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each pooled sample was analyzed four times with four FAIMS compensation voltages (CV) (−40V, -55V, -65V,- 75V). Data dependent analysis (DDA) was performed by acquiring a full scan over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolving power (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, with a 10ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS inter-rogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. Similar settings were used for data dependent analysis of phosphopeptide enriched pooled samples, with a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and no FAIMS fractionation.  Data-independent analysis (DIA) was performed on all individual samples. An MS scan at 60,000 resolving power over a scan range of 390-1010 m/z, an instrument controlled AGC target, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled maximum injection time, followed by DIA scans using 8 m/z isolation windows over 400-1000 m/z at a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%.  Raw mass spectrometry data analysis. Peptides/Proteins were first identified with Spectronaut as previously described168. Database. False discovery rates were estimated using a decoy database strategy169. All data were filtered to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches, peptide identifications, and protein identifications. Search parameters included a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications for N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and for phosphoproteomics samples, serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. All other search parameters were defaults for the respective algorithms.  Statistical analysis of proteomics data was conducted utilizing the MSstats package in R [ref]. All data were normalized by equalizing median intensities, the summary method was Tukey’s median polish, and the maximum quantile for deciding censored missing values was 0.999. For protein abundance analyses, only the top 10 peptide features per protein were considered

### Publication Abstract
Innate immune pathways are tightly regulated to balance an appropriate response to infectious agents and tolerable levels of inflammation. Dysregulation of innate immune pathways can lead to severe autoinflammatory disorders or susceptibility to infections. Here, we aimed to identify kinases in common cellular pathways that regulate innate immune pathways by combining small-scale kinase inhibitor screening with quantitative proteomics. We found that inhibitors of kinases ATM, ATR, AMPK, and PLK1 reduced the induction of interferon-stimulated gene expression in response to innate immune pathway activation by poly(I:C) transfection. However, siRNA depletion of these kinases did not validate findings with kinase inhibitors, suggesting that off-target effects may explain their activities. We mapped the effects of kinase inhibitors to various stages in innate immune pathways. Determining the mechanisms by which kinase inhibitors antagonize these pathways may illuminate novel mechanisms of innate immune pathway control.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Plk1, Proteomics; phosphoproteomics, Ampk, Rig-i, Interferon, Atm, Kinases, Atr

### Affiliations
Microbiology department at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey R. Johnson
Microbiology department at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


