### Accession
PXD019619

### Title
Development of novel combination treatments in AML guided by proteomics profiling

### Description
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) can be cured by the co-administration of arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). These small molecules relieve the differentiation blockade of the cancerous promyelocytes and trigger their maturation into functional neutrophils, which are physiologically primed for apoptosis. This normalization therapy uses low dose treatments and represents a compelling alternative to cytotoxic anticancer chemotherapy. However, the serendipitous discovery of this combination treatment prevented the establishment of methodologies to screen for novel combination treatments consisting of inducers of differentiation and other metallopharmaceuticals. Here, we present an experimental framework that enables interrogating the suitability, directionality and extent of normalization of novel combination treatments. Since the endpoint of this anticancer treatment is remodelling of cancer phenotypes, this approach requires a mechanism-driven understanding of the drug-induced cellular adaptions along the path to mature neutrophils. For this purpose, label-free quantification proteomics is used to probe the proteome changes upon differentiation and metal(-loid) treatment on the molecular level in a panel of ATRA-responsive and ATRA-non-responsive acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cell lines, including APL. The induction of differentiation was confirmed by the up-regulation of canonical surface markers (e.g. CD11β) and validated by flow cytometry. The regulation of key transcription factors in this panel of AML cell lines reflects their position in the myeloid differentiation cascade (e.g. SPI1, GFI-1 and CEBPE). The additive/synergistic contributions of ATO to the combination treatment were thoroughly characterized and include changes in metabolic activities, as well as protein signatures related to management of reactive oxygen species and an integrated stress response. The latter two are also characteristic for the organoruthenium-based drug candidate plecstatin-1, which was recently shown to modulate the scaffold protein plectin. The combination of differentiation-induction and plecstatin-1 treatment featured a striking similarity in the responsiveness of the AML cancer cells compared to ATO+ATRA. It turned out to be at least equivalent in the regulation of key processes underlying normalization therapy in AML with granulocytic maturation. By exploiting response patterns of AML cancer cells induced by the ATO+ATRA combination treatment, this approach may allow identifying novel small molecule combinations, which may have the potential to achieve normalization and thus therapeutic benefit beyond APL.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Sample Preparation HL-60, NB4 and U937 cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. All steps were performed on ice. Briefly, the cells were extensively washed with PBS (1×). Isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.25 M Sucrose, 0.5% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitors (1% PMSF and 1% protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche) was added, the cells were scraped off and transferred into labelled 15 mL Falcon tubes (17 × 120 mm, Corning). The cellular membrane was ruptured using shear stress by pressing the cell suspension through a syringe. After centrifugation (3500 rpm, 4 °C, 5min), the supernatant was transferred into ice-cold ethanol (1 : 5) and precipitated over night at –20 °C. The pellet containing the nuclei was incubated with a hypertonic solution (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 M NaCl) and subsequently with NP-40 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% NP-40) containing protease inhibitors (1% PMSF from Sigma and 1% protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche). After centrifugation (3500 rpm, 4 °C, 5 min), the soluble nuclear proteins were transferred into ice-cold ethanol (1 : 5) and precipitated over night at –20 °C. The precipitated proteins were pelleted, dried under vacuum and dissolved in sample buffer (100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulphate) and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay.  Digestion Protocol The HL-60, NB4 and U937 samples obtained with the cytoplasmic-nuclear fractionation protocol were digested in-solution according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Equal amounts of 20 µg protein per sample were reduced with DTT at 37 °C. They were then loaded on 10 kDa centrifugal filters (Microcon-10, Merck, Millipore) and were preconcentrated. The samples were carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide in the dark. The samples were digested over night with trypsin/lys-C (Promega, Germany) at 37 °C. Filters were washed with 0.5% TFA and the eluates were dried with a miVac duo concentrator (GeneVac Ltd, UK) and stored at –20 °C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS analyses The data was acquired on a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany), which was coupled with a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Germany). The LC was equipped with a C-18 separation column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap RSCL, 75 µM × 50 cm) and C-18 trapping column (2 cm × 100 µm). Dried samples were dissolved in formic acid (30%, 5 µL) containing four synthetic peptides as internal standards and were diluted with mobile phase A (40 µL), which consisted of 98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 20% water, 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Each biological sample was recorded in technical duplicates. Samples were analysed over a 135 min chromatographic run containing a 90 min gradient from 8–40% mobile phase B. MS1 resolution was 70k with 50 ms injection time and MS2 resolution was 17.5k with 75 ms injection time. A top 8 method was used in the mass range of 400–1400.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) can be cured by the co-administration of arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-<i>trans</i> retinoic acid (ATRA). These small molecules relieve the differentiation blockade of the transformed promyelocytes and trigger their maturation into functional neutrophils, which are physiologically primed for apoptosis. This normalization therapy represents a compelling alternative to cytotoxic anticancer chemotherapy, but lacks an <i>in vitro</i> model system for testing the efficiency of novel combination treatments consisting of inducers of differentiation and metallopharmaceuticals. Here, using proteome profiling we present an experimental framework that enables characterising the differentiation- and metal-specific effects of the combination treatment in a panel of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cell lines (HL-60 and U937), including APL (NB4). Differentiation had a substantial impact on the proteome on the order of 10% of the identified proteins and featured classical markers and transcription factors of myeloid differentiation. Additionally, ATO provoked specific cytoprotective effects in the AML cell lines HL-60 and U937. In HL-60, these effects included an integrated stress response (ISR) in conjunction with redox defence, while proteasomal responses and a metabolic rewiring were observed in U937 cells. In contrast, the APL cell line NB4 did not display such adaptions indicating a lack of plasticity to cope with the metal-induced stress, which may explain the clinical success of this combination treatment. Based on the induction of these cytoprotective effects, we proposed a novel metal-based compound to be used for the combination treatment instead of ATO. The organoruthenium drug candidate plecstatin-1 was previously shown to induce reactive oxygen species and an ISR. Indeed, the plecstatin-1 combination was found to affect similar pathways compared to the ATO combination in HL-60 cells and did not lead to cytoprotective response signatures in NB4. Moreover, the monocytic cell line U937 showed a low plasticity to cope with the plecstatin-1 combination, which suggests that this combination might achieve therapeutic benefit beyond APL. We propose that the cytoprotective plasticity of cancer cells might serve as a general proxy to discover novel combination treatments <i>in vitro</i>.

### Keywords
Aml, Ruthenium, Plecstatin-1, Proteomics, Arsenic trioxide, Normalization, Metal, Apl, Differentiation, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Joint Metabolome Facility, University of Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Joint Metabolome Facility, University of Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.


