### Accession
PXD006543

### Title
A map of protein-metabolite interactions reveals principles of chemical communication

### Description
Application of a novel mass spectrometry-based high-throughput workflow (LiP-SMap) and data resource based on limited proteolysis (LiP) of complex samples. Proteome-wide limited proteolysis sites were obtained in different conditions to infer ligand-induced and protein-protein interaction induced conformational changes. This information was used to identify unknown ligand binding proteins, small molecule-protein binding sites and the remodeling of protein complexes directly in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples for MS analysis were subjected to limited proteolysis in native conditions and subsequently denatured. Samples were then reduced with TCEP, alkylated using Iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin to generate peptides mixtures. Peptide mixtures were further cleaned-up by C-18 column in prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples for MS analysis were subjected to limited proteolysis in native conditions and subsequently denatured. Samples were then reduced with TCEP, alkylated using Iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin to generate peptides mixtures. Peptide mixtures were further cleaned-up by C-18 column in prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolite-protein interactions control a variety of cellular processes, thereby playing a major role in maintaining cellular homeostasis. Metabolites comprise the largest fraction of molecules in cells, but our knowledge of the metabolite-protein interactome lags behind our understanding of protein-protein or protein-DNA interactomes. Here, we present a chemoproteomic workflow for the systematic identification of metabolite-protein interactions directly in their&#xa0;native environment. The approach identified a network of known and novel interactions and binding sites in Escherichia coli, and we demonstrated the functional relevance of a number of newly identified interactions. Our data enabled identification of new enzyme-substrate relationships and cases of metabolite-induced remodeling of protein complexes. Our metabolite-protein interactome consists of 1,678 interactions and 7,345 putative binding sites. Our data reveal functional and structural principles of chemical communication, shed light on the prevalence and mechanisms of enzyme promiscuity, and enable extraction of quantitative parameters of metabolite binding on a proteome-wide scale.

### Keywords
Lip-smap, E.coli, Small molecules, Limited proteolysis, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ilaria Piazza

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


