### Accession
PXD005482

### Title
Analysis of Trpc6 Phosphorylation in HEK293T cells

### Description
The aim of this project was to detect phosphorylation on the human calcium Channel TRPC6. TRPC6 is mutated in genetic diseases of the podocyte, a postmitotic cell at the epithelial filtration barrier

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with TRPC6 WT and cell lysates were generated as previously described. Then, peptides were desalted and fractionated using off-line strong cation exchange chromatography as previously described. Fractions were desalted and phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC- FeNTA columns, and peptides were cleaned up using stage tips as previously described . Phosphopeptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap XL machine with an 90min gradient as previously described. Data were searched using the proteome discoverer 1.4 platform (Thermo) using the sequest search algorithm. For details, please see the method section of the accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Sequest search algorithm as described in the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling <i>via</i> the transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channel C6 plays a pivotal role in hereditary and sporadic glomerular kidney disease. Several studies have identified gain-of-function mutations of <i>TRPC6</i> and report induced expression and enhanced channel activity of TRPC6 in association with glomerular diseases. Interfering with TRPC6 activity may open novel therapeutic pathways. TRPC6 channel activity is controlled by protein expression and stability as well as intracellular trafficking. Identification of regulatory phosphorylation sites in TRPC6 and corresponding protein kinases is essential to understand the regulation of TRPC6 activity and may result in future therapeutic strategies. In this study, an unbiased phosphoproteomic screen of human TRPC6 identified several novel serine phosphorylation sites. The phosphorylation site at serine 14 of TRPC6 is embedded in a basophilic kinase motif that is highly conserved across species. We confirmed serine 14 as a target of MAPKs and proline-directed kinases like cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) in cell-based as well as <i>in vitro</i> kinase assays and quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of TRPC6. Phosphorylation of TRPC6 at serine 14 enhances channel conductance by boosting membrane expression of TRPC6, whereas protein stability and multimerization of TRPC6 are not altered, making serine 14 phosphorylation a potential drug target to interfere with TRPC6 channel activity.-Hagmann, H., Mangold, N., Rinschen, M. M., Koenig, T., Kunzelmann, K., Schermer, B., Benzing, T., Brinkkoetter, P. T. Proline-dependent and basophilic kinases phosphorylate human TRPC6 at serine 14 to control channel activity through increased membrane expression.

### Keywords
Trpc6, Phosphorylation, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Hagmann
University Hospital Cologne


