### Accession
PXD033825

### Title
Identification of the quantitative phosphoproteome in mitotic HeLa cells with or without G6PD inhibitors.

### Description
HeLa cells were synchronized with a double thymidine block procedure. Briefly, the exponentially growing HeLa cells were maintained with 2 mM thymidine for 18 h, followed by a release of 9 h in fresh medium, and then cells were re-cultured in 2 mM thymidine for additional 15 h. After a release of 7.5 h in fresh medium, DMSO or G6PD inhibitor was added to the medium. 1 h later, the cells entered into M phase. Mitotic cells were harvested by mitotic shake-off. Then, the samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Finally, a Kinase-Substrate Enrichment was performed, which could infer the changes of upstream kinase activity upon the treatment of G6PD inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor(Scientz) in lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 100nM Okadaic acid). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4°C for 10 mins. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for s second 4h-digestion.  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 001, PTM bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bio-material-based PTM enrichment for phosphorylation: Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Statistical analysis of phosphoproteome was performed on logarithmized intensities for those values that were found to be quantified in any experimental condition. To identify potentially modulated phosphopetides across two different conditions, we choosed the phosphopetides with a change rate greater than 1.20 or less than 0.83. Then we performed a Kinase-Substrate Enrichment which could infer the changes of upstream kinase activity. In detail, kinase-substrate relationships were extracted by PhosphoSitePlus and NetworKIN with default parameters (NetworKIN score cutoff of 2, p-value cutoff of 0.05 and substrate count cutoff of 5). The enrichment score was exclusively based on the collective phosphorylation status of its substrates and the phosphorylation sites on the kinase itself were disregarded. For data shown, each kinase corresponding p-value and score were assigned.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G6pd, Mitosis, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Aoxing Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenye Yang
University of Science and Technology of China


