### Accession
PXD029131

### Title
MS to detect peptides of human HCT116 cell lysate immunoprecipitated by anti-miPEP31

### Description
We used anti-miPEP31 to immnoprecipitated the interacting protein or peptides. Then segregate ingredients ≤ 10 kD and > 3 kD. All mass spectrometric experiments were performed on a QE-Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 2000 via an Easy Spray (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
HCT 116 cells (1-2 × 108) were lysed and subjected to anti-miPEP31 immunoprecipitation. The purified protein lysates were eluted by 0.2M glycine (pH = 2.6), then subjected to micon Ultra Centrifugal Filters to segregate ingredients ≤ 10 kD and > 3 kD. The segregated peptides were treated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), purified using the C18 Ziptips, and eluted with 0.1% TFA in 50~70% acetonitrile. All mass spectrometric experiments were performed on a QE-Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 2000 via an Easy Spray (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS ion spectra were analyzed using PEAKS 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions) for processing, de novo sequencing and database searching. Resulting sequences were searched through the UniProt Proteome database (downloaded on May 5th, 2018) with mass error tolerance set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for parent and fragment, respectively. FDR estimation was enabled. Peptides were filtered for log10p R 20, and the proteins were filtered for log10p R 15 plus one unique peptide. For all experiments, these settings gave an FDR of < 1% at the peptide-spectrum match level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Peptides, Hct116, Ip-lc-ms

### Affiliations
 Shanghai Institute of immunology ,Shanghaijiaotong university
Shanghai Institute of Immunology Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM)

### Submitter
Hong Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Honglin Wang
Shanghai Institute of Immunology Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM)


