### Accession
PXD016219

### Title
LZY-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis

### Description
In many plant species, roots maintain specific growth angles relative to the direction of gravity, known as gravitropic set point angles (GSA). These contribute to the efficient acquisition of water and nutrients. AtLAZY1/LAZY1-LIKE (LZY) genes are involved in GSA control by regulating auxin flow toward the direction of gravity in Arabidopsis. LZYs are plant-specific unknown proteins with no domain for which the function is inferable. To clarify the molecular function of LZYs, we identified the proteins that interact with them by immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Two week-old seedlings of transgenic plants carrying 35S:GFP, 35S:LZY2-GFP or 35S:LZY3-GFP (0.5 mg) were homogenized with an extraction buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)]. After incubation on ice for 20 min, the extract was centrifuged at 2,500xg for 20 min. The supernatants were centrifuged at 20,000xg for 20 min and then the supernatants were used for following immunoprecipitation (IP). IP analyses were performed with the μMACS Epitope-Tagged Protein Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacture’s instruction with small modifications. The supernatants were incubated with anti-GFP conjugated with micromagnetic beads for 2 hours at 4°C on a rotator and then applied to μMACS column. After washing the column, the proteins were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer. The IP products were separated using a ready-made 12.5% (w/v) SDS-polyacrylamide gel (DRC) and stained with Flamingo (BioRad). Peptide preparation was performed by in-gel digestion using trypsin (MS grade gold; Promega). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a HTC-PAL/Paradigm MS4 system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The spectra obtained were compared with a protein database (TAIR10) using the MASCOT server (Version 2.4). The mascot search parameters were as follows: set off the threshold at peptide tolerance at ±10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at ±0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
In many plant species, roots maintain specific growth angles relative to the direction of gravity, known as gravitropic set point angles (GSAs). These contribute to the efficient acquisition of water and nutrients. AtLAZY1/LAZY1-LIKE (LZY) genes are involved in GSA control by regulating auxin flow toward the direction of gravity in Arabidopsis. Here, we demonstrate that RCC1-like domain (RLD) proteins, identified as LZY interactors, are essential regulators of polar auxin transport. We show that interaction of the CCL domain of LZY with the BRX domain of RLD is important for the recruitment of RLD from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane by LZY. A structural analysis reveals the mode of the interaction as an intermolecular &#x3b2;-sheet in addition to the structure of the BRX domain. Our results offer a molecular framework in which gravity signal first emerges as polarized LZY3 localization in gravity-sensing cells, followed by polar RLD1 localization and PIN3 relocalization to modulate auxin flow.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Gravitropism, Lzy

### Affiliations
Division of Plant Environmental Responses, National Institute for Basic Biology, Japan
Ritsumeikan University

### Submitter
Yoichiro Fukao

### Lab Head
Dr Miyo Terao Morita
Division of Plant Environmental Responses, National Institute for Basic Biology, Japan


