### Accession
PXD026454

### Title
Deep proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of neuroblastoma treated with XPO1 inhibitor Selinexor

### Description
Neuroblastoma accounts for 15% of cancer-related deaths in children, highlighting an unmet need for novel therapies. Selinexor is a small molecule inhibitor of XPO1 that shuffles cargo proteins with a nuclear export sequence, many of which are essential for cancer growth and cell maintenance, from the nucleus to the cytosol. We systematically tested the effect of selinexor against neuroblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo and used a proteomics screening approach to interrogate unknown mechanisms of action. We found that selinexor induces its cytotoxic effects in neuroblastoma through the nuclear accumulation of p53. By combining selinexor with an aurora kinase inhibitor, alisertib that is already in clinical use for neuroblastoma, we show that p53-mediated lethality can be further augmented supporting clinical testing of this drug combination against neuroblastoma

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling were carried out via an advanced TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS platform similar to previous studies(Stewart, McEvoy et al. 2018, Wang, Diaz et al. 2019, Bai, Wang et al. 2020, Kennedy, Okoreeh et al. 2020, Wang, Dey et al. 2020, Gocho, Liu et al. 2021). Briefly, around 8 million cells per sample were lysed in  0.5 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 1× PhosStop Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail) at 4°C(Wang, Yang et al. 2015). Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Cell lysates were first digested by Lys-C (100:1, w/w) for 2 hours,  followed by trypsin digestion (50:1, w/w) overnight at room temperature(Dey, Wang et al. 2019). Peptides were desalted, labeled with TMT16-plex reagents, and pooled together with equal amount(Gocho, Liu et al. 2021). Pooled peptides were then fractionated by basic pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography and concatenated to total 40 fractions. 95% of each fraction was used for TiO2 based phosphopeptide enrichment, and the 5% leftover were used for whole proteome analysis(Tan, Wu et al. 2015, Sifford, Tan et al. 2017). Each fraction was then sequentially loaded on an acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS instrument for proteomic or phosphoproteomic analysis (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific)(Liu, Yang et al. 2021).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling were carried out via an advanced TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS platform similar to previous studies(Stewart, McEvoy et al. 2018, Wang, Diaz et al. 2019, Bai, Wang et al. 2020, Kennedy, Okoreeh et al. 2020, Wang, Dey et al. 2020, Gocho, Liu et al. 2021). Briefly, around 8 million cells per sample were lysed in  0.5 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 1× PhosStop Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail) at 4°C(Wang, Yang et al. 2015). Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Cell lysates were first digested by Lys-C (100:1, w/w) for 2 hours,  followed by trypsin digestion (50:1, w/w) overnight at room temperature(Dey, Wang et al. 2019). Peptides were desalted, labeled with TMT16-plex reagents, and pooled together with equal amount(Gocho, Liu et al. 2021). Pooled peptides were then fractionated by basic pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography and concatenated to total 40 fractions. 95% of each fraction was used for TiO2 based phosphopeptide enrichment, and the 5% leftover were used for whole proteome analysis(Tan, Wu et al. 2015, Sifford, Tan et al. 2017). Each fraction was then sequentially loaded on an acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS instrument for proteomic or phosphoproteomic analysis (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific)(Liu, Yang et al. 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Neuroblastoma accounts for 15% of cancer-related deaths in children, highlighting an unmet need for novel therapies. Selinexor is a small molecule inhibitor of XPO1. XPO1 shuffles cargo proteins with a nuclear export sequence from the nucleus to the cytosol, many of which are essential for cancer growth and cell maintenance. We systematically tested the effect of selinexor against neuroblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo and used an advanced proteomic and phosphoproteomic screening approach to interrogate unknown mechanisms of action. We found that selinexor induced its cytotoxic effects in neuroblastoma through the predominantly nuclear accumulation of p53 and global activation of apoptosis pathways. Selinexor also induced p53 phosphorylation at site S315, which is one initiating step for p53 degradation. Since this phosphorylation step is undertaken mostly by aurora kinase A (AURKA), we used the clinically available AURKA inhibitor, alisertib, and found p53-mediated lethality could be further augmented in three orthotopic xenograft mouse models. These findings suggest a potential therapeutic benefit using selinexor and alisertib to synergistically increase p53-mediated cytotoxicity of high-risk neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
Xpo1, Selinexor, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Neuroblastoma, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital
St.Jude children's Research hospi

### Submitter
Hong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Wang
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital


