### Accession
PXD009939

### Title
Myc and the Tip60 chromatin remodeling complex control neuroblast maintenance and polarity in Drosophila

### Description
Stem cells establish cortical polarity and divide asymmetrically to simultaneously maintain themselves and generate differentiating offspring cells. Several chromatin modifiers have been identified as stemness factors in mammalian pluripotent stem cells, but whether these factors control stem cell polarity and asymmetric division has not been investigated so far. We addressed this question in Drosophila neural stem cells called neuroblasts. We identified the Tip60 chromatin remodeling complex and its interaction partner Myc to regulate target genes required for neuroblast maintenance. Knockdown of members of this complex results in loss of cortical polarity, symmetric neuroblast division and premature differentiation through nuclear entry of the transcription factor Prospero. We found that aPKC is the key target gene of Myc and the Tip60 complex subunit Domino regulating neuroblast polarity. Our transcriptome analysis further showed that Domino regulates the expression of mitotic spindle genes which were identified before as direct Myc targets. Our findings reveal an evolutionarily conserved functional link between Myc, the Tip60 complex and the molecular network controlling cell polarity and asymmetric cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from Co-IP samples were seperated by SDS-PAGE, and processed using an in-gel digestion approach with trypsin. Peptides were extracted and desalted using SDB-RP StegaTips. All samples were analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS utilizing an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC coupled to Q-Exactive PLus mass spectrometers, operated using default settings.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot Drosophila melanogaster database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively.The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification.Oxidation (M) was included as variable modification.The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cells establish cortical polarity and divide asymmetrically to simultaneously maintain themselves and generate differentiating offspring cells. Several chromatin modifiers have been identified as stemness factors in mammalian pluripotent stem cells, but whether these factors control stem cell polarity and asymmetric division has not been investigated so far. We addressed this question in <i>Drosophila</i> neural stem cells called neuroblasts. We identified the Tip60 chromatin remodeling complex and its interaction partner Myc as regulators of genes required for neuroblast maintenance. Knockdown of Tip60 complex members results in loss of cortical polarity, symmetric neuroblast division, and premature differentiation through nuclear entry of the transcription factor Prospero. We found that aPKC is the key target gene of Myc and the Tip60 complex subunit Domino in regulating neuroblast polarity. Our transcriptome analysis further showed that Domino regulates the expression of mitotic spindle genes previously identified as direct Myc targets. Our findings reveal an evolutionarily conserved functional link between Myc, the Tip60 complex, and the molecular network controlling cell polarity and asymmetric cell division.

### Keywords
Stem cell, Polarity, Neuroblast, Chromatin remodeling, Asymmetric cell division

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Institut I für Anatomie AG Molekulare Zellbiologie Universität zu Köln  Kerpener Str. 62, Geb. 37 D-50937 Cologne  Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Wodarz
Institut I für Anatomie AG Molekulare Zellbiologie Universität zu Köln  Kerpener Str. 62, Geb. 37 D-50937 Cologne  Germany


