### Accession
PXD014177

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis induced by rifampicim

### Description
Rifampicin plays an important role during tuberculosis treatment, which historically contributed for shortening therapy; however, rifampicin resistance has been the intersection for the definition of multi (MDR-TB) and extensively (XDR-TB) resistant outcomes. A key aspect which has contributed for investigations of drug action/resistance is the understanding of the dynamic genome expression, as that analyzed by Proteomics. Proteins from the reference strain, Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv were extracted after 12, 24 and 48 hours over rifampicin challenge at the minimal inhibitory concentration (0.03 μg•mL-1) and identified by LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 100 µg of protein were diluted in 8 M urea solution, and reduced with five mM DTT, and left 25 minutes at 56 °C. Subsequently, it was performed the alkylation with 14 mM iodoacetamide, light-protected at room temperature, followed by a DTT quenching (five mM) during 15 minutes at the same condition. Calcium chloride at one mM and two micrograms of trypsin for mass spectrometry (Promega, USA) were added to the solution, and incubated at 37 °C by 16 hours until the digesting being stopped with 0.4% trifluoracetic acid. The obtained peptides were desalted using C18 Sep Pak® cartridges (Waters, USA) and stored at -80 °C until the liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry  analysis (LC-MS). Afterwards, the tryptic  digest was identified by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0  and Perseus version 1.6.1.1.

### Publication Abstract
Rifampicin plays an important role during the treatment of tuberculosis, which makes it to be recommended throughout the regimen. The molecular target for rifampicin activity and resistance is the bacterial RNA polymerase coded by rpoB. However, it has been observed that Mycobacterium tuberculosis could use different metabolic pathways contributing to drug activity/resistance. In this sense, Proteomics analysis has been a key aspect towards the understanding of the dynamic genome expression triggered by drugs and other M. tuberculosis hostile stimuli. Herein, we aimed to report the changes in the M. tuberculosis protein profile triggered by rifampicin. The M. tuberculosis H<sub>37</sub>Rv strain was submitted to 12, 24 and 48&#xa0;h of rifampicin challenge, at the minimal inhibitory concentration (0.03&#xa0;&#x3bc;g&#xa0;mL<sup>-1</sup>), and proteins were extracted. The protein identification was carried out by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Four proteins, Ino1 (Rv0046c), FabD (Rv2243), EsxK (Rv1197) and PPE60 (Rv3478) were statistically underexpressed over 48&#xa0;h of rifampicin exposure, indicating that in addition to the known activity of rifampin in transcriptional machinery in M. tuberculosis, processes related to disturbance in cell wall synthesis and lipid metabolism in the bacillus are also triggered by rifampicin contributing to bacillus death.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics, Drug resistance, Cell wall

### Affiliations
State University of Maringá
Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences, Center of Health Sciences, State University of Maringá, Maringá-PR, Brazil

### Submitter
Jean Eduardo Meneguello

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Aline Zanetti Campanerut-Sá
Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences, Center of Health Sciences, State University of Maringá, Maringá-PR, Brazil


