### Accession
PXD025850

### Title
Proteomics analysis zebrafish ALS model

### Description
Despite advances in studies of C9orf72-ALS, understanding the function of C9orf72 remains a key research element that is poorly explored. We generated a C9orf72-related ALS stable zebrafish line with a reduced expression of C9orf72.Using this stable transgenic zebrafish model, we analyzed the effects of reduced C9orf72 function on the zebrafish’s neuromuscular system.

### Sample Protocol
Six day old zebrafish larvae were collected and lysed in 150 μL lysis buffer lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% triton, 0.1% SDS, 1%  sodium deoxycolate, and protease inhibitors cocktail (1:10, Sigma-Aldrich). The lysate were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Then, a 1:8:1 ratio was used to precipitate proteins, 1X of cell lysates, 8X of 100% ice cold acetone and 1X of 100% tricholoroacetic acid in low binding protein tubes. 20 μg of proteins were precipitated. Proteins were incubated at -20°C for 12 hours and centrifuged at 11,500 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant was then discarded A standard TCA protein precipitation was first performed to remove detergents from the samples (or acetone precipitation). Protein extracts were than re-solubilized in 10 µL of a 6M urea buffer. Proteins were reduced by adding 2.5 µL of the reduction buffer (45 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min at 37ºC, and then alkylated by adding 2.5 µL of the alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min at 24ºC in dark.  Prior to trypsin digestion, 20 µL of water was added to reduce the urea concentration to 2M. 10 µL of the trypsin solution (5 ng/µL of trypsin sequencing grade from Promega, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to each sample. Protein digestion was performed at 37ºC for 18 h and stopped with 5 µL of 5% formic acid. Protein digests were dried down in vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) against the Refseq Danio Rerio protein database. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8).

### Publication Abstract
The most common genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) is a hexanucleotide repeat expansion within the C9orf72 gene. Reduced levels of C9orf72 mRNA and protein have been found in ALS/FTD patients, but the role of this protein in disease pathogenesis is still poorly understood. Here, we report the generation and characterization of a stable C9orf72 loss-of-function (LOF) model in the zebrafish. We show that reduced C9orf72 function leads to motor defects, muscle atrophy, motor neuron loss and mortality in early larval and adult stages. Analysis of the structure and function of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) of the larvae, reveal a marked reduction in the number of presynaptic and postsynaptic structures and an impaired release of quantal synaptic vesicles at the NMJ. Strikingly, we demonstrate a downregulation of SV2a upon C9orf72-LOF and a reduced rate of synaptic vesicle cycling. Furthermore, we show a reduced number and size of Rab3a-postive synaptic puncta at NMJs. Altogether, these results reveal a key function for C9orf72 in the control of presynaptic vesicle trafficking and release at the zebrafish larval NMJ. Our study demonstrates an important role for C9orf72 in ALS/FTD pathogenesis, where it regulates synaptic vesicle release and neuromuscular functions.

### Keywords
Larvae, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
INRS
Institut National de Recherche Scientifique

### Submitter
Kessen Patten

### Lab Head
Dr Kessen Patten
Institut National de Recherche Scientifique


