### Accession
PXD016834

### Title
Impact of Polyethylene on Salivary Glands Proteome in Galleria melonella

### Description
Polyethylene pollutions are considered inert in nature and adversely affect the entire ecosystem. Larvae of greater wax moths (Galleria mellonella) have the ability to masticate and potentially biodegrade polyethylene films at elevated rates. The wax moth has been thought to metabolize PE independently of gut flora, however, the role of the microbiome is poorly understood and degradation by the wax moth might be involved. To determine whether the salivary glands of the wax moth were potentially involved in the PE degradation, it was investigated how surface changes of polyethylene were affected by mastication and consumption. Formation of pitting and degradation intermediates, including carbonyl groups, indicated that salivary glands could assist in polyethylene metabolism. We investigated the biochemical effect of exposure to PE on the composition of the salivary gland proteome. The expression of salivary proteins was found to be affected by PE exposure. The proteins that were significantly affected by the exposure to PE revealed that the wax moth is undergoing general changes in energy levels, and that enzymatic pathways associated with fatty acid beta oxidation were induced during PE consumption.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were lysed by bead beating in the presence of TEAB buffer, B-PER buffer and sodium deoxycholate, followed by TCA precipitation. Proteins were digested in solution and subsequently desalted using C18 microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Quadruplicate measurements were analysed using MaxQuant using the LFQ feature. Protein and peptide FDR were set to 1%. Subsequent data analysis was performed using Perseus and in-house R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Polyethylene pollutions are considered inert in nature and adversely affect the entire ecosystem. Larvae of greater wax moth (Galleria mellonella) have the ability to masticate and potentially biodegrade polyethylene films at elevated rates. The wax moth has been thought to metabolize PE independently of gut flora, however the role of the microbiome is poorly understood and degradation by the wax moth might be involved. To determine whether the salivary glands of the wax moth were potentially involved in the PE degradation, it was investigated how surface changes of polyethylene were affected by mastication and consumption. Formation of pitting and degradation intermediates including carbonyl groups, indicated that salivary glands could assist in polyethylene degradation. We investigated the biochemical effect of exposure by PE on the composition of the salivary gland proteome. The expression of salivary proteins was found to be affected by PE exposure. The proteins that were significantly affected by the exposure to PE revealed that the wax moth are undergoing general changes in energy levels, also enzymatic pathways associated to fatty acid beta oxidation during consumption to PE were induced.

### Keywords
Biodegradation, Greater wax moth, Polyethylene, Salivary glands

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Section of Biotechnology Head of Functional Ecology group Professor
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Nadieh de Jonge

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Aalborg University Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Section of Biotechnology Head of Functional Ecology group Professor


