### Accession
PXD043166

### Title
Global profiling of the proteome, phosphoproteome, and N-glycoproteome of protoscolex and adult worms of Echinococcus granulosus

### Description
Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is a chronic zoonosis caused by infection with the larval stage(protoscoleces, PSCs) of the cestode Echinococcus granulosus. A unique characteristic of the PSC is an ability to develop bidirectionally into an adult worm in the definitive host or into a secondary hydatid cyst in the intermediate host. Furmore, the cestode has a complex life-cycle involving different development stages but the mechanisms underpinning this development. Many studies have demonstrated that some matrix proteins undergo posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation and glycosylation, which have important regulatory effects on the functional properties of the proteins. Systematic analysis of the proteome, the phosphorylated modified proteome and the glycosylated modified proteome of the  PSCs and adult worms was performed using a proteomics strategy. A total of 6407 phosphorylation sites and 1757 proteins were quantifiable. Of those, 2032 phosphorylation sites and 770 proteins were up-regulated, and 2993 phosphorylation sites and 1217 proteins were down-regulated in the PSCs compared with the adult worms. A total of 612 N-glycosylation sites within 392 N-glycoproteins were identified. Of which, 355 N-glycosylation sites and 212 N-glycoproteins were quantifiable. Of those, 90 N-glycosylation sites and 64 N-glycoproteins were up-regulated, and 171 N-glycosylation sites and 126 N-glycoproteins were down-regulated 6407 in the PSCs compared with the adult worms. GO enrichment analysis indicated that the differently expressed phosphoproteins were mainly enriched in regulation of oxidoreduction coenzyme metabolic process, myelin sheath and RNA helicase activity, while the differently expressed N-glycoproteins were enriched in the cellular response to unfolded protein, endoplasmic reticulum lumen and nucleic acid binding. KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that the differently expressed phosphoproteins were mainly enriched in RNA transport, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis, HIF-1 signaling pathway and Pyruvate metabolism. while the differently expressed N-glycoproteins were enriched in PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, ECM-receptor interaction and Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum.

### Sample Protocol
The sheep livers infected with Echinococcus granulosus were collected in the slaughterhouse and brought back to the laboratory. The cyst fluid containing protoscoleces was extracted under aseptic condition, and the protoscoleces were collected by centrifugation to separate the cyst wall, the collected protoscolex and cyst wall were stored in -80 ℃ refrigerator after 3-5 times of washing with PBS with penicillin and streptomycin. The adults of Echinococcus granulosus were stored in -80 ℃ refrigerator in our laboratory.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Echinococcus_granulosus PR database (11279 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 20 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.   Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used.  Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper.  We used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis: Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis: For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 11.0 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Echinococcus granulosus; phosphoproteome; n-glycoproteome; global profiling

### Affiliations
Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences

### Submitter
Zhengrong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhengrong Wang
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences


