### Accession
PXD031463

### Title
The AMA1-RON complex drives Plasmodium sporozoite invasion in the mosquito and mammalian hosts

### Description
Sporozoites and merozoites share a number of proteins that are expressed by both stages, including the Apical Membrane Antigen 1 (AMA1) and the Rhoptry Neck Proteins (RONs). Although AMA1 and RONs are essential for merozoite invasion of erythrocytes during asexual blood stage replication of the malaria parasite, their precise function in sporozoites is unclear. Here we performed RFP-trap immunoprecipitation experiments using lysates from transgenic sporozoites expressing RON4 fused to mCherry. RON4, RON2, RON5 and AMA1 were the main proteins identified by mass spectrometry among co-precipitated proteins, showing that AMA1-RON interactions are conserved in salivary gland sporozoites.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected RON4-mCherry sporozoites were lysed. After centrifugation supernatants were preclearing overnight. Precleared lysates were subjected to mCherry immunoprecipitation using RFP-Trap beads. After washes, proteins on beads were directly eluted in Laemmli buffer. Lysates were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) for short migration (5 mm). Lanes containing the samples were then cut into small pieces and submitted to trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces, desalted by StageTips and analysed by LC-MS/MS system (nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files (mgf) were generated using Data Analysis 5.1 (Bruker) and processed with X!Tandem pipeline version 0.2.36 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline) using databases from UniProt or PlasmoDB. The databases used were: Contaminants_20160129 containing a list of common contaminants, Anopheles_stephensi_UP.fasta (Date 09/2018, number of entries: 11,767) and PlasmoDB_PB_39_PbergheiANKA (Date 09/2018, number entered: 5,076). The search parameters were : maximum 1 missed cleavage allowed, Cys-CAM as fixed modification, Met-Ox and acetyl N-term as variable modifications. MS mass error tolerances were adapted to instrument. MS1 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. MS2 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. Protein lists were filtered (FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level, minimum 1 peptide per protein).

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium sporozoites that are transmitted by blood-feeding female Anopheles mosquitoes invade hepatocytes for an initial round of intracellular replication, leading to the release of merozoites that invade and multiply within red blood cells. Sporozoites and merozoites share a number of proteins that are expressed by both stages, including the Apical Membrane Antigen 1 (AMA1) and the Rhoptry Neck Proteins (RONs). Although AMA1 and RONs are essential for merozoite invasion of erythrocytes during asexual blood stage replication of the parasite, their function in sporozoites was still unclear. Here we show that AMA1 interacts with RONs in mature sporozoites. By using DiCre-mediated conditional gene deletion in P. berghei, we demonstrate that loss of AMA1, RON2 or RON4 in sporozoites impairs colonization of the mosquito salivary glands and invasion of mammalian hepatocytes, without affecting transcellular parasite migration. Three-dimensional electron microscopy data showed that sporozoites enter salivary gland cells through a ring-like structure and by forming a transient vacuole. The absence of a functional AMA1-RON complex led to an altered morphology of the entry junction, associated with epithelial cell damage. Our data establish that AMA1 and RONs facilitate host cell invasion across Plasmodium invasive stages, and suggest that sporozoites use the AMA1-RON complex to efficiently and safely enter the mosquito salivary glands to ensure successful parasite transmission. These results open up the possibility of targeting the AMA1-RON complex for transmission-blocking antimalarial strategies.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Ama1, Malaria, Sporozoites, Rons.

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM

### Submitter
Soumia HAMADA

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM


