### Accession
PXD016686

### Title
Engineering Af1521 macro domain increases ADP-ribose binding affinity and leads to the identification of more ADP-ribosylated proteins

### Description
Protein ADP-ribosylation is a covalent, reversible post-translational modification that has important functions in several cellular mechanisms. The identification of modified proteins in cells has proven challenging and, due to the low abundance of protein ADP-ribosylation, has mainly been possible via enrichment methodologies using ADP-ribose binding domains. Here, using random mutagenesis and in vitro selection with an ADP-ribosylated histone peptide, we engineered the archaeal Af1521 macro domain to generate an engineered isoform containing nine mutations that displays significantly increased affinity towards ADP-ribose. Comparison of the wild-type and the engineered Af1521 macro domains using our proteomic ADP-ribosylome enrichment workflow demonstrated an increased identification rate of ADP-ribosylated proteins with the engineered Af1521.

### Sample Protocol
ADPr-Peptide enrichments were carried out as previously described (1) with the following protocol modifications. After reducing potentially PARylated peptides to MARylated peptides using the enzyme poly(ADP-ribose)-glycohydrolase (PARG), the affinity enrichment of ADP-ribosylated peptides was either performed using either WT Af1521 or eAf1521 for 2 hrs at 4°C. Both enriched samples were then prepared for MS analysis as described previously (2). Identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides from untreated and H2O2-treated HeLa cells was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to an ACQUITY M class UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters).  1. Leutert, M., Menzel, S., Braren, R., Rissiek, B., Hopp, A.K., Nowak, K., Bisceglie, L., Gehrig, P., Li, H., Zolkiewska, A. et al. (2018) Proteomic Characterization of the Heart and Skeletal Muscle Reveals Widespread Arginine ADP-Ribosylation by the ARTC1 Ectoenzyme. Cell Rep, 24, 1916-1929 e1915. 2. Martello, R., Leutert, M., Jungmichel, S., Bilan, V., Larsen, S.C., Young, C., Hottiger, M.O. and Nielsen, M.L. (2016) Proteome-wide identification of the endogenous ADP-ribosylome of mammalian cells and tissue. Nat Commun, 7, 12917.

### Data Protocol
MS1-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed by applying Progenesis QI software (v. 3.0.6039.34628, Nonlinear Dynamics, Purham, NC). For post-translational modification (PTM) site annotation Scaffold-PTM software (Version 3.2.0) was used invoking the site localization algorithm Ascore (4), including neutral losses for HCD fragment ion spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Protein ADP-ribosylation is a reversible post-translational modification that regulates important cellular functions. The identification of modified proteins has proven challenging and has mainly been achieved via enrichment methodologies. Random mutagenesis was used here to develop an engineered Af1521&#xa0;ADP-ribose binding macro domain protein with 1000-fold increased affinity towards ADP-ribose. The crystal structure reveals that two point mutations K35E and Y145R form a salt bridge within the ADP-ribose binding domain. This forces the proximal ribose to rotate within the binding pocket and, as a consequence, improves engineered Af1521&#xa0;ADPr-binding affinity. Its use in our proteomic ADP-ribosylome workflow increases the ADP-ribosylated protein identification rates and yields greater ADP-ribosylome coverage. Furthermore, generation of an engineered Af1521 Fc fusion protein confirms the improved detection of cellular ADP-ribosylation by immunoblot and immunofluorescence. Thus, this engineered isoform of Af1521 can also serve as a valuable tool for the analysis of cellular ADP-ribosylation under in vivo conditions.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Af1521 macro domain, Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Kathrin Nowak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Switzerland


