### Accession
PXD012584

### Title
Secretome and intracellular proteome of eccE1 and mycP1 deletion mutants of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis uses the specialised ESX-1 secretion system to secrete virulence factors and potent immunogenic effectors required for disease progression. ESX-1 is a multi-subunit apparatus with a membrane complex that is predicted to form a pore in the cytoplasmic membrane. In M. tuberculosis this complex is composed of five membrane proteins: EccB1, EccCa1, EccCb1, EccD1, EccE1. In this study, we have characterised the membrane component EccE1, and we found that deletion of eccE1 leads to destabilisation of EccB1, EccCa1 and EccD1 levels as well as to the disruption of EsxA, EsxB, EspA and EspC secretion. Surprisingly, secretion of EspB was not affected by loss of EccE1.

### Sample Protocol
Culture filtrates were incubated for 10 min in 100µl of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8 at room temperature. Then, each sample of culture filtrate and culture lysate was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009) with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Acidified peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (Cox & Mann. 2008) against the TubercuListR27 database (https://mycobrowser.epfl.ch/). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Label Free Quantification (MaxLFQ) was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings (Cox et al. 2014). Perseus (Tyanova et al. 2016) was used to highlight differentially quantified proteins. Reverse proteins, contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Biological replicates were grouped together and protein groups containing a minimum of two LFQ values in at least one group were conserved. Empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution. Significant hits were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t test p-values with ratio information (Tyanova et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Ecce1, Esx-1, Mycp1

### Affiliations
EPFL
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Andrej Benjak

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart Thomas Cole
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland


