### Accession
PXD002727

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
The opportunistic fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans causes life-threatening meningitis in immunocompromised individuals. The expression of virulence factors including capsule and melanin is in part regulated by the cyclic-AMP/Protein Kinase A (PKA) signal transduction pathway. In this study, we investogated the influence of PKA on the composition of the intracellular proteome to obatin a comprehensive understanding of the regulation that underpins virulence. Through quantitative proteomics, enrichment and bioinformatic analyses, and an interactome study, we discovered a conserved pattern of PKA regulation for proteins associated with translation, the proteasome, metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, and virulence-related functions. PKA regulation of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in C. neoformans showed a striking parallel with connections between PKA and protein degradation in chronic neurodegenerative disorders and other human diseases. Further investigation using the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib revealed an impact on capsule production and fungal growth. These results prompted additional studies of the antifungal activity of bortezomib in the context of cAMP signlaing and in combination with fluconazole. Taken together, the data suggest a model whereby PKA activation causes a shift in proteostasis and the function of the endoplasmic reticulum to support the synthesis and export of capsule polysaccharide. Overall, this study revealed a remarkably broad and conserved influence of the cAMP/PKA pathway on the proteome, and identified proteostasis as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of cryptococcosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular fractions were processed in triplicate for total protein concentration. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and an in-solution trypsin digestion was performed on the total cellular extracts, followed by STAGE-tip purification. Reductive dimethylation was performed for differential peptide lableing. Digested and purified peptides were fractionated by SCX. Purified and SCX-fractionated peptides were analyzed using linear-trapping quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-ORbitrap Velos) online coupled to an Agilent 1290 Series HPLC using a nanospray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v. 1.3.0.25 was used for analysis and quantification and statistical analysis and data visualization performed using Perseus 1.3.09. Search performed against database for C. neoformans. Fold changes for WT and regulated strains grown under repression and induction were normalized, converted to a log2 scale. Student's t-test (p-value < 0.05) was performed and multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR < 0.05) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Camp/pka pathway, Virulence, Proteomics, Fungal pathogenesis

### Affiliations
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr James W. Kronstad
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia


