### Accession
PXD034173

### Title
The type-A response regulators negatively mediate heat stress response by altering redox homeostasis in Arabidopsis

### Description
In this study, in a systematic screen of CK signaling mutants, we have identified a role of the CK signaling components type-A Arabidopsis response regulators (ARRs) in heat stress response in Arabidopsis. The mutants lacking multiple type-A ARR genes exhibit improved basal and acquired thermotolerance and, altered response to oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as described previously (Saiz-Fernández et al., 2020), then portions of samples corresponding to 2.5 μg peptide were analysed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the Arabidopsis protein database (Araport). Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Besides the long-standing role of cytokinins (CKs) as growth regulators, their current positioning at the interface of development and stress responses is coming into recognition. The current evidence suggests the notion that CKs are involved in heat stress response (HSR), however, the role of CK signaling components is still elusive. In this study, we have identified a role of the CK signaling components type-A Arabidopsis response regulators (ARRs) in HSR in Arabidopsis. The mutants of multiple type-A <i>ARR</i> genes exhibit improved basal and acquired thermotolerance and, altered response to oxidative stress in our physiological analyses. Through proteomics profiling, we show that the type-A <i>arr</i> mutants experience a 'stress-primed' state enabling them to respond more efficiently upon exposure to real stress stimuli. A substantial number of proteins that are involved in the heat-acclimatization process such as the proteins related to cellular redox status and heat shock, are already altered in the type-A <i>arr</i> mutants without a prior exposure to stress conditions. The metabolomics analyses further reveal that the mutants accumulate higher amounts of &#x3b1;-and &#x3b3;-tocopherols, which are important antioxidants for protection against oxidative damage. Collectively, our results suggest that the type-A ARRs play an important role in heat stress response by affecting the redox homeostasis in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Arr, Heat, Arabidopsis, Cytokinin

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ


