### Accession
PXD018220

### Title
Analysis of histone PTMs in nascent chromatin in new and old histones upon DNA damage (CAL353, CAL358) using the NCC-SILAC approach

### Description
Dynamic recycling and de novo deposition of histones are fundamental for chromatin restoration. Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are assumed to have a causal role in establishing distinct chromatin structures. However, it remains unknown how specific histone PTMs are regulated at broken replication fork. To get better insight into histone PTMs during DNA damage response, we combined NCC (Nascent chromatin capture) with SILAC-MS for identification of histone PTMs at replication forks upon CPT (camptothecin).

### Sample Protocol
NCC was performed as described previously1 with the following modifications. HeLa S3 cells (2×108) growing in suspension were released from a single thymidine block for 3 h. For biotin–dUTP labelling, cells were incubated for 5 min in a hypotonic buffer (50 mM KCl and 10 mM HEPES) containing biotin–dUTP and resuspended in fresh cell culture medium. Cells were fixed in 2% formaldehyde after biotin–dUTP labeling. Outline of the SILAC labeling and drug treatment are described in the figures of the publication2. Crosslinking was stopped after 15 min by adding glycine to a final concentration of 1% and incubating for 5 min at room temperature. Nuclei were mechanically isolated in a sucrose buffer (0.3 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 1% Triton X-100 and 2 mM MgOAc), and chromatin was solubilized by sonication in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) at 4°C in sonication buffer (10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA at pH 8, 1 mM EGTA at pH 8, 0.2% SDS, 0.1% sodium sarkosyl and 1 mM PMSF). Biotinylated chromatin fragments were purified on streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (MyC1 Streptavidin beads) by overnight end-over-end rotation at 4°C and 5 stringent washes (10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA at pH 8, 1 mM EGTA at pH 8, 0.1% SDS, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride). To release chromatin and reverse the crosslink, beads were boiled in LSB for 40 min at 100°C, including a brief vortex and short spin every 10 min to prevent drying. Histones were separated in a 16% gel and processed with deuterated-6 acetic anhydride (CAL353-358) as described before with minor modifications3.  For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF (CAL353-358, Thermo).   For Q Exactive HF measurements, the mass spectrometer was operated in the PRM mode to identify and quantify the light and heavy (K8R10) versions of the H4 4-17 peptide carrying one, two or three naturel acetyl groups6. In this mode, the mass spectrometer automatically switched between one survey scan and 6 MS/MS acquisitions of the m/z values described in the inclusion list containing the precursor ions, modifications and fragmentation conditions. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 260–760) were acquired with resolution R=30,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The ions from the inclusion list were sequentially isolated to a target value of 2x105 (isolation window 1.3 m/z), and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Skyline as described previously5,6. The peak areas corresponding to the peptides and modifications of interest were exported to csv and the statistical analysis were done with GraphPad Prism 8. CAL353-CAL 358 related figures: Figure 3d, Supplementary Figure 3a Figure3d, ratio of new/old histone H4 (NCC-PD), CHX data was extracted from previous work7  Supplementary Figure 3a, PTMs of H3 and H4 (new/old) (NCC-PD) 1.- Alabert, C. et al. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 281–293 (2014). 2.- Nakamura, K. et al.  Replication forks proteomics reveals ATM-dependent rewiring of broken forks to promote restart.  3.- Völker-Albert, M.C. et al. Curr Protoc Protein Sci. 2018 Apr;92(1):e54. 4.- Olsen, J.V. et al.Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005 Dec;4(12):2010-21. 5.- Völker-Albert, M.C. et al. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1832:61-74. 6.- Feller, C. et al. Mol Cell. 2015 Feb 5;57(3):559-71. 7.- Alabert, C. et al. Two distinct modes for propagation of histone PTMs across the cell cycle. Genes Dev. 2015 Mar 15;29(6):585-90.

### Publication Abstract
Cells have evolved an elaborate DNA repair network to ensure complete and accurate DNA replication. Defects in these repair machineries can fuel genome instability and drive carcinogenesis while creating vulnerabilities that may be exploited in therapy. Here, we use nascent chromatin capture (NCC) proteomics to characterize the repair of replication-associated DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) triggered by topoisomerase 1 (TOP1) inhibitors. We reveal profound changes in the fork proteome, including the chromatin environment and nuclear membrane interactions, and identify three classes of repair factors according to their enrichment at broken and/or stalled forks. ATM inhibition dramatically rewired the broken fork proteome, revealing that ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) signalling stimulates DNA end resection, recruits PLK1, and concomitantly suppresses the canonical DSB ubiquitination response by preventing accumulation of RNF168 and BRCA1-A. This work and collection of replication fork proteomes provide a new framework to understand how cells orchestrate homologous recombination repair of replication-associated DSBs.

### Keywords
Camptothecin, Histone ptms, Replication, Silac, Ncc

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
The Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research (CPR), University of Copenhagen, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Anja Groth
The Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research (CPR), University of Copenhagen, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


