### Accession
PXD024974

### Title
Irf7 orchestrates the immunological reaction in cardiomyocytes upon Adar1 deletion

### Description
Adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (Adar1 and Adar2) catalyze I-to-A RNA editing, a post-transcriptional mechanism involved in multiple cellular functions. The role of Adar1-dependent RNA editing in cardiomyocytes (CMs) remains unclear. Here we show that conditional deletion of Adar1 in CMs results in myocarditis progressively evolving into dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure at only 6 months of age. Adar1 depletion drives activation of interferon signaling genes (ISGs) in the absence of apoptosis and cytokine activation, and reduces the hypertrophic response of CMs upon pressure overload. Interestingly, ablation of the cytosolic sensor MDA5 prevents cardiac ISG activation and delays disease onset, but does not rescue the long-term lethal phenotype elicited by conditional deletion of Adar1. Retention of a single catalytically inactive Adar1 allele in CMs, in combination with MDA5 depletion, however, completely restores the cardiac function and prevents heart failure. Finally, ablation of interferon regulatory factor 7 (Irf7) attenuates the phenotype of Adar1-deficient CMs to a similar extent as MDA5 depletion, highlighting Irf7 as the main regulator of the immune response triggered by lack of Adar1 in CMs.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate samples were processed and analyzed as described (PMID: 32564729).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric instrument parameters were summarized and extracted using MARMoSET (PMID: 31097673) and are included along with documentation on MaxQuant (PMID: 19029910) parametrization in the supplied *.xlsx file.  Downstream bioinformatic analysis was performed using an in-house R pipeline based on limma (PMID: 25605792): https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.13/bioc/html/autonomics.html.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocarditis, Immune response, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Rna editing, Irf7, Cardiomyocytes, Adar1

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
Institute of Translational Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine, Philipps-Universität Marburg

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Braum
Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.


