### Accession
PXD029288

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveals the temporal phosphorylation network regulated via mesenchymal stem cells in the tumor microenvironment

### Description
The tumor microenvironment (TME), which comprises cellular and noncellular components, is involved in the complex process of cancer development. Emerging evidence suggests that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), one of the vital regulators of the TME, foster tumor progression through paracrine secretion. However, the comprehensive phospho-signaling pathways that are mediated by MSCs-secreting factors have not yet been fully established. In this study, we attempt to dissect the MSCs-triggered mechanism in lung cancer using quantitative phosphoproteomics. A total of 1958 phosphorylation sites are identified in lung cancer cells stimulated with MSCs-conditioned medium (MSC-CM). Integrative analysis of the identified phosphoproteins and predicted kinases demonstrates that MSC-CM functionally promotes the proliferation and migration of lung cancer via the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-S374 pathway. Recent studies have reported that extracellular ATP accumulates in the tumor microenvironment and stimulates the P2X7 receptor on the cancer cell membrane via purinergic signaling. We observe that ectopic ATP synthase is located on the surface of MSCs and excreted extracellular ATP into the lung cancer microenvironment to trigger the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-Ser374 pathway, which is consistent with these previous findings. Our results suggest that ectopic ATP synthase on the surface of MSCs releases extracellular ATP into the tumor microenvironment, which promotes cancer progression via activation of the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-Ser374 pathway.

### Sample Protocol
LM cells were treated with MSC-CM or with Control-CM for 5 min, 10 min, 30 min, and 60 min. The Control-CM-treated cells were served as controls.. The Control-CM-treated cells and the MSC-CM-treated cells were lysed by using PTS lysis buffer composed of 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC; Sigma–Aldrich), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS; MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma–Aldrich). Protease inhibitor cocktail (BioShop, Burlington, Ontario, Canada), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail I (tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors; BioShop), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II (serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitors; BioShop) were added into the PTS lysis buffer for the protection of proteins and phosphoproteins. Proteins were extracted using an ultrasonic homogenizer (LABSONIC M ultrasonic homogenizer, Sartorius AG, Göttingen, Germany) operating at 60% amplitude and 0.6 cycle duration for 2 min. After centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 20 min, the supernatants were transferred into new eppendorf tubes. The concentrations of the proteins of interest were detected using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 500 μg of each protein sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; BioShop) at room temperature for 30 min and cysteines were carbidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; Sigma–Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:100 w/w; WAKO, Osaka, Japan) for 2 h, followed by digestion with MS Grade trypsin (1:100 w/w; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 16 h at 37 °C. An immiscible organic solvent, ethyl acetate (Sigma–Aldrich), was mixed into the digested peptide samples for the purposes of detergent removal. After centrifuging at 15,700 × g for 2 min, the aqueous samples (with the detergent removed) were desalted by using homemade SDB-XC StageTips (3M, Neuss, Germany). 100 μg of peptide was dried under vacuum and then dissolved in 100 μl of 100 mM TEAB solution and labeled. The peptide obtained from both the control-CM-treated group and the MSC-CM-treated group for each timepoint were labeled with 4% formaldehyde-H2 (Sigma–Aldrich) and 4% formaldehyde-D2 (Sigma–Aldrich), respectively. Freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma–Aldrich) was added as a catalyst. Cold 1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (WAKO) was added to stop the dimethyl labeling reaction and 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma–Aldrich) was used to acidify the isotope-labeled peptides to pH < 3. Finally, an equal volume of H2-labeled peptides (control-CM group) and D2-labeled peptides (MSC-CM group) were combined and then desalted with homemade SDB-XC StageTips. The phosphopeptides were enriched by hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) using homemade MOC tips that were prepared by packing 1 mg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) into 10 μl C8 StageTips. The isotope-labeled peptide mixture was combined with an equal volume of solution A (0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile [Thermo Fisher Scientific], and 300 mg/ml lactic acid [WAKO]) and then loaded onto MOC tips (100 μg peptide/tip) that were equilibrated with solution A after being preconditioned with solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile). After washing with solution A and solution B, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 0.5% and 5% piperidine (Sigma–Aldrich), acidified, and desalted. Each sample was dried with a centrifugal evaporator before being analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Two biological replicates of the control-CM-treated and the MSC-CM-treated LM cells for each timepoint were obtained, and each biological sample underwent duplicate nanoLC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) was used to perform the NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. In brief, samples were loaded into a 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and then separated in a C18 BEH nanoACQUITY column with an internal diameter (I.D.) of 75 μm and a length of 25 cm, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, where mobile phases were the mixure of buffer A (0.1% formic acid [WAKO]) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile). Buffer A linear gradient of 10–40% buffer B in 90 min and later 40–85% buffer B in 10 min was applied throughout this study. Mass spectra from a full survey scan were acquired using the Orbitrap (m/z 300–1500). The resolution of the instrument was set to 60,000 at m/z 400 with an automated gain control (AGC) value of 106. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scanning by ion trap (with an AGC target of 7000). Raw MS/MS spectrums were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 with following parameters: trypsin specificity allowing for up to two missed cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine (M) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues (STY) were selected as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. The first search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm, whereas the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. FTMS MS/MS match tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Peptide identification was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the 20,386 UniProtKB/SwissProt human protein entries published on Jun-02, 2021. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, searching against a randomized target-decoy database created by the MaxQuant, was applied for peptide, protein, and site identifications. The intensity value of dimethyl-labeled phosphopeptides was obtained by summing up the eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) in two technical replicates. The normalized ratios of the heavy-light dimethyl-labeled partners (MSC-CM treatment versus Control-CM treatment) were reported by MaxQuant using the robust linear regression of the 2D centroid intensities of isotope pairs and adjusting the median of logarithmized ratios to 0. The normalized ratios were estimated in two biological replicates, respectively. A site localization probability of 0.75 was set as the threshold for localization of phosphorylation sites. The significantly regulated phosphosites between the MSC-CM and the control-CM groups were determined by ANOVA with p-value cut-off 0.05 in the Perseus environment using default parameters (version 1.6.1.3).

### Publication Abstract
The tumor microenvironment (TME), which comprises cellular and noncellular components, is involved in the complex process of cancer development. Emerging evidence suggests that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), one of the vital regulators of the TME, foster tumor progression through paracrine secretion. However, the comprehensive phosphosignaling pathways that are mediated by MSC-secreting factors have not yet been fully established. In this study, we attempt to dissect the MSC-triggered mechanism in lung cancer using quantitative phosphoproteomics. A total of 1958 phosphorylation sites are identified in lung cancer cells stimulated with MSC-conditioned medium. Integrative analysis of the identified phosphoproteins and predicted kinases demonstrates that MSC-conditioned medium functionally promotes the proliferation and migration of lung cancer via the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-S374 pathway. Recent studies have reported that extracellular ATP accumulates in the TME and stimulates the P2X7R on the cancer cell membrane via purinergic signaling. We observe that ectopic ATP synthase is located on the surface of MSCs and excreted extracellular ATP into the lung cancer microenvironment to trigger the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-S374 pathway, which is consistent with these previous findings. Our results suggest that ectopic ATP synthase on the surface of MSCs releases extracellular ATP into the TME, which promotes cancer progression via activation of the ERK/phospho-c-Fos-S374 pathway.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Ectopic atp synthase, Phosphoproteomics, Tumor microenvironment, C-fos, Mapk, P2x7r

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Yi-Wen Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.


