### Accession
PXD037161

### Title
Precision Characterization of Site-specific O-Acetylated Sialic Acids on N-Glycoproteins

### Description
O-Acetylation is a common modification of sialic acid, playing a significant role in glycoprotein stability, immune response, and cell development. The lack of efficient methods for direct analysis of O-acetylated sialoglycopeptides (O-AcSGPs) made the majority of identified O-acetylated sialic acids (O-AcSia) till now had no glycosite/glycoprotein information. Herein, we introduced a new workflow for precise interpretation of O-AcSGPs with probability estimation by recognizing the characteristic B and Y ions of O-AcSias.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction from mouse sera  Animal experiments were conducted in compliance with ethical regulations and approved by the ethics committee of Northwest University, China. Mice were housed at approximately 22 °C with 50%～60% humidity, under a 12/12 hour light-dark cycle. Blood sera were collected from three mice: strain C57BL/6, male, aged 3 months. The blood sera from three mice were pooled and homogenized in 8M urea/1M NH4HCO3 buffer at 4 °C followed by sonication until the solution was clear. The supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected after centrifugation at 16,000g for 40min at room temperature. Finally, protein concentration was measured by BCA reagent. Protein Digestion Proteins were extracted, denatured, alkylated, and digested by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) according to our previously described method23. The digested peptides were desalted by a C18 column (Waters, Milford, USA), and eluted by 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. Enrichment of Glycopeptides The intact glycopeptides were enriched from the peptide samples using an in-house HILIC micro-column made by HILIC beads (Agela Technologies, Tianjin, China). Before sample loading, the desalted peptide concentrations were diluted to a final solvent composition of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. and the in-house HILIC micro-columns was washed twice each by 0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. After samples were loaded, the columns were washed three times with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA again. The glycopeptides bound to the column were then eluted by 0.4 ml of 0.1% TFA solution. Finally, the enriched glycopeptide samples were dried and dissolved in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass Spectrometry Analysis Intact glycopeptides of mouse sera were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). About 1 μg glycopeptides were separated by an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a 75 µm x 50 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 C18 separating column protected by a 75 µm x 2 cm guarding column. Mobile phase flow rate was 200nl min−1 and consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (B). A 130 min gradient was employed settled as follows: 3%-40% B for 100 min, 40-68% B for 10 min, 68%-99% B for 5 min, and 99% B for 15 min. The spray voltage (+) was set as 2400V.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptides identification in this study were employed by StrucGP v1.1 with minor changes. All MS data were converted into ‘mzML’ format by MSConvert. Mono- and di- O-acetylated Neu5Gc were added to branch structure database of StrucGP as four new branches (mono- and di- O-acetylated Neu5Gc attach at Galactose and GlcNAc, respectively). The ‘fasta’ format mouse proteome database was downloaded from UniProt on Mar.13, 2018. Both peptide and glycan portions required <1% FDR for the intact glycopeptide identification. All identified PSMs were annotated and saved as images by a built-in software GlycoVisualTool.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-Acetylation is a common modification of sialic acid, playing a significant role in glycoprotein stability, immune response, and cell development. Due to the lack of efficient methods for direct analysis of <i>O</i>-acetylated sialoglycopeptides (<i>O</i>-AcSGPs), the majority of identified <i>O</i>-acetylated sialic acids (<i>O</i>-AcSia) until now had no glycosite/glycoprotein information. Herein, we introduced a new workflow for precise interpretation of <i>O</i>-AcSGPs with probability estimation by recognizing the characteristic B and Y ions of <i>O</i>-AcSias. With further optimization of mass spectrometry parameters, the method allowed us to identify a total of 171 unique <i>O</i>-AcSGPs in mouse serum. Although the majority of these <i>O</i>-AcSGPs were at a relatively low abundance compared with their non-<i>O</i>-acetylated states, they were mainly involved in peptidase/endopeptidase inhibitor activities. The method paves the way for large-scale structural and functional analyses of site-specific <i>O</i>-AcSias in various complex samples as well as further identification of many other similar chemical modifications on glycoproteins.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-acetylated sialic acids, Mouse serum, Strucgp

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, 710069, P. R. China

### Submitter
Jiechen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University


