### Accession
PXD025085

### Title
Proteomic differences between Drosophila melanogaster female reproductive tract tissue and fluid and their postmating responses

### Description
Fertility depends on the progression of complex and coordinated postmating processes within the extracellular luminal environment of the female reproductive tract (FRT). To achieve a more comprehensive level of knowledge regarding female-derived proteins available to interact with the ejaculate, we utilized semiquantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to study the composition of the FRT tissue and, separately, the luminal fluid, before and after mating in Drosophila melanogaster. Our approach leveraged whole-fly isotopic labelling to delineate between female proteins and those transferred from males in the ejaculate. The dynamic mating-induced proteomic changes in the extracellular FRT luminal fluid further informs our understanding of secretory mechanisms of the FRT and serves as a foundation for establishing the roles of ejaculate-female interactions in fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Unmated LHm females were aged 3 – 8 days and were either dissected as unmated or 6 hrs after mating to isotopically labeleed (arg and lys) males. Lower FRTs (i.e., bursa, oviduct, parovaria, spermathecae, seminal receptacle, and tightly associated fat bodies) were dissected from etherized females in 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). FRTs from at least 150 females per replicate were dissected, rinsed in another PBS drop, and transferred into a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube with 50 ul PBS. FRT fluid was isolated from the FRT tissue by gentle centrifugation. Fluid in the supernatant was combined with 10 ul of 1 MHEPES + 2% SDS and 5% tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and heated for 15 min. The remaining FRT tissues were solubilized in 100 ul of 1M HEPES with 2% SDS and 5% TCEP. Tissues samples were heated at 95o C and homogenized with a pellet pestle until completely solubilized and all samples were stored at -80o C. In total, we collected two replicates for each of the following: (1) FRT fluid from unmated females, (2) FRT fluid from mated females, (3) FRT tissue from unmated females, and (4) FRT tissue from mated females.  15 g of protein from tissue and fluid samples were separated by size on a 1.5mm 12% SDS-PAGE gel stained with colloidal Coomassie dye and divided into 10 slices. Gel fractions for each sample were reduced (dithiothreitol; DTT), alkylated (idoacetamide), trypsin digested (overnight at 37oC) and eluted (0.1% formic acid). Samples were then analyzed with a Dionex Ultimate 300 rapid separation liquid chromatography nanoUPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Q Extractive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides in fractions were first filtered through a pre-column (PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particle, 100 Å pore, 300 um x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min at 10 ul/min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then eluted to the analytical reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (PepMap C18, 2mm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 mm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at 300 nL/min with 0.1% formic acid with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile over 90 min (total run time 120 min, including column wash and equilibration). Eluted peptide (transferred via Easy-Spray source; Thermo Fisher Scientific) ion m/z values were measured via mass spectrometer (between 380-1500 Da, 70,000 resolution). Data dependent MS/MS scans (MS1 followed by MS2, top 20) isolated and fragmented precursor ions by collision-induced dissociation (32.5%, normalized collision energy) and analyzed (resolution of 35,000) in the linear ion trap within a 60s ± 10 ppm dynamic exclusion window (ions were also excluded if they were singly charged or had unassigned charge state).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were identified with PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Identification of unlabeled (i.e. female-derived) proteins was based upon an analysis using the D. melanogaster reference genome protein annotation (r6.32), including only the longest protein isoform of each gene, appended with the cRAP v 1.0 contaminant  database (thegpm.org). Search parameters allowed for semi-specific digestion with three missed tryptic cleavages as well as parent monoisotopic mass error of 15.0 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Post translational modifications included carbamidomethylation (cysteine; fixed), oxidation (methionine; variable) and deamidation (glutamine and arginine; variable). The samples contained a total of 2.14 million spectra resulting in the identification of 876,082 peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs). PSMs were included if their -10logP ≥ 30 (total FDR < 0.05 estimated with a decoy-fusion approach (82)), had a PTM A score > 100, and a de novo identified score ≥ 50. Protein inclusion required a -10logP ≥ 20 and identification by at least 2 unique peptides, at least two spectral hits and a spectral area greater than zero in either all tissue replicates or all fluid replicates fluid. These criteria resulted in a total of 1,804 identified proteins.  Differential abundance analyses were conducted on spectral area using the PEAKS quantitation software allowing for comparisons of abundance estimates to be fine-tuned on the direct comparison of spectra. Specifically, estimation of spectral area allowed for a mass error tolerance of 20.0 ppm, retention time shift tolerance of 6.0 min. and was normalized to the sum of the total area for each sample. Separate analyses were conducted to identify differentially abundant proteins between: (1) tissue and fluid samples, including both mated and unmated samples (n=1132 proteins), (2) unmated and mated tissue samples (n= 1558 proteins) and (3) unmated and mated fluid samples (n=715 proteins). PEAKS Q Significance values were converted to p-values (approximately equivalent to -10log10P) and corrected for multiple comparisons with the Dunn-Bonferroni correction and proteins were considered differentially abundant if adjusted p-value ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila, Reproductoin, Ejaculate-female interaction

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Syracuse University Center for Reproductive Evolution

### Submitter
Caitlin McDonough-Goldstein

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Syracuse University Center for Reproductive Evolution


