### Accession
PXD022685

### Title
Comparative Proteomics Analysis Reveals Unique Early Signaling Response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to Oxidants with Different Mechanism of Action Prajita Pandey 1,‡, Khadiza Zaman 2, ‡, Laszlo Prokai 2 , and Vladimir Shulaev 1,*

### Description
The early signaling events involved in oxidant recognition and triggering of oxidant-specific defense mechanisms to counteract oxidative stress still remains largely elusive. Our discovery driven comparative proteomics analysis revealed unique early signaling response of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae on proteome level to oxidants with different mechanism of action as early as 3 min after treatment with four oxidants, namely H2O2, cumene hydroperoxide (CHP), menadione and diamide, when protein abundances were compared using label-free quantification relying on a high-resolution mass analyzer (Orbitrap). We identified significant regulation of 196 proteins in response to H2O2, 569 proteins in response to CHP, 369 proteins in response to menadione and 207 proteins in response to diamide. Only 17 proteins were common across all treatments, but several more proteins were shared between two or three oxidants. Pathway analyses revealed that each oxidant triggered unique signaling mechanism associated with cell survival and repair. Signaling pathways mostly regulated by oxidants were Ran, mTOR, Rho, and eIEF2. Furthermore, each oxidant regulated these pathways in a unique way indicating specificity of response to oxidants having different mode of action. We hypothesize that interplay of these signaling pathway may be important in recognizing different oxidants to trigger different downstream MAPK signaling cascades and induce specific responses.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth and oxidative stress conditions S. cerevisiae cells were initially batch grown overnight at 30°C, pH 6.0 , 150 rpm, in minimal medium (25ml) containing Difco yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 2% (w/v) dextrose supplemented with uracil 20 mg/l, L-leucine 60 mg/l and L-histidine 20 mg/l until mid-exponential phase was reached based on measuring optical density measurement at 600 nm (OD600 ~ 1.5). Conditions of oxidative stress were achieved by the addition of 1.2 mM H2O2, CHP 190 µM, menadione 150 µM, and diamide 1.5 mM at mid-exponential phase (OD600 ~ 1.5). Controls without CHP were made by adding the same volume of 95% (v/v) ethanol (the solvent for CHP). Controls without menadione were made by adding the same volume of 100% (v/v) DMSO (the solvent for menadione). Controls without H2O2 and diamide were not treated with any chemical, as their solvent is water. Three biological replicates were carried out for each condition. Sample collection and processing Samples were collected at 3 min after the addition of oxidants. To quench metabolism, cells were harvested in aqueous 40% ethanol (v/v) solution containing 0.8% NaCl (w/v), kept at –40°C using a dry ice-ethanol bath, as described in Spura et al. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 1000g and –10°C. The pellets were suspended in 100% methanol, freeze-dried for 48 h using a Labconco 79480 Freeze Dry System (Labconco,Kansas City, MO ) and stored at –80°C until use.  Protein extraction and digestion  Proteins were extracted using lysis buffer made of 8 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate   One ml of lysis buffer was added to 35 mg (dry weight) of yeast cells and vortexed for a 1 min to ensure proper resuspension. Two hundred μl of 0.5 mm glass beads were added. The pellet was milled for 2 min at 30 Hz in the Retsch Mixer Mill MM 300 (Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany) and kept in ice for 1 min. This step was repeated 5 times. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000g at 4°C in a refrigerated microcentrifuge and the supernatant was transferred into a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined using Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) After calculating the appropriate volume containing 100 µg of protein, 25mM of ABC was added to bring the volume to 100 µl. The extracted proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min and carbamidomethylated by addition of 200 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were then diluted 9-fold with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin. The enzymatic digestion was then stopped by acidifying the sample with 15 μl of acetic acid. Solid phase extraction (SPE) The digested protein was cleaned up using SOLA HRP cartridge (Thermo Scientific). After activating and equilibrating the column bed with 500 µl of acetonitrile, the bed was equilibrated with 2x 500 µl of 0.1% TFA in water. The protein was eluted in 10 fractions using the elution solvents (2 x 250 µl) in the Table S1. Fractions were dried in vacuum concentrator and re-suspended in 150 μl of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Data-dependent nanoLC-MS/MS analyses The digested peptides were analyzed employing a hybrid linear ion trap (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA)) equipped with a Proxeon Nanoelectrospray ionization source (Proxeon) and connected to a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). A nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS T3 analytical column, 75mm x 150 cm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA; PN: 186008816) was used for peptide separation at 400 nl/min flow rate using 3-hour linear gradient (from 5% to 95% B). The eluent system consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water (v/v) and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v). Peptides were eluted through a Picotip emitter (internal diameter 10 ± 1 µm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) and directly sampled by the nano-electrospray source of the mass spectrometer in a positive ion mode.  NSI spray voltage and capillary temperature maintained during the gradient run were 1.8 kV and 250oC respectively. FT full-scan mass spectra were attained at 60,000 mass resolving power (m/z 400) in the m/z range of 350 to 1650. Collision induced dissociation (CID) was achieved using helium in the linear ion trap to obtain MS/MS product ion scans of the top ten most abundant precursor ions from the full scan mass spectra using a 2.5 Da isolation width and normalized collision energy of 35%. The precursor ions selected for CID was then dynamically excluded from further MS/MS analysis for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and statistical analysis MS and MS/MS data were analyzed using the SEQUEST HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, XX). Protein identification and quantification were conducted against FASTA database composed of S. cerevisiae Uniprot protein database (6049 entries). SEQUEST search parameters included: peptide length >5 amino acids, maximum of one tryptic missed cleavage events, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as variable modifications, precursor mass tolerance of 25 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.80 Da. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was directly determined by target-decoy strategy. PSMs and protein level FDR were both set at 1%. Total ion current (TIC) normalization signal to noise ratio was set to 2. Fold changes of the proteins were calculated from normalized precursor intensity values by comparing the treatment conditions to control. Student’s t-tests was used to determine statistically significant differential protein expressions (p<0.05), and fold change threshold was set to ±2.0. We uploaded our data to the ProteomeXchange Consortium by the PRIDE partner repository (assigned dataset identifier (To be assigned) Bioinformatics  Differentially expressed proteins from each oxidant group were submitted with UniProt identifiers and fold changes to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA®, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA) for core analysis. The matched proteins were used to generate molecular networks including canonical pathways and upstream regulatory analysis. The core analysis allowed us to delineate specific response to different oxidants. IPA® also predicted possible upstream regulators of the proteins in this study, which were assigned as inhibited or activated according to Z-score, a statistical result of differential protein expression according to the fold changes. IPA® employs right-tailed Fisher’s exact test to calculate the overlaps of p-values.

### Publication Abstract
The early signaling events involved in oxidant recognition and triggering of oxidant-specific defense mechanisms to counteract oxidative stress still remain largely elusive. Our discovery driven comparative proteomics analysis revealed unique early signaling response of the yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> on the proteome level to oxidants with a different mechanism of action as early as 3 min after treatment with four oxidants, namely H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, cumene hydroperoxide (CHP), and menadione and diamide, when protein abundances were compared using label-free quantification relying on a high-resolution mass analyzer (Orbitrap). We identified significant regulation of 196 proteins in response to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, 569 proteins in response to CHP, 369 proteins in response to menadione and 207 proteins in response to diamide. Only 17 proteins were common across all treatments, but several more proteins were shared between two or three oxidants. Pathway analyses revealed that each oxidant triggered a unique signaling mechanism associated with cell survival and repair. Signaling pathways mostly regulated by oxidants were Ran, TOR, Rho, and eIF2. Furthermore, each oxidant regulated these pathways in a unique way indicating specificity of response to oxidants having different modes of action. We hypothesize that interplay of these signaling pathways may be important in recognizing different oxidants to trigger different downstream MAPK signaling cascades and to induce specific responses.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress; reactive oxygen species; antioxidants; global untargeted proteomics; tor signaling; ran signaling; mapk cascade

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA
1 Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, TX 2  Advanced Environmental Research Institute (AERI), University of North Texas, Denton, TX

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Vladimir Shulaev
1 Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, TX 2  Advanced Environmental Research Institute (AERI), University of North Texas, Denton, TX


