### Accession
PXD017887

### Title
Identification of heat induced, RNF4 regulated ubiquitylation sites

### Description
Exposure of cells to heat or oxidative stress causes misfolding of proteins. To avoid toxic protein aggregation, cells have evolved nuclear and cytosolic protein quality control (PQC) systems. In response to proteotoxic stress cells also limit protein synthesis by triggering transient storage of mRNAs and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) in cytosolic stress granules (SGs). We demonstrate that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase (StUbL) pathway, which is part of the nuclear proteostasis network, regulates SG dynamics. We provide evidence that inactivation of SUMO deconjugases under proteotoxic stress initiates SUMO-primed, RNF4-dependent ubiquitylation of RBPs that typically condense into SGs. Impairment of SUMO-primed ubiquitylation drastically delays SG resolution upon stress release. Importantly, the StUbL system regulates compartmentalization of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated mutant of FUS in SGs. We propose that the StUbL system functions as surveillance pathway for aggregation-prone RBPs in the nucleus thereby linking the nuclear and cytosolic axis of proteotoxic stress response.   Toidentify heat induced, RNF4 regulated ubiquitylation sites we performed an unbiased SILAC-based mass-spectrometry screen comparing heat-induced ubiquitylation in control and RNF4 depleted cells.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of GG-sites was performed in triplicates. HeLa cells were grown in light (R0K0), medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) medium (Firma). Efficient incorporation of labelled amino acids was checked by LC-MS/MS analysis of lysates after tryptic digestion. The cells were transfected with a control siRNA (light and medium labelled cells) or a siRNA directed against RNF4 (heavy labelled cells) for 72 h. Medium and heavy labeled cells were treated with a heatshock (43°C, 1h) prior to lysis. The cells were washed three times in cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 25 µM NEM, pH 7.6). Lysates were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation (14,000 g, RT, 15 min). Protein concentration was determined in a Lowry assay and lysates were combined at equimolar ratios to reach 25 mg of total protein. Precipitation of proteins was performed by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone to the combined lysates, followed by a 2 h incubation at -20°C and centrifugation (3,000 g, 4°C, 20 min). Pellets were washed in 90 % (v/v) ice-cold acetone, followed by a second centrifugation step. Subsequently, pellets were dissolved in denaturing resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.6). Reduction of proteins was performed by adding 5 mM DTT for 30 min at RT. Reduced proteins were alkylated by adding 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Lysates were diluted by adding three volumes of 50 mM ammoniumbicabonate. A tryptic digest was performed by adding 10 µg of trypsin per 1 mg of protein followed by an overnight incubation at 37°C. The digest was stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid to reach a pH lower than 3 followed by a 10 min incubation and centrifugation (20,000 g, RT, 10 min). Digested samples were desalted on tC18 Sep-Pak SPE cartridges (Waters). Eluates were lyophilized over night and resuspended in 6 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2). 80 µl of PTMScan® Ubiquitin Branch Motif (K-ε-GG) Immunoaffinity Beads (Cell Signalling Technology) were equilibrated in IAP buffer and added to each of the samples followed by 2 h of rotation at 4°C. Beads were pelleted (20,000 g, 4°C, 1 min) and washed three times in in cold PBS and three times in cold ddH2O by rotation for 10 min at 4°C followed by centrifugation (20,000 g, 4°C, 1 min). Peptides were eluted by adding 100 µl of 0.15% for 10 min under agitation. Peptides were collected, concentrated and desalted on STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were separated on an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher) and a 19 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by linear gradient from 4-30.4% acetonitrile over 123 minutes at a flow rate of 400 nl/min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1750 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 10^6 charges. Up to 10 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.6 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 64 ms and an AGC target value of 5 x 10^5. Ions with charge states of 1, 2 and > 8 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimise repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files of mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda database search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Extracted ion spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (v.2017). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, the minimal LFQ ratio count was set to 2. GlyGly modification of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were used as variable modifications. Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure of cells to heat or oxidative stress causes misfolding of proteins. To avoid toxic protein aggregation, cells have evolved nuclear and cytosolic protein quality control (PQC) systems. In response to proteotoxic stress, cells also limit protein synthesis by triggering transient storage of mRNAs and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in cytosolic stress granules (SGs). We demonstrate that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase (StUbL) pathway, which is part of the nuclear proteostasis network, regulates SG dynamics. We provide evidence that inactivation of SUMO deconjugases under proteotoxic stress initiates SUMO-primed, RNF4-dependent ubiquitylation of RBPs that typically condense into SGs. Impairment of SUMO-primed ubiquitylation drastically delays SG resolution upon stress release. Importantly, the StUbL system regulates compartmentalization of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated FUS mutant in SGs. We propose that the StUbL system functions as surveillance pathway for aggregation-prone RBPs in the nucleus, thereby linking the nuclear and cytosolic axis of proteotoxic stress response.

### Keywords
Ubiquitylation heatshock rnf4 hela

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Keiten-Schmitz

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany


