### Accession
PXD004068

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of rat livers shows that unrestricted feeding and re-feeding after food restriction are stressful for cellular proteostasis

### Description
We used quantitative MS-based proteomic analysis of whole rat livers to study  the molecular events associated with a food restriction regimen as compared with ad libitum food and animals re-fed after a restriction time.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion: Rat livers were homogenized in a radio-immuno-precipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (20Mm Tris-HCl, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate), that was supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in a 1:12 ratio. Initial Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA). Aliquots of samples were then mixed with 5x sample buffer before separation by 1D SDS-PAGE.  After Coomassie blue staining, protein amounts on gel were determined by densitometry by comparison against a prequantified standard cell extract. 30 micrograms of each sample were then separated by SDS-PAGE on Bis-Tris precast gels (4-12% acrylamide, Novex). Entire lanes were sliced using a gel gridding tool (Gel Company, San Francisco, CA) into 14 fractions which were digested automatically with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) on a Biomek 3000 liquid handler (Beckman) according to standard protocols (Shevchenko et al., 2006).  Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 20 ul 0.1% formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS.              Mass spectrometry analysis:   Tryptic peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus quadrupole orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) interfaced via a nanospray source to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Peptides from all fractions were separated on a C18 reversed-phase Easy Spray PepMap nanocolumn (50cm x 75µm ID, 2µm ) at 0.3 μl/min with a gradient from 4 to 86 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid in 40 min. Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27%) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.6 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and statistics:  MS data were processed for protein identification and label-free quantitation with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) as described (Cox et al., 2014), using the set of rat proteome sequences annotated in the SWISSPROT database (RAT.fasta, October 2014 version, 28902 sequences). Both peptide and protein FDR rates were set at 1% as calculated against a decoy sequence database and the match between runs function was activated for LFQ quantitation.   A total of eighteen rat livers  were sampled for MS analysis: six biological replicates of the three different treatments: AL, RES, and CU.  References Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794–1805. Cox, J., Hein, M.Y., Luber, C. a, Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–2526. Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2006). In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat. Protoc. 1, 2856–2860.

### Publication Abstract
Studies in young mammals on the molecular effects of food restriction leading to prolong adult life are scares. Here, we used high-throughput quantitative proteomic analysis of whole rat livers to address the molecular basis for growth arrest and the apparent life-prolonging phenotype of the food restriction regimen. Over 1800 common proteins were significantly quantified in livers of ad libitum, restriction- and re-fed rats, which summed up into 92% of the total protein mass of the cells. Compared to restriction, ad libitum cells contained significantly less mitochondrial catabolic enzymes and more cytosolic and ER HSP90 and HSP70 chaperones, which are hallmarks of heat- and chemically-stressed tissues. Following re-feeding, levels of HSPs nearly reached ad libitum levels. The quantitative and qualitative protein values indicated that the restriction regimen was a least stressful condition that used minimal amounts of HSP-chaperones to maintain optimal protein homeostasis and sustain optimal life span. In contrast, the elevated levels of HSP-chaperones in ad libitum tissues were characteristic of a chronic stress, which in the long term could lead to early aging and shorter life span.

### Keywords
Rat, Food intake, Liver, Label-free, Food restriction

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne Département de Biologie Végétale et Moléculaire Batiment Biophore 1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Goloubinoff
University of Lausanne Département de Biologie Végétale et Moléculaire Batiment Biophore 1015 Lausanne Switzerland


