### Accession
PXD030122

### Title
AP-MS of MAGU-2 in the nematode C. elegans

### Description
The Crumbs complex is a regulator of epithelial polarity and is important for the formation of the apical domain. The Crumbs complex consists of the Crumbs protein, Pals1, and PATJ. In C. elegans, we identify MAGU-2 as an ortholog of Pals1. We find that MAGU-2 localizes apically in epithelial cells and its localization is dependent on Crumbs. AP-MS was performed on animals endogenously expressing MAGU-2::GFP and four control strains to identify interactors of MAGU-2. From the data, we identify MPZ-1 as the top hit and identify it as the C. elegans ortholog of PATJ.

### Sample Protocol
Animals endogenously expressing GFP-tagged MAGU-2 or control animals were grown on six to eight 9 cm NGM plates until starvation to enrich for L1 animals. Animals were then transferred into 250 ml of S-Medium supplemented with 1% Penn/Strep (Life Technologies), 0.1% nystatin (Sigma) and OP50 bacteria obtained from the growth of a 400 ml culture. Animals were grown at 20° on a shaker for 96 hours and were harvested and cleaned using a sucrose gradient. Worms were washed with M9 and lysis buffer (25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 1X Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). Samples were sonicated for 10 mins (sonication cycle: 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF) at 4° in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) at high energy setting to lyse the worms. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation. Immunoprecipitation was performed using GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads (Chromotek), using 25 μl of beads per sample. Beads were equilibrated in wash buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630), blocked with 1% BSA for 1 hour, then washed 4 times. Lysate was added to the beads for 1 hour tumbling end-over-end and the beads were washed 4 times. The purifications were performed in biological triplicates on independent days. GFP-Trap beads were resuspended in 15 μl of 4× Laemmli sample buffer (Biorad), boiled at 99 °C for 10 min and supernatants were loaded on 4–12% Criterion XT Bis–Tris precast gel (Biorad). The gel was fixed with 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid and then stained for 1 hour using colloidal Coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain, Thermo Scientific). Each lane from the gel was cut and placed in 1.5 ml tubes. Samples were then washed with 250 μl of water, followed by 15 min dehydration in acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced (10mM DTT, 1 hour at 56°), dehydrated and alkylated (55mM iodoacetamide, 1 hour in the dark). After two roundsof dehydration, trypsin was added and incubated overnight at 37°. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried down and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to MS analysis.   Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil pur C18, Dr. Maisch, 100 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm; constructed in-house) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 100 μm x 50 cm, 2.7 μm) using 90 min linear gradient from 7% to 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nl/min. The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 375 to 1600m/z the 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation. MS spectra were acquired with a resolution > 30,000, whereas MS2 with a resolution > 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database search was performed using the C. elegans database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using a percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score > 20.   Crapome (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013) was used to compare MAGU-2 spectral counts with the spectral counts identified in the controls. SAINT-Express analysis using default settings was used to calculate the significance interactome (SAINT) score.

### Publication Abstract
Crumbs proteins are evolutionarily conserved transmembrane proteins with essential roles in promoting the formation of the apical domain in epithelial cells. The short intracellular tail of Crumbs proteins are known to interact with several proteins, including the scaffolding protein PALS1 (protein associated with LIN7, Stardust in Drosophila). PALS1 in turn binds to a second scaffolding protein PATJ (PALS1-associated tight junction protein) to form the core Crumbs/PALS1/PATJ complex. While essential roles in epithelial organization have been shown for Crumbs proteins in Drosophila and mammalian systems, the three Caenorhabditis elegans crumbs genes are dispensable for epithelial polarization and development. Here, we investigated the presence and function of PALS1 and PATJ orthologs in C.&#xa0;elegans. We identified MAGU-2 as the C.&#xa0;elegans ortholog of PALS1 and show that MAGU-2 interacts with all three Crumbs proteins and localizes to the apical membrane domain of intestinal epithelial cells in a Crumbs-dependent fashion. Similar to crumbs mutants, magu-2 deletion showed no epithelial polarity defects. We also identified MPZ-1 as a candidate ortholog of PATJ based on the physical interaction with MAGU-2 and sequence similarity with PATJ proteins. However, MPZ-1 is not broadly expressed in epithelial tissues and, therefore, not likely a core component of the C.&#xa0;elegans Crumbs complex. Finally, we show overexpression of the Crumbs proteins EAT-20 or CRB-3 can lead to apical membrane expansion in the intestine. Our results shed light on the composition of the C.&#xa0;elegans Crumbs complex and indicate that the role of Crumbs proteins in promoting apical domain formation is conserved.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Crumbs, Magu-2, Pals1

### Affiliations
Developmental Biology, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Developmental Biology
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Jason Kroll

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Boxem
Developmental Biology, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands


