### Accession
PXD002453

### Title
Finding missing proteins from the epigenetically manipulated human cell with stringent quality criteria

### Description
There are three major epigenetic mechanisms, DNA methylation, histone modifications, and ncRNAs. The histone is a key player in epigenetics, and the acetylation and methylation are their most common post-translational modifications (PTMs). These histone modifications have important roles in transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, DNA replication, alternative splicing and chromosome condensation. For example, we previously found that H3.3 lysine 36 trimethylation (H3.3K36me3) histone and its reader protein BS69 could work together to regulate pre-mRNA process. Therefore, in this study, we established in vitro histone acetylation, demethylation and methylation models, respectively, by using human lung, liver and colorectal cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and MS analyses were performed as we described previously with minor modifications 25, 26. Briefly, cells were lysed with 1% SDS buffer and subjected to reduction (8 M urea and 50 mM DTT at 37˚C, 1 h) and alkylation (100 mM IAA, at room temperature, 30 min). We next performed a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) for the in-solution protein digestion 33. In detail, cell lysates were loaded into the 30 KDa Ultra centrifugal filters (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Shanghai, China), and centrifuged for 15 min (12000× g, 4˚C), followed by 2 sequential buffer change centrifugations with 8 M Urea and 5× volume of 50 mM NH4HCO3, respectively. Trypsin was then added into the protein solution at mass ratio of 1:30 for in-solution digestion at 37˚C, 8 h. Peptides were collected by centrifugation (12000× g, 4˚C, 15 min), freeze-dried and resuspended by NH4HCO2 (pH=10). The peptides were fractionated by high-pH RP-LC (10 fractions) and then analyzed with a Triple TOF 5600 MS (5600 MS; AB SCIEX, Framingham, CA, USA). MS parameters: spray voltage, 2.3 kV; interface heater temperature, 120 ˚C; scan range, 350-1500 m/z; mass tolerance, 50 mDa; resolution, >30 k FWHM; Information dependent acquisition (IDA) MS/MS scans, applied; maximum number of candidate ions per cycle, 40; charge state, 2-4 and >200 cps; dynamic exclusion, applied; co-occurrence, 1; and duration, 20 s.

### Data Protocol
We used both MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and Mascot version 2.5.1 to perform the database searches against Uniprot-Swiss HUMAN.fasta (2015_02 Release, 20198 entries). Searching parameters were used as follows: fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-terminus), and acetyl (N-terminus); fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.05 Da; parent ion tolerance, 15 ppm.  For Mascot searches, we extracted wiff peak by AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (version 1.3) and set the peptide level FDR<1%; we then further analyzed the resulting DAT file with Scaffold (version 4.2.1) to control the protein level FDR to <1%. For MaxQuant searches, we set the FDR<1% for both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
The chromosome-centric human proteome project (C-HPP) has made great progress of finding protein evidence (PE) for missing proteins (PE2-4 proteins defined by the neXtProt), which now becomes an increasingly challenging field. As a majority of samples tested in this field were from adult tissues/cells, the developmental stage specific or relevant proteins could be missed due to biological source availability. We posit that epigenetic interventions may help to partially bypass such a limitation by stimulating the expression of the "silenced" genes in adult cells, leading to the increased chance of finding missing proteins. In this study, we established in vitro human cell models to modify the histone acetylation, demethylation, and methylation with near physiological conditions. With mRNA-seq analysis, we found that histone modifications resulted in overall increases of expressed genes in an even distribution manner across different chromosomes. We identified 64 PE2-4 and six PE5 proteins by MaxQuant (FDR &lt; 1% at both protein and peptide levels) and 44 PE2-4 and 7 PE5 proteins by Mascot (FDR &lt; 1% at peptide level) searches, respectively. However, only 24 PE2-4 and five PE5 proteins in Mascot, and 12 PE2-4 and one PE5 proteins in MaxQuant searches could, respectively, pass our stringently manual spectrum inspections. Collectively, 27 PE2-4 and five PE5 proteins were identified from the epigenetically modified cells; among them, 19 PE2-4 and three PE5 proteins passed FDR &lt; 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Gene ontology analyses revealed that the PE2-4 proteins were significantly involved in development and spermatogenesis, although their chemical-physical features had no statistical difference from the background. In addition, we presented an example of suspicious PE5 peptide spectrum matched with unusual AA substitutions related to post-translational modification. In conclusion, the epigenetically manipulated cell models should be a useful tool for finding missing proteins in C-HPP. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the iProx database (accession number: IPX00020200).

### Keywords
Missing proteins, Chromosome-centric human proteome project, Epigenetic, Histone

### Affiliations
Institute of Life and Health Engineering Assistant Director, Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research  of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes Jinan University
+8613719403020

### Submitter
Xinlei Lian

### Lab Head
Dr He Qing-Yu
Institute of Life and Health Engineering Assistant Director, Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research  of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes Jinan University


