### Accession
PXD010148

### Title
Integrative genomics reveal a role for MCPIP1 in adipogenesis and adipocyte metabolism

### Description
Obesity is considered a serious chronic disease, which is associated with increased risk of developing cardiovascular diseases, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and type 2 diabetes. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1-induced protein-1 (MCPIP1), also called Regnase-1, is an RNase that decreases stability of transcripts coding for inflammation-related proteins. In addition, MCPIP1 plays an important role in the regulation of adipogenesis in vitro by reducing the expression of key transcription factors, including C/EBPβ and PPARγ, during adipocyte differentiation. Here we present RNA-Seq and proteomic analysis of 3T3-L1 adipocytes overexpressing wild-type MCPIP1 (WTMCPIP1) and mutant MCPIP1 (D141NMCPIP1) at day 2 and 4 of differentiation, respectively. RNA-Seq analysis followed by confirmatory Q-RT-PCR revealed that elevated MCPIP1 levels in 3T3-L1 adipocytes upregulated transcripts encoding proteins involved in signal transmission and cellular remodeling and downregulated transcripts of factors involved in metabolism. These data are consistent with our LC-MS/MS analysis, which showed that MCPIP1 expressing adipocytes exhibit upregulation of proteins involved in cellular organization and movement and decreased levels of proteins involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Moreover, MCPIP1 adipocytes are characterized by decreased Glut4 levels and impaired glucose uptake. Overall, our ﬁndings demonstrate that MCPIP1 is an important regulator of adipogenesis and adipocyte metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
The cells in three biological replicates were washed twice with PBS and lysed directly on cell culture dish with a buffer containing 1% SDS and 0.1 M Tris/HCl (pH 7.5). The extracts were sonicated for 10 min at high intensity (320 W, 30 s/30 s on/off) in a Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode). Then lysates were incubated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min at 20°C. The samples were processed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with some modifications. The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed in duplicate on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide sample were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 μm x 20 mm, 3 μm particle, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 2% acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 5 μl/min and further separated on analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm particle, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 240 minutes gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionised using a Digital PicoView 550 nanospray source (New Objective) and acquired in a MS data dependent mode using top twelve method with 30 s of dynamic exclusion. Full scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 over a mass range of 300 to 2000 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. The MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 5e5. The maximum ion accumulation times for the full MS and the MS/MS scans were 120 ms and 60 ms respectively. The lock mass option was used to perform internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1). Peak lists were searched against the forward and reverse Swissprot_201608 database (Mus musculus, 16 813 sequences) using integrated Andromeda search engine. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages and minimum length of seven amino acids were considered. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance in the first search used for mass recalibration was set to 20 ppm. The main search was performed with precursor and fragment mass tolerance 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The match between runs option was enabled within a time window of 0.7 min. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identifications was set to 0.01. All proteins that cannot be distinguished based on the identified peptides were merged to one protein group. Relative quantification and normalization was performed with the MaxLFQ label free algorithm using a minimum ratio count of 2. Both razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. Bioinformatic and statistical analysis were performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3). Contaminants, proteins from the reverse database and proteins identified only with modified peptides were excluded from the study. All bioinformatic analyses were executed on LFQ intensities transformed to logarithmic scale with base two. Proteins which were identified in all three biological replicates in one group, whereas were not present in any replicate in second group was recognized as qualitative differences between compared cell lines. To identify significant expression changes at the protein level, a two-sample Student’s t-test was applied with the S0 parameter set to 1, followed by a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple hypothesis testing at a 0.01 threshold. Only proteins which have valid values in each biological replicate in both compared groups were taken into consideration. In comparison D141NMCPIP1 versus control no proteins meet these thresholds, therefore in this case less restrictive criteria were used, namely: S0 set to 0.2 and FDR set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is considered a serious chronic disease, associated with an increased risk of developing cardiovascular diseases, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and type 2 diabetes. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1-induced protein-1 (MCPIP1) is an RNase decreasing stability of transcripts coding for inflammation-related proteins. In addition, MCPIP1 plays an important role in the regulation of adipogenesis in vitro by reducing the expression of key transcription factors, including C/EBP&#x3b2;. To elucidate the role of MCPIP1 in adipocyte biology, we performed RNA-Seq and proteome analysis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes overexpressing wild-type (<sub>WT</sub>MCPIP1) and the mutant form of MCPIP1 protein (<sub>D141N</sub>MCPIP1). Our RNA-Seq analysis followed by confirmatory Q-RT-PCR revealed that elevated MCPIP1 levels in 3T3-L1 adipocytes upregulated transcripts encoding proteins involved in signal transmission and cellular remodeling and downregulated transcripts of factors involved in metabolism. These data are consistent with our proteomic analysis, which showed that MCPIP1 expressing adipocytes exhibit upregulation of proteins involved in cellular organization and movement and decreased levels of proteins involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Moreover, MCPIP1 adipocytes are characterized by decreased level of insulin receptor, reduced insulin-induced Akt phosphorylation, as well as depleted Glut4 level and impaired glucose uptake. Overexpression of Glut4 in 3T3-L1 cells expressed <sub>WT</sub>MCPIP1 rescued adipogenesis. Interestingly, we found decreased level of MCPIP1 along with an increase in body mass index in subcutaneous adipose tissue. The presented data show a novel role of MCPIP1 in modulating insulin sensitivity in adipocytes. Overall, our findings demonstrate that MCPIP1 is an important regulator of adipogenesis and adipocyte metabolism.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Adipocytes, Mcpip1, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kędracka-Krok
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


