### Accession
PXD004238

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Rathayibacter toxicus FH 79 using LC MS/MS

### Description
Rathayibacter toxicus is a gram-positive bacterium that is the causative agent of annual ryegrass toxicity, a disease that causes devastating losses in the Australian livestock industry. This bacterium is poorly characterized, making it difficult to accurately detect in feed samples. Using 1-D gels and mass spectrometry, we analyzed the protein expression of R. toxicus under stationary growth phase conditions to obtain a more complete understanding of the mechanisms of this organism. A total of 333 unique proteins were identified. The data obtained in this analysis is an essential first step toward developing an antibody-based diagnostic assay.

### Sample Protocol
Three hundred mL cultures were pelleted by centrifugation at 6000 x g, washed two times in 0.5X PBS and suspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer (25 mM TRIS, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT and 2.0% SDS). Samples were boiled in a water bath for 15 minutes, cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 6000 x g and proteins were precipitated in ice cold 80% acetone overnight at -20C. Proteins were pelleted at 14000 x g and resuspended in 25 mM TRIS, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, and 5% w/v glycerol.   Three of the four biological replicate samples (RT Growth 1, 2 and 3) were subsequently further purified using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation. Briefly, the resuspended protein pellets were precipitated using a ¼ volume of TCA and incubated at 4C for 10 minutes. Precipitates were pelleted, and washed 2x with ice-cold acetone. The pellet was dried on a heating block to remove all acetone, and resuspended in the buffer described above. All protein samples were quantified using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad Hercules, CA) with BSA as a standard. Approximately 60 g of soluble proteins were separated on a 4-12% NU-PAGE gel and stained with Simply Blue Safe Stain (Life Technologies Carlsbad, CA). Gels were sliced horizontally into 16 equal parts, destained twice for 45 minutes each in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 140 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and dehydrated in 100% ACN. Samples were hydrated in trypsin digestion buffer containing ultrapure water, 10% ACN, 10g/mL trypsin and 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After 30 minutes at room temperature additional digestion buffer minus trypsin was added to completely cover gel slices and digestion was allowed to continue overnight at 37 C. Trypsin digested peptides were extracted by the addition of 100 l of water containing 0.1% TFA followed by 100 l 50% ACN containing 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02). Two FASTA formatted databases were constructed for Mascot searching by downloading and concatenating the protein reference sequence subsets of Clavibacter michiganensis and Leifsonia xyli from the National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant protein database using the appropriate taxonomy filters. The FASTA formatted sequences of common human keratin contaminants and porcine trypsin were appended to the database for a total of 21,846 sequences. The second FASTA formatted database was constructed from an in-house genome project of Rathayibacter toxicus comprising 2,456 sequences. All mass spectrometry peak lists were searched against both databases simultaneously. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Rathayibacter toxicus is a Gram-positive bacterium that is the causative agent of annual ryegrass toxicity (ARGT), a disease that causes devastating losses in the Australian livestock industry. R. toxicus exhibits a complex life cycle, using the nematode Anguina funesta as a physical vector to carry it up to the seed head of the host plant. ARGT is caused by a tunicamycin-like corynetoxin that is produced in R. toxicus-infected seed galls. We analyzed protein expression in R. toxicus under stationary growth phase conditions to obtain a more complete understanding of the biology of this organism and identify potential targets for immunoassay development. A total of 323 unique proteins were identified, including those with putative roles in secondary metabolism and pathogenicity. The proteome analysis for this complex phytopathogenic Gram-positive bacterium will facilitate in the characterization of proteins necessary for host colonization and toxin production, and assist in the development of diagnostic assays. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004238.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Gram-positive bacteria

### Affiliations
USDA- ARS- NAA Foreign Disease Weed Science Research Unit 1301 Ditto Ave. Fort Detrick, MD 21702
USDA ARS FDWSRU

### Submitter
Michael McMahon

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Boyd McMahon
USDA- ARS- NAA Foreign Disease Weed Science Research Unit 1301 Ditto Ave. Fort Detrick, MD 21702


