### Accession
PXD036356

### Title
Grass carp SERPINA1 CoIP with hepatopancreas mass spectrometry analysis

### Description
SERPINA1, a member of the serine protease inhibitor family, plays a role in viral infection and inflammation by regulating the activities of serine and cysteine proteases. To further investigate the antiviral role SERPINA1 played in GCRV (Grass carp Reovirus) infection, a polyclonal antibody of SERPINA1 was prepared, and the protein interacting with SERPINA1 was screened by CoIP/MS in grass carp hepatopancreas tissue. Samples of hepatopancreas tissues from grass carp (n=3) before (healthy) and 8 days after the infection (post-infection) were selected. Grass carp were infected by intraperitoneal injection. The total tissue proteins were extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions for cell lysate (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). The types and abundance of proteins bound to SERPINA1 before and after the infection were detected and analyzed using CoIP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
The experimental procedure was as follows: 250 μL SERPINA1 antibody (1:1,000 dilution) was added to the total protein (500 μL) of grass carp hepatopancreas tissue (healthy and post-infection tissue). In the control groups, SERPINA1 antibody was replaced by 250 μL negative control serum (1:10,000 dilution), and both the groups were incubated at 4 ℃ overnight. Thereafter, 50 μL protein A+G agarose (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) was added to the experimental and control groups and were kept for incubation at 4 ℃ for 4 h. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation and the precipitate was washed with 1 mL cell lysate. The supernatant was used as the eluted protein sample after instantaneous high-speed centrifugation for mass spectrometry analysis. The eluted protein samples were precipitated and washed with TCA. 8 M Urea (dissolved in 100 mM Tris-HCl solution, pH 8.0) was added to the protein precipitate, and the supernatant was obtained by centrifugation. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 37 ℃ for 1 h. Thereafter, IAA was added to 40 mM for alkylation. Finally, 100 mM Tris-HCl solution (pH 8.0) was added before using Bradford’s method to quantify the protein concentration, which was processed for sequencing according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Protein peptide sequencing was performed using a TripleTOF 5600+ liquid mass spectrometry system (Applied Biosystems/MDS SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions (28). For mass spectrometry DDA mode analysis, each scan cycle contained one full MS scan (scan range: 350–1500 m/z, ion accumulation time: 250 ms) and 40 subsequent MS/MS scans (scan range: 100–1500 m/z, ion accumulation time: 50 ms). MS/MS scans were triggered by peptide ions with signals above 120 cps (+2 to +5). The exclusion time for MS/MS repeat acquisition was set at 18 s. The generated mass spectrometry data were retrieved by ProteinPilot (V 4.5) using the Paragon retrieval algorithm(29) and our laboratory’s grass carp proteome reference database. Spectra files were searched against the target database using the following parameters: Sample Type: Identification, Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Digestion: Trypsin/P, and Search Effort: Rapid ID. Search results were filtered with Unused ≥1.3. Proteins denoted as decoy hits or contaminants were removed and the remaining proteins were used for further analysis. Based on the MS/MS counts among different sample groups, significant proteins were obtained. After removing the proteins from the control samples for each of the healthy and post-infection immunoprecipitation samples, data with a spectral count of 0 were filled with 1 for statistical analysis. For the identification of expression differences, each experimental run was initially considered separately. The ratio of the spectral counts (ratio) and their mean (MeanSP) is the vertical coordinate scatter plot. The t-test was performed on the spectrogram number of each sample protein before and after the infection, and when the protein spectrogram number ratio difference exceeded 1.5-fold (spectrogram number tends to +∞) to 3-fold (spectrogram number tends to 1) with p ≤ 0.05, the protein was labeled as “++/--”; otherwise, it was labeled as differential protein (“+/-”).

### Publication Abstract
SERPINA1, a member of the serine protease inhibitor family, plays a role in viral infection and inflammation by regulating the activities of serine and cysteine proteases. To date, there have been no reports on the immune function of SERPINA1 in fishes. In this study, we first cloned the <i>serpina1</i> gene of grass carp (<i>Ctenopharyngodon idellus</i>) and found that it could respond rapidly to the infection of Grass carp reovirus (GCRV), and overexpression of <i>serpina1</i> could enhance the antiviral response of CIK cells. A polyclonal antibody of SERPINA1 was prepared, and the protein interacting with SERPINA1 was screened by CoIP/MS in grass carp hepatopancreas tissue. It was found that SERPINA1 interacted with coagulation factor 2 (CF2) and could degrade it in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, overexpression of <i>cf2</i> contributed to the infection of GCRV in CIK cells, whereas co-expression of <i>serpina1</i> and <i>cf2</i> in grass carp reduced the copy number of GCRV in cells. The results showed that grass carp SERPINA1 could inhibit GCRV infection by degrading CF2. This study proposes that SERPINA1 can inhibit viral infection through interaction with the coagulation factor, providing new insights into the molecular mechanism of SERPINA1's antiviral function.

### Keywords
Grass carp, Coip/ms, Hepatopancreas, Serpina1

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China.
State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China 

### Submitter
Yangyang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yaping Wang
State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China.


