### Accession
PXD024951

### Title
Cryptococcus neoformans proteins during fungal-macrophage interaction

### Description
Cryptococcus neoformans interactions with murine macrophages are critical for disease. In this project we analyzed fungal proteins which were co-purified with murine host proteins after interaction. H99 C. neoformans was opsonized with mAb 18B7 and addedd to murine macrophages. Then murine cells were lysed and cell extracts submitted to proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
2.0 × 107 C. neoformans infected  bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDM), were rinsed with warm PBS, scraped and collected, then centrifuged at 1000 × g for 5 minutes at 4° C. Pellets were resuspended in ice-cold water containing cOmplete™ protease inhibitors (Roche). Each sample was subsequently passed 10 times through a 26-gauge needle to shear the host macrophage-like cells while leaving the fungi intact.  C. neoformans and cellular debris were removed from the lysate by an initial centrifugation of 3,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4° C and Two subsequent 8,000 × g centrifugations  for 10 minutes at 4° C. Proteins were concentrated in a Savant Speed Vac Concentrator. Total proteins were quantified using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). 50 µg of each total lysate (mixture of murine and cryptococcal proteins) from the protein isolation step was run on a 12% NuPAGE™ tris-acetate gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) two centimeters into the gel prior to Coomassie R250 staining and water de-staining for subsequent proteomic analysis.Resulting gel lanes containing a mixture of fungal and mammalian proteins were excised and fractioned into 1-5 sections prior to in-gel protein digestion and were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer at the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center (Columbia University Medical Center) proteomics facility. Experiment was performed once for BMDM and another time for J774.16. These data files represent data from BMDM.

### Data Protocol
Databases were downloaded from Uniprot and Sequest HT from Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used to search data.  Peptide data was aligned and filtered using murine and cryptococcal (H99, Broad Institute)(Janbon et al., 2014) databases.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> is a facultative intracellular pathogen that can replicate and disseminate in mammalian macrophages. In this study, we analyzed fungal proteins identified in murine macrophage-like cells after infection with <i>C. neoformans</i>. To accomplish this, we developed a protocol to identify proteins released from cryptococcal cells inside macrophage-like cells; we identified 127 proteins of fungal origin in infected macrophage-like cells. Among the proteins identified was urease, a known virulence factor, and others such as transaldolase and phospholipase D, which have catalytic activities that could contribute to virulence. This method provides a straightforward methodology to study host-pathogen interactions. We chose to study further Yeast Oligomycin Resistance (Yor1), a relatively uncharacterized protein belonging to the large family of ATP binding cassette transporter (ABC transporters). These transporters belong to a large and ancient protein family found in all extant phyla. While ABC transporters have an enormous diversity of functions across varied species, in pathogenic fungi they are better studied as drug efflux pumps. Analysis of <i>C. neoformans yor1&#x394;</i> strains revealed defects in nonlytic exocytosis, capsule size, and dimensions of extracellular vesicles, when compared to wild-type strains. We detected no difference in growth rates and cell body size. Our results indicate that <i>C. neoformans</i> releases a large suite of proteins during macrophage infection, some of which can modulate fungal virulence and are likely to affect the fungal-macrophage interaction.

### Keywords
Fungi, Cryptococcus neoformans, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
JHU
MRC CMM

### Submitter
Carolina Coelho

### Lab Head
Dr Arturo Casadevall
JHU


