### Accession
PXD001966

### Title
Proteomics insights into Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (CLN1) point to the involvement of palmitoylation in the disease

### Description
Mutations in the depalmitoylation enzyme, palmitoyl protein thioesterase (PPT1), result in the early onset neurodegenerative disease known as Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis. Here, we provide proteomic evidence suggesting that PPT1 deficiency could be considered as a ciliopathy.  An unbiased proteomic analysis of membranal brain proteins from neonate Ppt1 knock out and control mice revealed a list of 88 proteins with different expression levels. Among them, we identified Rab3IP, which is known to work in concert with Rab8 and Rab11 to regulated proper ciliogenesis. Surprisingly, PPT1 was observed to localize to cilia. Indeed, an unbiased proteomics analysis on isolated cilia revealed 660 proteins, which differed in their abundance between wild type and Ppt1 knock out. We demonstrate here that Rab3IP, Rab8 and Rab11 are palmitoylated proteins, and palmitoylation of Rab11 is required for proper intracellular localization. Most interestingly, cells and tissues from Ppt1-/- exhibited less ciliated cells and abnormally longer cilia with both acetylated tubulin and Rab3IP mis-distributed along the length of cilia. Overall, our results suggest a novel link between palmitoylated proteins, cilia organization and the pathophysiology of Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis.

### Sample Protocol
ABE Chemistry for detection of palmitoylation in PPT1 knockout and wild type mice  Acyl-Biotinyl Exchange chemistry (ABE) was performed as described previously (Roth et al., 2006;Wan et al., 2007) with some minor modifications. Protein concentrations of the Triton X-100 soluble (TS) fractions of brain cells from five PPT1 knockout and five wild type mice were determined using the micro-Lowry protein assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturers instructions. 300 µg from each TS fraction was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol (CM) method. Precipitated protein pellets were re-solubilized in 25 µl 4% SDS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA) at 37°C for 15 min followed by incubation in a sonication bath for 2 min. The samples were diluted with three volumes of dilution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100 supplemented with EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and reduced with 10 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 56°C for 30 min followed by alkylation with 50 mM NEM (N-ethylmaleimide) for 2.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. Four sequential CM precipitations were performed to remove excess NEM. The protein pellets were re-solubilized in 50 μl 4% SDS buffer and divided equally into two portions (experimental HA+ portion, and control HA- portion, respectively). Three volumes of a freshly prepared solution of 0.53 mM N-[6-(biotinamido) hexyl]-3-(2-pyridylthio) propionamide) (biotin-HPDP), 0.27% Triton X-100 13.2% N,N-di-methylformamide supplemented with EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4 was added to each portion. For the experimental HA+ portions the solution contained 1M hydroxylamine (HA) pH 7.4 whereas for the control HA- portions the HA was substituted with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. Samples were incubated for 1.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. The protein pellets were re-solubilized in 12.5 μl 2% SDS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 2% SDS, 5 mM EDTA). The samples were diluted with 19 volumes of dilution buffer, incubated for 30 min at room temperature with end-over-end rotation followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000g to remove any particulates. The samples were transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes containing 25 μl pre-equilibrated avidin agarose beads (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) and incubated for 1.5 hours at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. The beads were successively washed five times for 2 min with 50 volumes of equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS). The beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 200g for 2 min in between each wash step. The proteins were eluted by incubating the beads with 250 μl 20 mM TCEP in equilibration buffer for 30 min at room temperature with end-over-end rotation followed by centrifugation at 200g for 2 min. The supernatants were centrifuged again at 200g for 2 min and transferred to new micro-centrifuge tubes. The proteins were concentrated by a CM precipitation and re-dissolved in 20 μl 2% SDS buffer. After the addition of 20 μl Laemmli buffer the proteins were resolved by 12.5% Criterion precast TGX gels (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) and silver stained as described by Shevchenko (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Each lane was excised and divided into smaller pieces (2x2 mm) and in-gel digested essentially as described (Wilm et al., 1996). Briefly, the gel pieces were washed repeatedly in 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM TCEP in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 56°C, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After washing with 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate the gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The gel pieces were rehydrated on ice for 45 min in digestion buffer containing 10 ng/μl sequencing-grade modified trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were successively extracted three times with 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile for 30 min. Samples were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and cleaned up using Stage-Tip C18 columns (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturers instructions. The eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -20°C until analysis by nanoflow reversed phase HPLC tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry An ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with an Eksigent 2D NanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) was used to analyze the peptides derived from in-gel digestions after ABE chemistry. Peptides were loaded at a constant flow rate of 10 μl/min onto a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 5 μm, 5 mm x 0.3 mm, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Hägersten, Sweden) and subsequently separated on a 10 μm fused silica emitter, 75 μm x 16 cm (PicoTip Emitter, New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with a 60 min linear gradient of 3% to 35% acetonitrile in water, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode, simultaneously acquiring MS spectra in the Orbitrap (from m/z 400 to 2000) and MS/MS spectra in the LTQ. Four MS/MS spectra were acquired using collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. Each Orbitrap-MS scan was acquired at 60,000 FWHM nominal resolution settings using the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) for internal calibration. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries using a repeat count of two with a repeat duration of 20 sec, and with a maximum retention period of 120 sec. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled to select for ions with at least two charges and rejecting ions with undetermined charge state.  Protein identification, quantification and detection of palmitoylation Raw mass spectrometric data files were analyzed in the Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, version 4, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) software platform. Runs were aligned and peptide identifications were propagated between runs to minimize missing values. MS/MS spectra of ions with charge state +2/+3/+4 between 400 and 2000 m/z were filtered and submitted to Mascot (v 2.3, 2012) for identification using the mouse UniProt database including a reverse dataset. No fixed modifications were set for any amino acids. Variable modifications were selected as carbamidomethyl (Cys), deamidation (Asn and Gln), N-acetyl (N terminus), N-ethylmaleimide (Cys), N-ethylmaleimide + water (Cys), and oxidation (Met). The mass tolerance was set as 5 ppm for MS spectra and 0.8 Da for MS/MS spectra. Identifications were filtered with an FDR of 0.05 at the peptide and protein levels. The Progenesis software was used both as a tool for the differential protein analysis between the knockout PPT1 and wild type mice and for the detection of palmitoylated proteins in the samples. For the differential protein analysis the experimental HA+ raw data files were compared between the knockout and wild type samples, whereas for the detection of palmitoylated proteins the paired experimental HA+ and control HA- raw data files were compared for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Disease, Palmitoylation

### Affiliations
Dpeartment of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Peter James

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Dpeartment of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden


