### Accession
PXD039714

### Title
Enzyme adaptation to habitat thermal legacy shapes the thermal plasticity of marine microbiomes

### Description
Microbial communities respond to temperature with physiological adaptation and compositional turnover. Whether thermal selection of enzymes explains marine microbiome plasticity in response to temperature remains unresolved. By quantifying the thermal behaviour of seven functionally-independent enzyme classes (esterase, extradiol dioxygenase, phosphatase, beta-galactosidase, nuclease, transaminase, and aldo-keto reductase) in native proteomes of marine sediment microbiomes from the Irish Sea to the southern Red Sea, we record a significant effect of the mean annual temperature (MAT) on enzyme’s response (R2, 0.51–0.80, p < 0.01 in all cases). Activity and stability profiles of 228 esterases and 5 extradiol dioxygenases from sediment and seawater across 70 locations worldwide (latitude 62.2°S–16°N, MAT –1.4ºC–29.5ºC) validate this thermal pattern. Modelling the esterase phase transition temperature as a measure of structural flexibility, confirm the observed relationship with MAT. Furthermore, when considering temperature variability in sites with non-significantly different MATs, the broadest range of enzyme thermal behaviour and the highest growth plasticity of the enriched heterotrophic bacteria occur in samples with the widest annual thermal variability. These results indicate that temperature-driven enzyme selection shapes microbiome thermal plasticity and that thermal variability finely tunes such processes and should be considered alongside MAT in forecasting microbial community thermal response

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel protein digestion (Stacking gel) The protein extracts, were suspended in a volume up to 100 μl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (1mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 12% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 1 cm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (1mm2), deposited in 96-well plates and processed automatically in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was based on Schevchenko et al. [1] with minor variations: gel plugs were washed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN prior to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and alkylation was carried out with 55 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Gel pieces were then rinsed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN, and then were dried under a stream of nitrogen. Proteomics Grade Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in 25% ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the digestion took place at 37°C for 4h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50%ACN/0.5%TFA for peptide extraction. The tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and then desalted onto StageTip C18 Pipette tips (Thermo Scientific) until the mass spectrometric analysis.   1. Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M: “Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels”. Anal Chem 1996, 68:850-858.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometer analysis A 1 µg aliquot of each sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX , Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 µm particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 300 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 20, declustering potential (DP) 85 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.5 software (AB SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data obtained for individual samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.5.1 Software (AB SCIEX). Raw data file conversion tools generated mgf files which were also searched against a custom protein database using the Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment masses, also 2 missed cleavages were allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR ≤ 1% at PSM level) for peptide identification were manually calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbial physiology, Enzymatic activity, Climate changes, Temperature variability, Thermal response, Marine bacteria

### Affiliations
Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division (BESE), Red Sea Research Centre (RSRC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Daniele Daffonchio
Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division (BESE), Red Sea Research Centre (RSRC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia


