### Accession
PXD026794

### Title
Proteome-wide Identification of DNA Guanine Quadruplex-binding Proteins

### Description
DNA sequences of high guanine (G) content have the potential to fold into G quadruplex (G4) structures. DNA G4 is known to play important roles in various cellular processes including DNA replication, transcriptional regulation, and maintenance of genomic integrity. A more complete understanding about the biological functions of G4 DNA requires the investigation about how these structures are recognized by cellular proteins. Here, we conducted exhaustive quantitative proteomic experiments to profile the interaction proteomes of three well-defined G4 structures derived from the human telomere and the promoters of cMYC and cKIT genes. Our results led to the identification of a number of candidate G4-interacting proteins; some were previously reported, e.g., FUS, TOP1, and PARP1, and many others were discovered here for the first time. These included three proteins that can bind to all three DNA G4 structures and many proteins that can bind specifically to selected DNA G4 structure(s). We also validated that GRSF1 can bind directly and selectively toward G4 DNA structure derived from the cMYC promoter. Taken together, we uncovered a number of cellular proteins that exhibit general and selective recognitions of G4 folding patterns, which underscore the complexity of G4 DNA in biology and the importance in understanding fully the G4-interaction proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The annealed biotin-conjugated G4 DNA probes and the corresponding mutant probes, at a concentration of 0.5 μM, were incubated separately with high-capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo) with rocking for 60 min following the manufacturer’s guidelines. The beads were then washed and equilibrated for three times with a 1-mL aliquot of the aforementioned buffer A. After each washing, the beads were centrifuged at 700g for 1 min and the supernatant discarded.  The DNA-bound streptavidin beads were then incubated with 500 μg of nuclear proteome in buffer B, which contained 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA and 10% glycerol, at 4C with rocking for 2 hr. In the forward SILAC experiment, the light and heavy nuclear proteomes were incubated with the G4-containing DNA probe and the corresponding mutated probe incapable of folding into G4, respectively. To remove any experimental bias, we also performed the reverse SILAC experiment where the heavy and light nuclear protein lysates were incubated with the G4-containing probe and the mutant control probe, respectively.  After the incubation, the DNA-protein mixture was washed for three times with 1-mL buffer C, which contained 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, along with elevating concentrations of NaCl (50, 100, and 200 mM). After the washing, the beads were combined and the bound proteins were eluted with the addition of 30 μL of 2× SDS-PAGE loading buffer (Bio-Rad) with 5 min of boiling. The resulting mixture was centrifuged and the supernatant loaded onto a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. After a very short separation, gel band containing the proteins was excised and cut into small pieces. The proteins were then digested in-gel with trypsin, as described previously 3. Briefly, excess SDS in the gel was removed with overnight shaking in an equal-volume mixture of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile. The supernatant was removed and the gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile. Proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37C for 1 hr and subsequently alkylated by incubating with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma) in the dark for 1 hr. Gel pieces were washed for three times with 25 mM NH4HCO3 (1 mL) with 5 min of shaking. Proteins were then digested in-gel with trypsin at 37C overnight, and the peptides were subsequently eluted from the gel by incubating, with vigorous shaking for 15 min, first in 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 5% acetic acid for two times, then in 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 5% acetic acid and 50% acetonitrile, and finally in 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing in 5% acetic acid and 95% acetonitrile. The eluted peptide fractions were subsequently pooled, evaporated to dryness, and desalted using OMIX C18 Tips (Agilent), following the manufacturer’s recommended procedures. On-line LC-MS/MS analysis of the peptide samples was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a N.D.oelectrospray ionization source and coupled with an EASY-nLC II HPLC system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA). The HPLC separation was performed using a trapping column followed by a separation column, both packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 m, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). The peptides were separated using a 170-min linear gradient of 2-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 230 nL/min and electrosprayed (spray voltage 1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer operated in the positive-ion mode. Full-scan MS (m/z 300-1500) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400), followed by data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS for the 20 most abundant ions found in the full-scan MS exceeding a threshold of 1000 counts.  The normalized collision energy for MS/MS was 35.0.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were analyzed in parallel with MaxQuant Version 1.6.15.0 for protein identification and quantification 4. MaxQuant multiplicity was set to 2, and Lys8 and Arg6 were selected as heavy amino acids. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carboamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages for trypsin was set to two per peptide. The tolerances in mass accuracy for MS and MS/MS were 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Raw MS data were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (Proteome ID: UP000005640_9606) to which contamiN.D.ts and reverse sequences were added. The match between runs option was enabled with the alignment window being 5 min. Raw output results were analyzed and known contamiN.D.t proteins were removed from analysis.  Proteins exhibiting a G4/ssDNA SILAC ratio of at least 1.5 were categorized as putative G4-binding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
DNA sequences of high guanine (G) content have the potential to form G quadruplex (G4) structures. A more complete understanding about the biological functions of G4 DNA requires the investigation about how these structures are recognized by proteins. Here, we conducted exhaustive quantitative proteomic experiments to profile the interaction proteomes of G4 structures by employing different sequences of G4 DNA derived from the human telomere and the promoters of c-<i>MYC</i> and c-<i>KIT</i> genes. Our results led to the identification of a number of candidate G4-interacting proteins, many of which were discovered here for the first time. These included three proteins that can bind to all three DNA G4 structures and 78 other proteins that can bind selectively to one or two of the three DNA G4 structure(s). We also validated that GRSF1 can bind directly and selectively toward G4 structure derived from the c-<i>MYC</i> promoter. Our quantitative proteomic screening also led to the identification of a number of candidate "antireader" proteins of G4 DNA. Together, we uncovered a number of cellular proteins that exhibit general and selective recognitions of G4 folding patterns, which underscore the complexity of G4 DNA in biology and the importance of understanding fully the G4-interaction proteome.

### Keywords
G-quadruplex, Lc-ms/ms, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside
University of California, Riverside 

### Submitter
Zi Gao

### Lab Head
Dr YInsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside


