### Accession
PXD004741

### Title
Mouse ciliopathy-associated CPLANE proteins

### Description
Combining proteomics, in vivo imaging and genetic analysis of proteins linked to planar cell polarity (Inturned, Fuzzy and Wdpcp), we identified and characterized a new genetic module, which we term CPLANE (ciliogenesis and planar polarity effector), and an extensive associated protein network. CPLANE proteins physically and functionally interact with the poorly understood ciliopathy-associated protein Jbts17 at basal bodies, where they act to recruit a specific subset of IFT-A proteins. In the absence of CPLANE, defective IFT-A particles enter the axoneme and IFT-B trafficking is severely perturbed. Accordingly, mutation of CPLANE genes elicits specific ciliopathy phenotypes in mouse models and is associated with ciliopathies in human patients.

### Sample Protocol
To best optimize the LAP purification procedure and minimize the possibility of carryover, we standardized the growth of cells, the preparation of extracts and the method of tandem affinity purification. Briefly, cell lines with stable expression of LAP-tagged proteins were collected using detergent. The mouse IMCD3 renal cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (CRL-2123). The cell line was authenticated by examining the expression of renal markers (AQP2), polarization, establishment of tight junctions and ciliation, as outlined in ref. 66. Cells tested negative for mycoplasma contaminaiton. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 280,000g and subjected to immunoprecipitation with an affinity-purified rabbit antibody to GFP produced in house. Bound proteins were eluted from antibody-conjugated beads using TEV protease, recaptured on S-protein agarose (Novagen) and eluted in 4× NuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen). Following purification, great care was taken to ensure a lack of contamination from both environmental sources and other purified proteins. Each purified set of interacting proteins was separated on an individual 10% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. IMCD3 samples were run on gels for 20–40 mm and divided into 20- to 40-mm × 1-mm slices. Each excised lane was reduced, carboxyamidomethylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide identification of each digestion mixture was performed by microcapillary reverse-phase HPLC nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry (mLC-MS/MS) on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos or XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap repetitively surveyed a mass/charge (m/z) range from 395 to 1,600, while data-dependent MS/MS spectra on the 20 (Velos) or 10 (XL) most abundant ions in each survey scan were acquired in the linear ion trap. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a relative collision energy of 30%, an isolation width of 2.5 Da and dynamic exclusion of recurring ions for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Preliminary sequencing of peptides was facilitated with the SEQUEST algorithm with a mass tolerance of 30 ppm against a species-specific (mouse or human) subset of the UniProt Knowledgebase. With a custom version of the Harvard Proteomics Browser Suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were accepted with mass error <2.5 ppm and score thresholds to attain an estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% using a reverse-decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia use microtubule-based intraflagellar transport (IFT) to organize intercellular signaling. Ciliopathies are a spectrum of human diseases resulting from defects in cilia structure or function. The mechanisms regulating the assembly of ciliary multiprotein complexes and the transport of these complexes to the base of cilia remain largely unknown. Combining proteomics, in vivo imaging and genetic analysis of proteins linked to planar cell polarity (Inturned, Fuzzy and Wdpcp), we identified and characterized a new genetic module, which we term CPLANE (ciliogenesis and planar polarity effector), and an extensive associated protein network. CPLANE proteins physically and functionally interact with the poorly understood ciliopathy-associated protein Jbts17 at basal bodies, where they act to recruit a specific subset of IFT-A proteins. In the absence of CPLANE, defective IFT-A particles enter the axoneme and IFT-B trafficking is severely perturbed. Accordingly, mutation of CPLANE genes elicits specific ciliopathy phenotypes in mouse models and is associated with ciliopathies in human patients.

### Keywords
Ciliopathy, Mouse, "planar cell polarity”, Cplane, “human genetics"

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Jackson
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175


