### Accession
PXD023038

### Title
IFNγ modulates the immunopeptidome of triple negative breast cancer cells by enhancing and diversifying antigen processing and presentation.

### Description
Peptide vaccination remains a viable approach to induce T-cell mediated killing of tumours. To identify potential T-cell targets for Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) vaccination, we examined the effect of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon-γ (IFNγ) on the transcriptome, proteome and immunopeptidome of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified a total of 84,131 peptides from 9,647 source proteins presented by human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-I and HLA-II alleles. Treatment with IFNγ resulted in a remarkable remoulding of the immunopeptidome, with only a 34% overlap between untreated and treated cells across the HLA-I immunopeptidome, and expression of HLA-II only on treated cells. IFNγ increased the overall number, diversity and abundance of the immunopeptidome, as well as the proportion of coverage of source antigens. The suite of peptides displayed under conditions of IFNγ treatment included many known tumour associated antigens, with the HLA-II repertoire sampling 265 breast cancer associated antigens absent from those sampled by HLA-I. Quantitative analysis of the transcriptome (10,248 transcripts) and proteome (6783 proteins) of these cells revealed 229 proteins and transcripts were commonly differentially expressed, most of which involved in downstream targets of IFNγ signalling including components of the antigen processing machinery such as tapasin and HLA. However, these changes in protein expression did not explain the dramatic modulation of the immunopeptidome following IFNγ treatment.  These results demonstrate the high degree of plasticity in the immunopeptidome TNBC cells following cytokine stimulation and provide evidence that under pro-inflammatory conditions a greater variety of HLA-I and HLA-II vaccine targets are unveiled to the immune system. This has important implications for the development of personalised cancer vaccination strategies.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 pelleted cells were lysed (5x106 cells) with SDC lysis buffer. 400g of protein was taken, and this was then denatured and alkylated with the addition of 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95 °C for 5 min. This was then allowed to cool to room temperature and the pH was adjusted to 8 before trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:30 (trypsin:protein (w/w)) and incubated at 37°C with shaking at 180rpm overnight. The trypsinised lysate was then fractionated into eighteen fractions by C18 RP-HPLC. These fractions were then pooled into six fractions and analysed on mass spectrometry for data dependent acquisition

### Data Protocol
The Acquired DDA .raw files were searched against the human proteome (Uniprot v_05102017) using Spectronaut Pulsar software to obtain peptide sequence information and generate a spectral library for DIA analysis. The following search parameters and settings have been used: (i) trypsin (full specificity after Arginine and Lysine) was selected as protease and up to one missed cleavage was permitted; (30) mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment masses (iii) carbamidomethylation of C was selected as fixed and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as variable modification. Only peptides identified at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the added decoy database were considered for spectral library generation. Spectronaut 10 (Orion; Biognosys) was used to create the corresponding spectral library and search all DIA raw files. For data analysis, we used Spectronaut 10 default protein‐centric parameters (BGS Factory Settings). Data matrices containing the quantitative values were obtained from “QValue Sparse” scores.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide vaccination remains a viable approach to induce T-cell mediated killing of tumors. To identify potential T-cell targets for Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) vaccination, we examined the effect of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon-&#x3b3; (IFN&#x3b3;) on the transcriptome, proteome, and immunopeptidome of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified a total of&#xa0;84,131&#xa0;peptides from&#xa0;9,647 source proteins presented by human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-I and HLA-II alleles. Treatment with IFN&#x3b3; resulted in a remarkable remolding of the immunopeptidome, with only a 34% overlap between untreated and treated cells across the HLA-I immunopeptidome, and expression of HLA-II only detected on treated cells. IFN&#x3b3; increased the overall number, diversity, and abundance of peptides contained within the immunopeptidome, as well increasing the coverage of individual source antigens. The suite of peptides displayed under conditions of IFN&#x3b3; treatment included many known tumor associated antigens, with the HLA-II repertoire sampling 17 breast cancer associated antigens absent from those sampled by HLA-I molecules. Quantitative analysis of the transcriptome (10,248 transcripts) and proteome (6,783 proteins) of these cells revealed 229 common proteins and transcripts that were differentially expressed. Most of these represented downstream targets of IFN&#x3b3; signaling including components of the antigen processing machinery such as tapasin and HLA molecules. However, these changes in protein expression did not explain the dramatic modulation of the immunopeptidome following IFN&#x3b3; treatment. These results demonstrate the high degree of plasticity in the immunopeptidome of TNBC cells following cytokine stimulation and provide evidence that under pro-inflammatory conditions a greater variety of potential HLA-I and HLA-II vaccine targets are unveiled to the immune system. This has important implications for the development of personalized cancer vaccination strategies.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Ifn gamma, Proteomics, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


