### Accession
PXD033084

### Title
Complexome profiling of HEK293 WT and TMBIM5 mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondria adapt to different energetic demands reshaping their proteome. Mitochondrial proteases are emerging as key regulators of these adaptive processes. Here, we use a multi-proteomic approach to demonstrate regulation of the m-AAA protease AFG3L2 by the mitochondrial proton gradient, coupling mitochondrial protein turnover to the energetic status of mitochondria. We identify TMBIM5 (previously also known as GHITM or MICS1) as a Ca2+/H+ exchanger in the mitochondrial inner membrane, which binds to and inhibits the m-AAA protease. TMBIM5 ensures cell survival and respiration, allowing Ca2+ efflux from mitochondria and limiting mitochondrial hyperpolarization. Persistent hyperpolarization, however, triggers degradation of TMBIM5 and activation of the m-AAA protease. The m-AAA protease broadly remodels the mitochondrial proteome and mediates the proteolytic breakdown of respiratory complex I to confine ROS production and oxidative damage in hyperpolarized mitochondria. TMBIM5 thus integrates mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling and the energetic status of mitochondria with protein turnover rates to reshape the mitochondrial proteome and adjust the cellular metabolism.  This dataset was used to demonstrate that TMBIM5-/- is not required for Complex I assembly into supercomplexes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Mitochondrial isolation was conducted from cell pellets using isolation buffer (220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 2 mM EGTA, 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 1 mM PMSF (Roche, Cat# 10837091001)), complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Cat# 52434800), 0.1% BSA) including a 15 min swelling step. Cells were disrupted using 15 strokes in a glass mortar and PTFE pestle at 1000 rpm with a rotating homogenizer (Schuett biotec, Cat# 3201011). The mitochondrial containing fraction was separated at 1000 × g for 15 min and subsequently pelleted at 8000 × g for 15 min before washing in isolation buffer without BSA. Separation of native protein complexes from membrane enriched fractions (crude mitochondria) was performed using Blue Native PAGE as previously described (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22982022/ ). Protein Digestion Each lane of the BN-PAGE was cut into 72 slices of equal size. Each slice was digested in-gel using Trypsin and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, the gel pieces were destained in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ethanol. Then proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 45 min, carbamidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested using 12 ng/µl LysC (Wago) /Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) (1:3 ratio) at 37°C overnight. Then, the digestion was stopped by acidification with trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%, and peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (ACN). The organic solvent was vacuum evaporated using a SpeedVac concentrator plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and peptides were desalted using self-made C18-based Stop and Go Extraction Tips.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition strategy on a nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectromter. The total gradient length was 25 min separating peptides using a binary buffer system of A) 0.1% formic acid in H2O and B) 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. The spray voltage was 2000 V and the capillary temperature was set to 250°C. MS1 Spectra were acquired using a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS2 spectra, a maximum injection time of 120ms and an AGC target of 1e6. The isolation width was set to 1.6 Th. The normalized HCD energy was 25.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis  The acquired data dependent acquisition mass spectra were correlated to the human Uniprot database containing only rewieved sequences (download 12.2021, 20,326 protein sequences) using the MaxQuant software (2.0.3.0) and the implemented Andromeda search engine.  The match between runs algorithm has been enabled. The iBAQ intensity was calculated and used for further analysis. The MitoCarta3.0 pathway annotations were used to identify Complex I and III subunits. Assembly factors are not included. Profiles for Complex I subunits and Complex III subunits showing the median as a line and the inter quantile range (IQR) as a transparent area were plotted using the Instant Clue software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293, Complexome profiling, Tmbim5

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann Strasse 9b, Cologne, 50931, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann Strasse 9b, Cologne, 50931, Germany


