### Accession
PXD011932

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identifies novel PIAS1 protein substrates involved in cell migration and motility

### Description
The Protein Inhibitor of Activated STAT 1 (PIAS1) is an E3 SUMO ligase that plays important roles in various cellular pathways, including STAT signaling, p53 pathway, and the steroid hormone signaling pathway. PIAS1 can SUMOylate PML (at Lys-65 and Lys-160) and PML-RARα promoting their ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Increasing evidence shows that PIAS1 is overexpressed in various human malignancies, such as prostate and lung cancers. To understand the mechanism of action of PIAS1, we developed a quantitative SUMO proteomic approach to identify potential substrates of PIAS1 in a system-wide manner. Our analyses enabled the profiling of 983 SUMO sites on 544 proteins, of which 204 SUMO sites on 123 proteins were identified as putative PIAS1 substrates. These substrates were found to be involved in different cellular processes, including transcriptional regulation, DNA binding and cytoskeleton dynamics. Further functional studies on Vimentin (VIM), a type III intermediate filament protein involved in cytoskeleton organization and cell motility, revealed that PIAS1 exerts its effects on cell migration and cell invasion through the SUMOylation of VIM at Lys-439 and Lys-445 residues. VIM SUMOylation was necessary for its dynamic disassembly, and cells expressing a non-SUMOylatable VIM mutant showed reduced levels of proliferation and migration. Our approach not only provides a novel strategy for the identification of E3 SUMO ligase substrates, but also yields valuable biological insights into the unsuspected role of PIAS1 and VIM SUMOylation on cell motility.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Labeling and Protein Extraction HEK293-SUMO3m cells were grown in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing light (0Lys, 0Arg), medium (4Lys, 6Arg) or heavy (8Lys, 10Arg) isotopic forms of lysine and arginine (Silantes) for at least 6 passages to ensure full labeling. For each triple SILAC experiment, the control channel was transfected with an empty-pcDNA3.0-Myc vector while the other two channels were transfected with the Myc-PIAS1 plasmid. After 48 h transfection, an equal amount of cells from each SILAC channel were combined and washed twice with ice-cold PBS, lysed in NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer (6 M Guanidinium HCl, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, 5 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=8) and sonicated. Protein concentration was determined using micro Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Protein Purification, Digestion and Desalting  For each replicate, 16 mg of total cell extract (TCE) were incubated with 320 μL of NiNTA beads (Qiagen) at 4 °C. After 16 h incubation, NiNTA beads were washed once with 10 mL of NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer, 5 times with 10 mL of NiNTA denaturing washing buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM imidazole, 5 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 20 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=6.3) and  twice with 10 mL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein concentration was determined using micro Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Protein digestion on beads was carried out using a ratio 1:50 sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega): protein extract in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight. To quench the reaction, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added. The solution was desalted on hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) cartridges (1cc, 30 mg)(Waters) and eluted in LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) before being dried down by Speed Vac. SUMO Peptide Enrichment PureProteome protein A/G magnetic beads (Millipore) were equilibrated with anti-K(NQTGG) antibody at a ratio of  1:2 (v/w) for 1 h at 4 °C in PBS. Saturated beads were washed 3 times with 200 mM triethanolamine pH=8.3. For crosslinking, 10 μl of 5 mM DMP in 200 mM triethanolamine pH=8.3 was added per μl of slurry and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched for 30 minutes by adding 1 M Tris-HCl pH=8 to a final concentration 5 mM. Cross-linked beads were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS and once with PBS containing 50% glycerol. The tryptic digests were resuspended in 500 ul PBS containing 50% glycerol and supplemented with cross-linked anti-K-(NQTGG) at a ratio of 1:2 (w/w). After 1 h incubation at 4 °C, anti-K-(NQTGG) antibody bound beads were washed three times with 1 ml of 1 × PBS, twice with 1 ml of 0.1 × PBS and once with ddH2O. SUMO peptides were eluted three times with 200 μl of 0.2% formic acid in water and dried down by Speed Vac. SCX Fractionation Enriched SUMO peptides were reconstituted in water containing 15% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid and loaded on conditioned strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with ammonium formate pulses at 50, 75, 100, 300, 600 and 1,500 mM in 15% acetonitrile, pH=3. Eluted fractions were dried down by Speed Vac and stored at −80 °C for MS analysis. Mass Spectrometry Analysis Peptides were reconstituted in water containing 0.2% formic acid and analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000. Samples were injected on a 300 μm ID × 5 mm trap and separated on a 150 μm × 20 cm nano-LC column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 A, Phenomenex). The separation was performed on a linear gradient from 7 to 30% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid over 105 minutes at 600 nl/min. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350 to m/z 1,500 at resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with a target AGC of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 25 and resolution of 30,000 using a Top 3 s method, with a target AGC of 5E3 and a maximum injection time of 3,000 ms. The MS/MS triggering threshold was set at 1E5 and the dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor was enabled for 20 s within a mass range of ±0.8 Da.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8)55,56. MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt/SwissProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/) including Isoforms (released on 10 March 2015). The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was set to 2. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetylation (Protein N term), oxidation (M), deamination (NQ) and NQTGG (K) were set as variable modifications.  The option match between runs was enabled to correlate identification and quantitation results across different runs. The false discovery rate for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%. SUMO sites with a localization probability of >0.75 were retained.

### Publication Abstract
The protein inhibitor of activated STAT1 (PIAS1) is an E3 SUMO ligase that plays important roles in various cellular pathways. Increasing evidence shows that PIAS1 is overexpressed in various human malignancies, including prostate and lung cancers. Here we used quantitative SUMO proteomics to identify potential substrates of PIAS1 in a system-wide manner. We identified 983 SUMO sites on 544 proteins, of which 62 proteins were assigned as putative PIAS1 substrates. In particular, vimentin (VIM), a type III intermediate filament protein involved in cytoskeleton organization and cell motility, was SUMOylated by PIAS1 at Lys-439 and Lys-445 residues. VIM SUMOylation was necessary for its dynamic disassembly and cells expressing a non-SUMOylatable VIM mutant showed a reduced level of migration. Our approach not only enables the identification of E3 SUMO ligase substrates but also yields valuable biological insights into the unsuspected role of PIAS1 and VIM SUMOylation on cell motility.

### Keywords
Vimentin, Quantitative proteomics, Cell invasion, Sumoylation, Pias1

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Québec, Canada,  University of Montréal, Department of Chemistry, Québec, Canada
University of Montreal

### Submitter
Francis McManus

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Québec, Canada,  University of Montréal, Department of Chemistry, Québec, Canada


