### Accession
PXD039807

### Title
Global molecular response of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis to zinc deprivation: analyses at transcript, protein and microRNA levels.

### Description
Zinc is one of the main micronutrients for all organisms. One of the defense mechanisms used by the host includes the sequestration of metals used in fungal metabolism, such as iron and zinc. There are several mechanisms that maintain the balance in intracellular zinc supply. MicroRNAs are effector molecules of responses between pathogen and host, favoring or preventing infection in many mi-croorganisms. Fungi of the Paracoccidioides genus are thermodimorphic and the etiological agents of paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM). In the current pandemic scenario in which the world mycosis studies continue to be highly important since a significant number of patients with COVID-19 developed systemic mycoses, co-infections that complicated their clinical condition. The objective is to identify transcriptomic and proteomic adaptations in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis during zinc deprivation. Nineteen microRNAs were identified, three of which were differentially regulated. Target genes regulated by those microRNAs are elements of zinc homeostasis such as ZRT1, ZRT3 and COT1 transporters. Transcription factors that have zinc in their structure are also targets of those miRNAs. Transcriptional and proteomic data suggest that P. brasiliensis undergoes metabolic remodeling to survive zinc deprivation and that miRNAs may be part of the regulatory process

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were reduced, alkylated and trypsinized. All obtained peptides were suspended in 80 μL of solution containing 20 mM of ammonium formate and 80 fmol/μL of PHB (Rabbit Phosphorylase B; Waters Corporation); MassPREPTM protein) as an internal standard. The peptide mixtures were subjected to shotgun proteomics in a nanoUPLC coupled to a mass spectrometry system. The peptides were subjected to 2D RP/RP chromatography in line with a Synapt G1 qToF mass spectrometer. The MS spectra were obtained in a Data independent acquisition mode. For lock mass correction, [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (100 fmol/ml in 50% V/V water and acetonitrile, 0.1% V/V formic acid) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled every 30 s

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from NanoUPLC-MSE were processed and searched using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) version 3.0 (Waters Corp). Protein identifications and quantitative data packaging were performed using dedicated algorithms and a search against the Paracoccidioides database. The ion detection, clustering, and log-scale parametric normalizations were performed in PLGS with an ExpressionE license installed (Waters, Manchester, UK). The intensity measurements were typically adjusted for these components, i.e., the deisotoped and charge state reduced EMRTs that were replicated throughout the entire experiment for the analysis at the EMRT cluster level. STY phosphorylations and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was used as fixed modification. Components were typically clustered with a 10 ppm mass precision and a 0.25 min time tolerance against the database-generated theoretical peptide ion masses with a minimum of one matched peptide. The alignment of elevated-energy ions with low-energy precursor peptide ions was performed with an approximate precision of 0.05 min. One missed cleavage site was allowed. The precursor and fragmention tolerances were determined automatically. The protein identification criteria also included the detection of at least three fragment ions per peptide, 7 fragments per protein and the determination of at least one peptide per protein. The maximum protein mass was set to 600 kDa and trypsin was chosen as the primary digest reagent. The identification of the protein was allowed with a maximum 4% false positive discovery rate in at least two out of three technical replicate injections.

### Publication Abstract
Zinc is one of the main micronutrients for all organisms. One of the defense mechanisms used by the host includes the sequestration of metals used in fungal metabolism, such as iron and zinc. There are several mechanisms that maintain the balance in the intracellular zinc supply. MicroRNAs are effector molecules of responses between the pathogen and host, favoring or preventing infection in many microorganisms. Fungi of the <i>Paracoccidioides</i> genus are thermodimorphic and the etiological agents of paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM). In the current pandemic scenario world mycosis studies continue to be highly important since a significant number of patients with COVID-19 developed systemic mycoses, co-infections that complicated their clinical condition. The objective was to identify transcriptomic and proteomic adaptations in <i>Paracoccidioides brasiliensis</i> during zinc deprivation. Nineteen microRNAs were identified, three of which were differentially regulated. Target genes regulated by those microRNAs are elements of zinc homeostasis such as ZRT1, ZRT3 and COT1 transporters. Transcription factors that have zinc in their structure are also targets of those miRNAs. Transcriptional and proteomic data suggest that <i>P. brasiliensis</i> undergoes metabolic remodeling to survive zinc deprivation and that miRNAs may be part of the regulatory process.

### Keywords
Zinc; mirna; proteomics; transcriptomics

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Goiás

### Submitter
Alexandre Bailao

### Lab Head
Dr Célia Maria de Almeida Soares
Universidade Federal de Goiás


