### Accession
PXD035183

### Title
LiP-MS on HEK293 lysate treated with rapamycin

### Description
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a structural proteomics technique that can be used to identify the targets of small molecules. This is achieved by incubating lysate with the drug of interest, which induces structural changes such as occupation of the binding site or changes and protein-protein interactions. This is followed by a limited proteolysis step in which the unspecific protease proteinase K is added to the treated lysate. The protease preferentially cleaves accessible and flexible regions of the proteins, thus generating peptides that reflect the changes in surface accessibility caused by the treatment with the small molecule. Here we treated HEK293 cell lysate with rapamycin and identify the known main target FKBP1A. This data is intended to be used as a model dataset for LiP-MS data evaluation and was created as part of the IMI EUbOPEN project.

### Sample Protocol
A HEK293 cell pellet from a 10-cm dish was lysed in native conditions. The lysate was diluted to 2 µg/µl. In quadruplicates, a final concentration of 10 µM of rapamycin or DMSO was added to the sample for 5 minutes. This was followed by a 5 minute limited proteolysis step in which proteinase K was added. The samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin in denaturing conditions. The peptides were desalted using a C18 resin and measured using SWATH-MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 System. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 3% to 30% acetonitrile in water over the course of 120 minutes. The MS spectra were acquired at an Orbitrap resolution of 120’000 between 350 m/z and 1150 m/z. The normalized ACG target was set to 200% or 264 ms maximum injection time. Subsequently, 41 MS/MS spectra with an Orbitrap resolution of 30’000 were acquired after HCD with a normalized collision energy of 30% with a normalized ACG target of 200% or maximum injection time of 66 ms between 350 m/z and 1150 m/z with variable window size.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was uploaded to the commercial software Spectronaut v. 15. The directDIA feature was used to search the data. Factory settings were used, except that the Minor grouping in the Quantification Settings was set to Precursor, and in the Post analysis Settings the Differential abundance grouping was set to Minor group. The data are intended to be further processed, for example using the R package protti.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Structural proteomics, Target deconvolution, Lip-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Viviane Reber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


