### Accession
PXD039710

### Title
The CD58:CD2 axis is co-regulated with PD-L1 via CMTM6 and shapes anti-tumor immunity

### Description
The cell-autonomous balance of immune-inhibitory and -stimulatory signals is a critical process in cancer immune evasion. Using patient-derived co-cultures, humanized mouse models, and single cell RNA-sequencing of patient melanomas biopsied before and on immune checkpoint blockade, we find that intact cancer-cell-intrinsic expression of CD58 and ligation to CD2 is required for anti-tumor immunity and is predictive of treatment response. Defects in this axis promote immune evasion through diminished T cell activation, impaired intratumoral T cell infiltration and proliferation, and concurrently increased PD-L1 protein stabilization. Through CRISPR-Cas9 and proteomics screens, we identify and validate CMTM6 as critical for CD58 maintenance and upregulation of PD-L1 upon CD58 loss. Competition by CD58 and PD-L1 for CMTM6 (via both extracellular loop domains) determines their rate of endosomal recycling over lysosomal degradation. Overall, we describe an underappreciated yet critical axis of cancer immunity and provide a molecular basis for how cancer cells balance immune inhibitory and stimulatory cues.

### Sample Protocol
For each IP, 5 million melanoma cells were stimulated with or without 10 ng/ml IFN-ɣ for 72 h and detached using 0.05% Trypsin and pelleted. Cells were then lysed in 1% digitonin lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% digitonin, 10X HaltTM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo)) for 30 min at 4 ºC with rotation and then spun at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatant was collected and lysates were then diluted 2X to 0.5% digitonin. Lysates were incubated with 2 µg anti-CMTM6 antibody (Sigma) for 3 h at 4 ºC with rotation. Antigen-antibody mixtures were then used to resuspend 10 µL cleared Protein A Dynabeads (Thermo) and incubated for 2 h at 4 ºC with rotation. Samples were washed 4 times on a DynaMagTM-2 (Thermo) with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% digitonin). Samples were then  flash frozen on dry ice for MS analysis. Three replicates were independently prepared of CD58 and IgG control pulldowns. Proteins bound to magnetic beads were washed five times with 200 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM TECP (RT, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (RT, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 5 mM DTT (RT, 15 min). Proteins bound on beads were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 µg of trypsin/LysC mix. The next day, digested peptides were collected in a new microfuge tube and digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA (final v/v), and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. Cleared digested peptides were desalted on SDB-RP Stage-Tip and dried in a speed-vac. Peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated within 80 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (25 cm x 75µm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks). Mobile phases A and B were with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2 to 23% within 70 min, followed by an increase to 35% within 10 min and a further increase to 80% before re-equilibration. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V·s/cm2, End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 200°C, PASEF settings: 10 MSMS Frames (1.16 seconds duty cycle), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 59 eV. A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions.

### Data Protocol
Acquired PASEF raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant environment v.2.0.1.0 and Andromeda for database searches at default settings with a few modifications. The default is used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance (20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively). MaxQuant was set up to search with the reference human proteome database downloaded from UniProt. MaxQuant performed the search trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide, site, and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were all set to 1% with a minimum of 1 peptide needed for identification; label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. The following modifications were used for protein identification and quantification: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) on asparagine and glutamine were set as a variable modification. Results obtained from MaxQuant, were imported into Perseus v.1.6.15.0 for t-test statistical analysis (FDR<0.05) to identify proteins demonstrating statistically significant changes in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The cell-autonomous balance of immune-inhibitory and -stimulatory signals is a critical process in cancer immune evasion. Using patient-derived co-cultures, humanized mouse models, and single-cell RNA-sequencing of patient melanomas biopsied before and on immune checkpoint blockade, we find that intact cancer cell-intrinsic expression of CD58 and ligation to CD2 is required for anti-tumor immunity and is predictive of treatment response. Defects in this axis promote immune evasion through diminished T&#xa0;cell activation, impaired intratumoral T&#xa0;cell infiltration and proliferation, and concurrently increased PD-L1 protein stabilization. Through CRISPR-Cas9 and proteomics screens, we identify and validate CMTM6 as critical for CD58 stability and upregulation of PD-L1 upon CD58 loss. Competition between CD58 and PD-L1 for CMTM6 binding determines their rate of endosomal recycling over lysosomal degradation. Overall, we describe an underappreciated yet critical axis of cancer immunity and provide a molecular basis for how cancer cells balance immune inhibitory and stimulatory cues.

### Keywords
Human, Melanoma, Cd58

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Columbia University

### Submitter
Patricia Ho

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Izar
Department of Medicine, Columbia University


