### Accession
PXD026433

### Title
Crosslinking mass spectrometry unveils novel interactions and structural distinctions in the model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
Interactomics is an emerging field that seeks to identify both transient and complex-bound protein interactions that are essential for metabolic functions. Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has enabled untargeted global analysis of these protein networks, permitting largescale simultaneous analysis of protein structure and interactions. Increased commercial availability of highly specific, cell permeable crosslinkers has propelled the study of these critical interactions forward, with the development of MS-cleavable crosslinkers further increasing confidence in identifications. Herein, the global interactome of the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was analyzed via XL-MS by implementing the MS-cleavable disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) crosslinker and enriching for crosslinks using strong cation exchange chromatography. Gentle lysis via repeated freeze-thaw cycles facilitated in vitro analysis of 157 protein-protein interactions throughout the C. reinhardtii proteome. These data confirmed known protein relationships across the cytosol and chloroplast, including coverage on 42% and 38% of the small and large ribosomal subunits, respectively. Additionally, several crosslinks point to novel associations between proteins, including the identification of a previously uncharacterized Mg-chelatase associated protein (Cre11.g477733.t1.2) bound to five distinct lysines on Mg-chelatase (Cre06.g306300.t1.2). These data establish a framework of protein-protein interactions that can be further explored to facilitate understanding of the dynamic protein landscape in C. reinhardtii.

### Sample Protocol
Three frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice before combining and adding 10 mL of 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.8 containing 30 mM sodium chloride, 1.5 mM magnesium chloride, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, and 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basal, Switzerland). Soft lysis via five rounds of freeze-thaw at -80 °C for 60 min was performed to ensure the extraction of intact protein interactions. Cellular debris was cleared by centrifugation at 3,200 g for 20 min at 4 °C before protein concentrations were estimated using the CB-X assay (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A 50 mM stock solution of disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) in DMSO was prepared and added to 3 mg of protein lysate at a working concentration of 2 mM. Samples were incubated with end-over-end rotation for 30 min at RT, before quenching the crosslinking reaction with 20 mM Tris, pH 8 for 30 min at RT.  Crosslinked proteins were precipitated with 5x cold acetone and centrifuged at 3200 g and 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was removed and proteins were resuspended in 200 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 containing 8 M urea. Samples were reduced and alkylated simultaneously using 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were diluted four-fold to 2 M urea with additional 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 before digestion was performed with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 16 h using a protease:protein ratio of 1:50. Samples were desalted with 100 mg/1.0 mL Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) using a 24-position vacuum manifold (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at a flow rate of 1 drop/s. Resin was first pre-eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before equilibration with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. Samples were acidified to pH < 3 using 10% TFA, loaded onto the cartridges in two passes, and then washed using 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 200 μL of 10 mM potassium phosphate monobasic, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7. The crosslinked peptides were fractionated with strong cation exchange chromatography using a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC equipped with a UV-vis detector (220 nm) (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) following the method described in Makepeace et al. Mobile phase A consisted of 10 mM potassium phosphate monobasic, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7, mobile phase B was 10 mM potassium phosphate monobasic, 250 mM potassium chloride, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7, and mobile phase C was 10 mM potassium phosphate monobasic, 600 mM potassium chloride, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7. Peptides were fractionated on a PolySulfoethyl A column (100 mm x 4.6 mm, 3 μm particles; PolyLC) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phases B and C at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. After 10 min of 100% mobile phase A, mobile phase B increased from 0% to 15% in 9.3 min, where it was held for 8.7 min before ramping to 30% in 8 min, where it was held for 11 min and then ramping to 100% in 5 min, where it was held for 5 min. After, mobile phase C increased from 0% to 100% in 5 min before returning to 100% mobile phase A in 5 min and re-equilibrating for 25 min. After 10 min into the gradient, fractions were collected every 1 min. These were desalted, concentrated under vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 15 μL of 0.1% TFA. Fractions were analyzed using an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Injections (4 μL) were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5μm, 180μm x 20 mm;  Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B increased from 5% to 35% in 90 min before ramping to 85% in 5 min, where it was held for 10 min before returning to 5% in 2 min and re-equilibrating for 13 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectral files (*.raw) from the 61 fractions were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v.2.5 with the incorporated XLinkX nodes and searched against the Joint Genome Institute’s v.5.6 database (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/info/Creinhardtii_v5_6, 19,523 entries, accessed 02/2020) appended with the NCBI chloroplast and mitochondrial databases (chloroplastic-NCBI: BK000554; mitochondrial-NCBI: NC_001638.1; 77 entries, accessed 02/2020) and sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries, accessed 02/2020). For crosslinked peptides, target-decoy searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation. Detailed settings for Proteome Discoverer nodes are found in Supplemental Information 1.  Protein structure modeling was achieved through SWISS-MODEL. Protein-protein interactions were modeled using the PatchDock molecular docking algorithm and visualized using iCn3D. Mapping of detected interlinks was performed using xiNET. An interactive version of Figure 1A/B can be found at https://xiview.org/xi3/network.php?upload=7177-49437-52030-64813-72671&FmanualMode=1&FfdrMode=0&Flinears=0&Fmonolinks=1&Fcrosslinks=1&FbetweenLinks=1&FselfLinks=1&FhomomultimericLinks=1&Fambig=0&FaaApart=0&FpepLength=1&Fpass=1&Ffail=0&Fdecoys=0&FdistanceUndef=1&FfdrThreshold=0.05&FinterFdrCut=&FintraFdrCut=&FmultipleGroup=1&FpepSeq=&FprotNames=&FprotDesc=&FprotPDB=0&FrunName=&FscanNumber=&FurpPpi=1&FA=&FB=&FC=&FQ=&FmatchScoreCutoff=%5B0,0%5D&FsearchGroups=%5B%22'NA'%22%5D&FdistanceCutoff=%5Bnull,null%5D. XlinkDB 3.0 was used to automatically calculate Euclidean distances of intralinks that were mapped onto homology models generated by the Integrative Modeling Platform. Intralinks that were mapped onto homology models were visualized using NGL Viewer. Detected crosslinks from this study are publicly available on the XLinkDB 3.0 database using the filename “Crcrosslinking_Lesliehicks”.

### Publication Abstract
Interactomics is an emerging field that seeks to identify both transient and complex-bound protein interactions that are essential for metabolic functions. Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has enabled untargeted global analysis of these protein networks, permitting largescale simultaneous analysis of protein structure and interactions. Increased commercial availability of highly specific, cell permeable crosslinkers has propelled the study of these critical interactions forward, with the development of MS-cleavable crosslinkers further increasing confidence in identifications. Herein, the global interactome of the unicellular alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> was analyzed <i>via</i> XL-MS by implementing the MS-cleavable disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) crosslinker and enriching for crosslinks using strong cation exchange chromatography. Gentle lysis <i>via</i> repeated freeze-thaw cycles facilitated <i>in vitro</i> analysis of 157 protein-protein crosslinks (interlinks) and 612 peptides linked to peptides of the same protein (intralinks) at 1% FDR throughout the <i>C. reinhardtii</i> proteome. The interlinks confirmed known protein relationships across the cytosol and chloroplast, including coverage on 42% and 38% of the small and large ribosomal subunits, respectively. Of the 157 identified interlinks, 92% represent the first empirical evidence of interaction observed in <i>C. reinhardtii.</i> Several of these crosslinks point to novel associations between proteins, including the identification of a previously uncharacterized Mg-chelatase associated protein (Cre11.g477733.t1.2) bound to seven distinct lysines on Mg-chelatase (Cre06.g306300.t1.2). Additionally, the observed intralinks facilitated characterization of novel protein structures across the <i>C. reinhardtii</i> proteome. Together, these data establish a framework of protein-protein interactions that can be further explored to facilitate understanding of the dynamic protein landscape in <i>C. reinhardtii</i>.

### Keywords
Interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Photosynthesis, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


