### Accession
PXD023290

### Title
In gel trypsin digested 1 D resolved bands of freeze-dried camel milk

### Description
Demand for camel milk (CM) is increasing worldwide, due to its high nutritious value and health benefits. In this study, whole CM powders were produced by spray drying (SD) at six inlet temperatures (190°C - 250°C) and by freeze drying (FD). Physicochemical and functional properties of CM powder proteins were investigated. Both treatments had negative effect on casein solubility, while whey proteins remained soluble and slightly increased its solubility with the extent of MR. The CM powders obtained at higher inlet temperatures demonstrated improved antioxidant activity. Secondary structure of whey proteins did not differ among the samples, while surface hydrophobicity of whey proteins was higher in all SD than in FD samples, suggesting only limited denaturation of camel whey proteins at higher inlet temperatures of drying. Thus, the effects of SD under the conditions applied in our study did not decrease camel whey protein solubility, while drying procedure itself regardless of temperature decreased solubility of camel milk caseins. This study provides useful insights for optimization of CM powder production.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble protein fractions (20μg/well) were resolved on 14% homemade SDS-polyacrylamide gel under reducing conditions with constant cooling using Hoefer SE600 Electrophoresis unit (Amersham Biosciences). In-gel trypsin digestion of 1D protein bands of FD CM soluble fraction proteins was performed according to protocol previously described (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havlis, Olsen, & Mann, 2006) with trypsin to sample mass ratio of 1:30 and 18 h long incubation with the single initial trypsin addition (Sigma MS grade trypsin (T6567-5X20UG). Following trypsin digest in approximate volumes of 10-30 ul were cleaned by zip tips (HyperSep C18, 16209-09, ThermoFisher) and subjected to nL/MS/MS analysis without further processing.

### Data Protocol
Identification of camel milk soluble fraction proteins from tryptic, semi tryptic and non-tryptic peptides was performed with the LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer and EASY- nLC II system in positive DDA mode with Top ten peptides method and 4 ul of tryptic digest was loaded with approximate quantity range of peptides from 100-500 ng per run (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). Separation of peptides was achieved with an EASYPrecolumn (C18-A1), 2 cm, internal diameter (ID) 100 um with 5 um particle size and an EASY-Column, 10 cm, ID 75 um with 3 um particle size. Eluent A was a 0.1% aqueous solution of formic acid and eluent B was 0.1% of formic acid in 98% acetonitrile/H2O. The linear gradient was from 5% to 95% of solvent B (70 min), with a flow rate of 300 nl/min, in 100 min of total run time. The spray voltage was set at 1.8 kV, the capillary voltage at 6 V and the capillary temperature to 250 ◦C.  For fragmentation, a collision-induced dissociation was performed with collision gas normalized energy of 35% and duration of 30 ms. Data acquisition was performed using the Xcalibur (version 2.1) software. PEAKS Studio 8.5 software program was used in data analyses (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Briefly, signature MS/MS spectra were searched using PEAKS DB algorithm against a database consisting of a UniProtKB (tremble and reviewed) genus Camelus database (taxon identifier 9836, downloaded on August 17, 2018 from http://www.uniprot.org/ with more than 20 000 entries in tremble and Sprot sections) and contamination database cRAP (the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, downloaded on October 18, 2016 from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Oxidation (Met) and deamidation (Gln,153 Asn) were considered as variables, with carbamidomethylation (Cys) set as fixed in the PEAKS154 DB algorithm. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages with non-specific cleavages at both ends of a peptide were allowed. Mass tolerances were set to ± 10 ppm for parent ions and ± 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Protein filters were as follows: protein −10 log P ≥ 20, proteins unique peptides ≥ 1, including significant peptides. The resulting false discovery rate of the peptide sequence and protein identification was lower than 1%, and de novo alignment local confidence score was ≥ 60%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soluble camel milk protein fraction of lyophilized camel milk, 1 d gel bands in reducing condition of camel milk powder

### Affiliations
Tanja Ćirković Velicković, PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member of Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea
Senior Research Associate at University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences

### Submitter
Katarina Smiljanic

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja D. Cirkovic Velickovic
Tanja Ćirković Velicković, PhD Professor of Biochemistry & Corresponding member of Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences and Department of Biochemistry, Studentski trg 12-16, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Professor of Food Chemistry Department of Environmental Technology, Food Technology and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University Global Campus, Yeonsu-Gu, 21985 Incheon, Republic of Korea


