### Accession
PXD044175

### Title
Secretomics of sponge whole-body collapse

### Description
Sponges (Porifera) are early-branching Metazoa who do not posess muscles or neurons, however are able to undergo a whole-body movement that involves the closure of their canal system and collapse of an epithelial tent. In this study we profile proteomic responses of the freshwater sponge Spongilla lacustris during agitation induced movements to elucidate the early evolution of coordination. Results from Thermal Proteome Profiling (TPP) experiments of agitated sponges suggest active secretion during the movement. Here, we use tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based quantification of proteins in the medium to systematically measure quantitative differences of secretion before and after agitation induced movement. In total, 146 proteins were detected in the medium, 47 of which were significantly upregulated during the movement.

### Sample Protocol
6 x 25 Spongilla lacustris gemmules were plated in 20 mL M-Medium (1 mM CaCl2 x 6 H2O, 0.5 mM MgSO4 x 7 H2O, 0.5 mM NaHCO3, 0.05 mM KCl, 0.25 mM Na2SiO3) (in 55 mm culture dishes) and kept at 18°C in the dark until usage. The medium in all plates was discarded and 500 uL of fresh filtered lake water was added. For the controls (3 replicates), the water was transferred to 1.5 mL reaction cups. Three plates were agitated (5 min, 500 rpm) and the medium was transferred to reaction cups afterwards. All samples were incubated at 70 °C for 20 min to inhibit protein degradation. Samples were dried in a concentrator at 30 °C and kept at - 20 °C for further processing. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin/Lys-C with the SP3 protocol . Peptides were labeled with TMT6plex.  Online fractionation was done on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5 mm, 300 mm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 A˚) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 mm x 50 cm C18, 3 mm, 100 A˚). Solvent A 99.9% LC-MS grade water (Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 99.9% acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid. Flow rate loading 30ul/min, separation at 0.3ml/min. Pico-Tip Emitter 360 mm OD x 20 mm ID; 10 mm tip (New Objective). Gradient (60 min): 2% to 4% B in 4 min, from 4% to 8% in 2 min, 8% to 28% in 42 min, and from 28% to 40% in another 4 min. A column cleaning step using 80% B for 4 min was applied before the system was set again to its initial conditions (2% B) for re-equilibration for 4 minutes. MS equipment: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray-Flex ion source. MS settings (Spray voltage: 2.4 kV, Capillary temperature: 275 ˚C, Full scan mass range 375-1500 m/z, MS1 Orbitrap resolution: 60000, MS1 Maximum IT: 50 ms, MS1 AGC target: 4e5, MS2 resolution: 15000, MS2 AGC target: 1e5, MS2 maximum IT: 54 ms, MS2 isolation window: 0.7, MS2 fixed first mass: 110, MS2 nCE: 36, MS2 dynamic exclusion: 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were converted to mzmL format using MSConvert from Proteowizard, using peak picking from the vendor algorithm and keeping the 300 most intense peaks. Files were then searched using MSFragger v3.4 and philosopher (4.2.1) in Fragpipe v17.1 against the custom Spongilla lacustris proteome (proteins with minimal length of 70 aa identified from transcriptome with TransDecoder (version 3.0.1)) including known contaminants and the reversed protein sequences. For the semi-tryptic search the number of enzyme termini was set to 1, whereas for tryptic search this was set to 2. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT6plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT6plex on peptide N-termini.  The raw output files of FragPipe(protein.tsv – files) were processed using the R programming language. Contaminants were filtered out and only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. For the detection of potential secreted biologically active peptides, we also considered proteins that were quantified with one unique peptide. Log2 transformed raw TMT reporter ion intensities were first cleaned for batch effects using the ‘removeBatchEffects’ function of the limma package and further normalized using the vsn package (variance stabilization normalization). Proteins were tested for differential detection using the limma package. The replicate information was added as a factor in the design matrix given as an argument to the ‘lmFit’ function of limma. A protein was annotated as a hit with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100 % and as a candidate with a fdr below 20 % and a fold-change of at least 50 %.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark of animals is the coordination of whole-body movement. Neurons and muscles are central to this, yet coordinated movements also exist in sponges that lack these cell types. Sponges are sessile animals with a complex canal system for filter-feeding. They undergo whole-body movements resembling "contractions" that lead to canal closure and water expulsion. Here, we combine live 3D optical coherence microscopy, pharmacology, and functional proteomics to elucidate the sequence and detail of shape changes, the tissues and molecular physiology involved, and the control of these movements. Morphometric analysis and targeted perturbation suggest that the movement is driven by the relaxation of actomyosin stress fibers in epithelial canal cells, which leads to whole-body deflation via collapse of the incurrent and expansion of the excurrent canal system. Thermal proteome profiling and quantitative phosphoproteomics confirm the control of cellular relaxation by an Akt/NO/PKG/PKA pathway. Agitation-induced deflation leads to differential phosphorylation of proteins forming epithelial cell junctions, implying their mechanosensitive role. Unexpectedly, untargeted metabolomics detect a concomitant decrease in antioxidant molecules during deflation, reflecting an increase in reactive oxygen species. Together with the secretion of proteinases, cytokines, and granulin, this indicates an inflammation-like state of the deflating sponge reminiscent of vascular endothelial cells experiencing oscillatory shear stress. These results suggest the conservation of an ancient relaxant-inflammatory response of perturbed fluid-carrying systems in animals and offer a possible mechanism for whole-body coordination through diffusible paracrine signals and mechanotransduction.

### Keywords
Secretomics, Evolution, Inflammation, Spongilla

### Affiliations
EMBL
Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Detlev Arendt
Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.


