### Accession
PXD023266

### Title
Proteomic characterization of SGBS cells

### Description
In this study, SGBS preadipocytes were differentiated for 12 days into mature preadipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were differentiated for 12 days in a 6 well plate in quintuplets. Cells were harvested from each well using 100 µL lysis buffer with 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and freshly added protease inhibitor in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was determined using Pierce assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All samples were analyzed on a nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a chip-based ESI source (Nanomate, Advion,). Peptides (10 µg) were trapped on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 2μm, 75μm×5cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a reversed-phase C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 3μm, 75μm × 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #164569) by using a non-linear gradient of 180 min.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10. The database search was performed against the UniprotKB/Swissprot protein database of Homo sapiens (06 March 2019, only reviewed entries). False discovery rates for peptides and proteins were set to 1 %, and a maximum of two tryptic missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, and additionally, oxidation (Met) and acetylation (protein N-termini) were used as variable modifications. Proteins with at least two identified peptides were kept and protein quantification was based on the intensities of the top three identified peptides. Obtained data were Log2-transformed and median-normalized before calculation of p-values, which were adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg. These steps were conducted with R-3.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
Bisphenol A (BPA), which is used in a variety of consumer-related plastic products, was reported to cause adverse effects, including disruption of adipocyte differentiation, interference with obesity mechanisms, and impairment of insulin- and glucose homeostasis. Substitute compounds are increasingly emerging but are not sufficiently investigated.We aimed to investigate the mode of action of BPA and four of its substitutes during the differentiation of human preadipocytes to adipocytes and their molecular interaction with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b3; (PPAR&#x3b3;), a pivotal regulator of adipogenesis.Binding and effective biological activation of PPAR&#x3b3; were investigated by surface plasmon resonance and reporter gene assay, respectively. Human preadipocytes were continuously exposed to BPA, BPS, BPB, BPF, BPAF, and the PPAR&#x3b3;-antagonist GW9662. After 12&#xa0;days of differentiation, lipid production was quantified via Oil Red O staining, and global protein profiles were assessed using LC-MS/MS-based proteomics. All tested bisphenols bound to human PPAR&#x3b3; with similar efficacy as the natural ligand 15d-PGJ2in vitroand provoked an antagonistic effect on PPAR&#x3b3; in the reporter gene assay at non-cytotoxic concentrations. During the differentiation of human preadipocytes, all bisphenols decreased lipid production. Global proteomics displayed a down-regulation of adipogenesis and metabolic pathways, similar to GW9662. Interestingly, pro-inflammatory pathways were up-regulated, MCP1 release was increased, and adiponectin decreased. pAKT/AKT ratios revealed significantly reduced insulin sensitivity by BPA, BPB, and BPS upon insulin stimulation.Thus, our results show that not only BPA but also its substitutes disrupt crucial metabolic functions and insulin signaling in adipocytes under low, environmentally relevant concentrations. This effect, mediated through inhibition of PPAR&#x3b3;, may promote hypertrophy of adipose tissue and increase the risk of developing metabolic syndrome, including insulin resistance.

### Keywords
Sgbs cells, Proteomics, Adipocytes, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Phd Student
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Laura Krieg

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


