### Accession
PXD022684

### Title
Proteomic analysis of FPA interactors

### Description
Genes involved in disease resistance are some of the fastest evolving and most diverse components of genomes. Large numbers of nucleotide-binding, leucine-rich repeat receptor genes (NLRs) are found in plant genomes and provide disease resistance. However, NLRs can trigger autoimmunity, disrupt beneficial microbiota or reduce fitness. It is therefore crucial to understand how NLRs are controlled. Here we show that the RNA-binding protein FPA mediates widespread premature cleavage and polyadenylation of NLR transcripts, controlling their functional expression and impacting immunity. Using long-read nanopore direct RNA sequencing we resolved the complexity of NLR transcript processing and gene annotation. Our results uncover a co-transcriptional layer of NLR control with implications for understanding the regulatory and evolutionary dynamics of NLRs in immunity.

### Sample Protocol
14-day-old seedlings were harvested and cross-linked with 1 % (v/v) formaldehyde for 15 min under vacuum. The cross-linking reaction was stopped by the addition of glycine to a final concentration of 0.125 M under vacuum for a further 5 min. Nuclei were isolated from frozen ground plant tissue using Honda buffer (20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, 440 mM sucrose, 1.25 % (w/v) Ficoll, 2.5 % (w/v) Dextran T40, 0.5 % (v/v) Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1% (v/v) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Sigma]) and collected by centrifugation at 2,000g for 17 min at 4°C. Nuclei were washed twice with Honda buffer (centrifugation at 1,500g for 15 min at 4°C between washes) and lysed in nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10 mM EDTA, 1 % (w/v) SDS, 1 mM PMSF, 1 % (v/v) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) by sonication for 4 cycles of 30 s pulses with low power and 60 s cooling between pulses using the Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode). Following centrifugation (16,100g for 10 min at 4°C), the supernatant was diluted ten-fold with sample dilution buffer (16.7 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 167 mM NaCl, 1.1 % (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 % (v/v) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Cross-linked protein complexes were isolated with GFP-trap agarose beads (Chromotek), incubated at 4°C with constant rotation for 5 h, followed by centrifugation (141g for 3 min at 4°C). Beads were washed three times with washing buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 2 mM EDTA pH 8, 1 % (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 1 mM PMSF) by centrifugations between washes (400g for 3 min at 4°C). Samples were incubated at 90°C for 30 min to reverse cross-linking prior to SDS-PAGE. Each biological replicate was separated into 5 fractions following SDS-PAGE, then subjected to in- gel digestion with trypsin and submitted for mass spectrometry analysis (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific)). Three biological replicates were performed for each genotype.

### Data Protocol
Raw peptide data files from mass spectrometry were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43). Peptide tables were then loaded using Proteus (version 0.2.14) and summarised to protein level counts using the hi-flyer method (mean of the top 3 most abundant peptides).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription, Arabidopsis, Fpa, Rna processing

### Affiliations
The University of Dundee

### Submitter
Matthew Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Gordon Simpson
The University of Dundee


