### Accession
PXD031827

### Title
Cross-link mass spectrometry reveals conformational changes within the N lobe and the activation loop of PDK1 upon dimerization

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry analysis of the PDK1 kinase domain dimer that undergoes trans-autophosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking of PDK1SKD-PIF S241A with the zero-length crosslinker EDC was performed in 40 mM MES pH 6.5, 100 mM NaCl. 10 µM protein was first incubated with 1 mM ATP and 2 mM MgCl2 for 30 min, then mixed with 2 mM EDC, 5 mM Sulfo-NHS and incubated for 1h at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 20 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 15 min at RT.  Crosslinking of PDK1LKD S241A with the homobifunctional bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) crosslinker was performed in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl. 60 µM protein was first incubated with 1 mM ATP and 2 mM MgCl2 for 30 min. Then 600 µM mM BS3 was added and the mix was incubated for 1h at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 70 mM Tris pH 7.5.  For both crosslinking reactions, cross-linked monomer and dimer species were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Gel bands were excised, cut up, and destained with acetonitrile (ACN) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC).  Before each of the following reaction steps, gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC and dehydrated in 100% ACN in order to facilitate the uptake of the solutions. Disulfide bridges were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ABC for 30 min at 56 °C. Subsequently the free thiols were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC in the dark (30 min at RT). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 10 l of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and petides were extracted by sonication with 5% FA, 50% ACN. The samples were dried in the vacuum centrifuge and taken up in 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid, 2% ACN. Peptide samples were injected on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system, set up with a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm). Peptides were separated on the C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm; all HPLC parts Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a linear gradient from 2 to 40% of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA; solvent A 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 120 minutes.  EDC-XL samples peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the data-dependent mode, survey scans were acquired in the m/z range of 350–1550 at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z, with lock mass on. The AGC target value was set to 4E5 with a maximal injection time of 50 ms. The 15 most intense ions were selected within an isolation width of 1.2 Thomson for maximal 200ms, and then fragmented in the HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 30%. Spectra were recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Only peptides with an assigned charge state between +3 and +6 were selected for fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.  BS3 cross-linked samples were analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 300-1700 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, for maximal 250 ms at a target value of 2E5, and then fragmented in the HCD cell by stepping the collision energy from 27 to 33 %. Spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge between +3 and +7 were selected for fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to preferred, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package, version 1.6.0.16 respect.  2.0.3.0 was used to identify the most abundant protein hits searching against the sequence of the PDK1 chimera protein, the proteome of Bombyx mori and Spodoptera from uniprot (2019.01UP000005204_7091_Bombyx_mori_all.fasta, 2019.09/2021.04_Spodoptera.fasta) and common contaminants. Search settings were set to default values. To identify cross-linked peptides, the spectra were searched against the sequences of the top 10 proteins from the MQ search sorted by iBAQ using pLink software v2.3.9. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The enzyme specificity was set to tryptic allowing 4 missed cleavage sites, and EDC/sulfo-NHS and BS3 were specified according to the cross-linking chemistry. Search results were filtered for 1% FDR (false discovery rate) on the PSM level (peptide-spectrum matches) and a maximum precursor mass deviation of 5 ppm. To remove low quality PSMs, additionally an e-Value cutoff of < 0.001 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) is an essential serine/threonine protein kinase, which plays a crucial role in cell growth and proliferation. It is often referred to as a 'master' kinase due to its ability to activate at least 23 downstream protein kinases implicated in various signaling pathways. In this study, we have elucidated the mechanism of phosphoinositide-driven PDK1 auto-activation. We show that PDK1 trans-autophosphorylation is mediated by a PIP<sub>3</sub>-mediated face-to-face dimer. We report regulatory motifs in the kinase-PH interdomain linker that allosterically activate PDK1 autophosphorylation via a linker-swapped dimer mechanism. Finally, we show that PDK1 is autoinhibited by its PH domain and that positive cooperativity of PIP<sub>3</sub> binding drives switch-like activation of PDK1. These results imply that the PDK1-mediated activation of effector kinases, including Akt, PKC, Sgk, S6K and RSK, many of whom are not directly regulated by phosphoinositides, is also likely to be dependent on PIP<sub>3</sub> or PI(3,4)P<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kinase, Pip3, Dimerization, Pdk1

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A. Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria


