### Accession
PXD021494

### Title
New antiviral small molecule inhibitors disturb interactions between cellular HSP70 and virus proteins

### Description
RNA virus outbreaks such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2), Ebola virus (EBOV) and Zika virus (ZIKV) causing worldwide health emergencies have highlighted the urgent need of new antiviral strategies. Upon outbreaks with new, unmet viruses where knowledge of virus biology is limited, targeting host cell pathways supporting viral replication is an attractive approach for development of antiviral compounds. Here, we present a strategy to identify novel host-targeted small molecule inhibitors using image-based phenotypic antiviral assay followed by characterization of structure-activity-relationship, mechanism-of-action and molecular targets of the novel antiviral compound using thermal proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
TPP-TR. SW-13 cells were seeded into T175 flasks, after 24 h infected with HAZV at MOI 10 for 16 hours and treated with 20 µM TH6744 or vehicle control (0.2% DMSO) for 4 hours in technical duplicates. Cells were washed twice with PBS, harvested by TryplE and collected in PBS. Cells were centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min, re-suspended in 1100 µL PBS containing the compound or DMSO, divided in 10x 100µL aliquots and heated individually for 3 min at temperatures ranging from 37-67 °C using Thermocycler. Thereafter, the cells were freeze-thawed 3 times by using dry ice in 100% Ethanol and a water bath set at 25 °C. Precipitated proteins were separated from soluble proteins by centrifugation at 20’000 g for 40 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were transferred to new microtubes and subjected to in-solution digestion with LysC and Trypsin followed by TMT10 plex labeling, SCX cleanup. Samples were prefractionated using basic revese phase prior to subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. 2D-TPP. U87 cells were seeded into T175 flasks 72 h prior assay to allow cell growth and obtain approximately 80% confluency. Cells were treated with 30 µM, 10 µM, 3 µM, 1 µM TH6744 or DMSO for 1.5 h. Cells were washed twice with PBS containing corresponding compound dose, harvested by TryplE and collected in PBS containing compound. Above protocol for TPP-TR was used here but instead TMTpro was used for isobaric labeling. Samples were prefractionated using HiRIEF prior to subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Each sample was analyzed on a HF Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap connected to a Dionex UHPLC system. The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo) and an analytical column (PepMapRSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm; Thermo). Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 250 nL/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 3-6% solvent B within 3 min, 6-35% solvent B within 117 min, 35–47% solvent B within 5 min, 47-100% solvent B within 5 min and 100% B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 5 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 370 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 60,000), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 250 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–7 using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1 m/z for higher energy collision dissociation HCD fragmentation. Collision energy was set at 34%; resolution = 30.000; Automatic gain control (AGC) target 2e5, maximum injection time 200 ms; dynamic exclusion 15s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using isobarquant and data analsysis was performed according to Nat Protoc 10, 1567–1593 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.101 against the uniprot human reference proteome database (42130 entries) downloaded from uniprot.org on 2016-10-24.

### Publication Abstract
Recent RNA virus outbreaks such as Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and Ebola virus (EBOV) have caused worldwide health emergencies highlighting the urgent need for new antiviral strategies. Targeting host cell pathways supporting viral replication is an attractive approach for development of antiviral compounds, especially with new, unexplored viruses where knowledge of virus biology is limited. Here, we present a strategy to identify host-targeted small molecule inhibitors using an image-based phenotypic antiviral screening assay followed by extensive target identification efforts revealing altered cellular pathways upon antiviral compound treatment. The newly discovered antiviral compounds showed broad-range antiviral activity against pathogenic RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, EBOV and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV). Target identification of the antiviral compounds by thermal protein profiling revealed major effects on proteostasis pathways and disturbance in interactions between cellular HSP70 complex and viral proteins, illustrating the supportive role of HSP70 on many RNA viruses across virus families. Collectively, this strategy identifies new small molecule inhibitors with broad antiviral activity against pathogenic RNA viruses, but also uncovers novel virus biology urgently needed for design of new antiviral therapies.

### Keywords
2d-tpp, Virus proteins, Lc-msms, Tpp, Antiviral compound

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat) (PI)

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat) (PI)


