### Accession
PXD005924

### Title
X!Tandem E. coli large vs small database

### Description
A comparison of the performance when using X!Tandem with a 1) large, exhaustive, reference database; and 2) small, specialized, database.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial lysates were injected into the LPI Hexalane FlowCell (Nanoxis Consulting AB, www.nanoxisconsulting.com; Patent Application No. WO2006068619), using a pipette to add 70 μl to ﬁll the FlowCell channel. Bacterial proteins in cell lysates were immobilized to the FlowCell membrane, with a 1-hour incubation at room temperature, to allow attachment. The FlowCell channels with bound proteins were washed with 400 µL of ammonium bicarbonate, using a syringe pump at a ﬂow rate of 100 μl/min. Enzymatic digestions of the membrane-bound bacterial proteins were performed by injecting 80 μl of trypsin (2 μg/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH ~8) into the FlowCell channels and incubating for 1 h at room temperature. The generated peptides were eluted by injecting 200 µL ammonium bicarbonate buffer (20 mM, pH ~8) into the FlowCell channels. The eluted peptides were collected at the outlet ports, using a pipette, and transferred into Axygen tubes (2.0 mL). The peptide solutions were incubated at room temperature overnight and subsequently frozen at −20 °C until pending MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
X! Tandem (Vengeance 2015.12.15.2) was used with two different reference databases:  [small]: Escherichia coli K12 (UniProt UP000000625) reference proteome.  4306 protein sequences.  [large]: GenBank NR and HMP reference genome proteomes.  59,349,300 unique protein sequences. Searches were made with the following X! Tandem settings concerning e-value filtering: both minimum expectation values (refinement parameter maximum valid expectation value, output parameter (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/api/omvev.html) at 100,000.0 (effectively disabling E-value filtering), and the output parameter results set to all to include all spectra used in the modelling session (default is to only include results with an expectation value lower than the two limits). All other settings were set as described in the main text.  After running X! Tandem on the samples with the two different databases, peptides were filtered, only allowing peptides with hyperscore >= 30.0 and e-value <1.0 (using convert_tandem_xml_2_fasta.py, available from https://bitbucket.org/chalmersmathbioinformatics/tparty/raw/1dff15ef43ba340ceaa96280302a888c44bdd82e/tparty/convert_tandem_xml_2_fasta.py). After extracting peptide matches from the X! Tandem output files, the peptides from each sample were evaluated with TCUP using the default settings (cf. main text). Hits are considered true positive (TP) hits if TCUP identifies a peptide as discriminative to E. coli at or below the species level, and false positive (FP) hits are defined as peptides that TCUP incorrectly identifies as discriminative to any other organism at or below the species level. Note that the majority of all peptides identified by X! Tandem, even after filtering, are not reported in the taxonomic composition estimation by TCUP at the species level, as a large proportion of peptides in a sample are not discriminative at the species level or below.

### Publication Abstract
Methods for rapid and reliable microbial identification are essential in modern healthcare. The ability to detect and correctly identify pathogenic species and their resistance phenotype is necessary for accurate diagnosis and efficient treatment of infectious diseases. Bottom-up tandem mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics enables rapid characterization of large parts of the expressed genes of microorganisms. However, the generated data are highly fragmented, making downstream analyses complex. Here we present TCUP, a new computational method for typing and characterizing bacteria using proteomics data from bottom-up tandem MS. TCUP compares the generated protein sequence data to reference databases and automatically finds peptides suitable for characterization of taxonomic composition and identification of expressed antimicrobial resistance genes. TCUP was evaluated using several clinically relevant bacterial species (<i>Escherichia coli</i>, <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>, <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis,</i> and <i>Haemophilus influenzae</i>), using both simulated data generated by <i>in silico</i> peptide digestion and experimental proteomics data generated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). The results showed that TCUP performs correct peptide classifications at rates between 90.3 and 98.5% at the species level. The method was also able to estimate the relative abundances of individual species in mixed cultures. Furthermore, TCUP could identify expressed &#x3b2;-lactamases in an extended spectrum &#x3b2;-lactamase-producing (ESBL) <i>E. coli</i> strain, even when the strain was cultivated in the absence of antibiotics. Finally, TCUP is computationally efficient, easy to integrate in existing bioinformatics workflows, and freely available under an open source license for both Windows and Linux environments.

### Keywords
Tandem ms, Database, E. coli

### Affiliations
Center for Translational Microbiome Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
University of Gothenburg, Göteborg

### Submitter
Fredrik Boulund

### Lab Head
Dr Edward R. B. Moore
University of Gothenburg, Göteborg


