### Accession
PXD008128

### Title
Caulobacter crescentus GsrN mutants proteome analysis

### Description
In order to elucidate the global regulatory effects of the sRNA, GsrN, in Caulobacter crescentus, we submitted soluble lysates from a gsrN knockout and over-expression stain for analysis, as well as, a wild-type sample for LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble protein extracted from cultures passaged similarly in the Hydrogen Peroxide/Sucrose assay section; however, harvested cultures were grown to an OD660 0.85-0.90 in 50 mL of M2X during the 16-hour overnight growth in a 30°C shaking incubator. Cells were spun down at 8000g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Cells were resuspended in 6 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer with DNase and RNase. Cells were mechanically lysed in LV1 Microfluidizer. Lysis was then spun down at 8000g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Triplicate Samples were immediately frozen and submitted to the University of Chicago Proteomics Facility.   In brief from the University of Chicago Proteomics Facility, samples were run on a 12% MOPS buffered 1D Gel (Thermo Scientific) and run for 10 minutes at 200V constant. Gel was stained with Imperial Protein stain (Thermo Scientific), and a ~2 cm plug was digested with trypsin. Detailed trypsin digestion and peptide extraction by the facility is published in (Truman et al., 2012).  Facility submiited samples for analysis in an electrospray tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360-2000 Fa, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60s (Truman et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
Raw files of LC-MS/MS runs of LC-MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software suitev1.5.1.2 (Cox et al., 2014). Samples were run against a FASTA file of proteins from the UniProt database (UP000001364) and standard contaminants. The label free quantitation (LFQ) option was turned on. Fixed modification included carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were acetyl or formyl (N-term) and oxidation (M).   Protein groups file were created for three analyses: wild-type against ΔgsrN samples, ΔgsrN against gsrN++ samples, and wild-type against gsrN++ samples. LFQ quantities of each protein group files were compiled and used as estimated protein quantities in our analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caulobacter crescentus gsrn srna

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
University of Chicago, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics

### Submitter
Matthew Tien

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Crosson
University of Chicago, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics


