### Accession
PXD019362

### Title
Towards understandingTissue Mϕ heterogeneity and functions using quantitative proteomics

### Description
Resident macrophages are important for maintaining tissue homeostasis and for defence against infections, but their precise functions in different tissues are not fully elucidated.We have used high resolution quantitative proteomics to investigate the functions of splenic red pulp macrophages and peritoneal cavity macrophages in the steady-state. The validation of several proteins at cellular expression levels by the flow cytometry analysis was consistently in agreement with the proteomics data. Peritoneal macrophages were shown to be enriched in a number of key enzymes and metabolic pathways normally associated with the liver, such as metabolism of fructose, detoxification, nitrogen homeostasis and the urea cycle. Supporting observations in proteomics, we find that PM are able to utilise glutamine and glutamate which are rich in peritoneum for urea generation. In comparison, splenic red pulp macrophages were enriched in proteins important for adaptive immunity such as antigen presenting MHC molecules, in addition to proteins required for erythrocyte homeostasis and iron turnover. We also show that these tissue macrophages may utilise carbon and nitrogen substrates for different metabolic fates to support distinct tissue-specific roles. This study provides a valuable resource for biologists interested in the functions of tissue macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates for PM and 3 biological replicates for SRPM were processed for proteomic analysis. Cell pellets were solubilised in 100 mM Tris HCl containing 4% SDS, and 100 mM DTT in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were processed using the FASP protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with some modifications. After removal of SDS with 8 M urea & alkylation with IAA, Vivacon 500, 10k MWCO HY filters (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, VN01H22) were washed 3 times with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 then another 4 times with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins on the filters were then digested twice at 30oC with trypsin (Pierce) (2 x 2 µg), first overnight and then for another 6 h in a final volume of 200 µl, 100 mM TEAB. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Empore, Agilent technologies) and quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific). Peptides (8 µg for each sample) were dissolved in 200 μL ammonium formate (10 mM, pH 9.5) and fractionated using RP-High pH HPLC.   A  C18 Column from Waters (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 X 150 mm, Ireland) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1X10mm, Waters) are used  on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Scientific). Buffers A and B used for fractionation consist,  respectively of 10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water and 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile.  Both buffers were adjusted to pH 9.5 with ammonia.  Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1 min intervals. Column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% buffer B for 20 min at a constant flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Samples (180 µl) were loaded onto the column at 0.2 ml/min, and separation gradient start 1 min after sample loading onto the column. Peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 2% to 5% buffer B over 6 min and then from 5% to 60% buffer B over 53 min. The column was washed for 16 min in 100% buffer B and equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 20 min as mentioned above. Fraction collection began 1 min after injection and stopped after 80 min (total of 80 fractions, 200 µl each). The total number of fractions concatenated was set to 10 and the content of the fractions was dried and suspended in 50 µl 1% formic acid prior to analysis with LC-MS.  Analysis of peptides was performed on a Velos-Pro (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following:  buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 15 μL of each sample were loaded at 5 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 98% buffer A. The trap column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 124 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 126 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and re-equilibrated in 98% buffer A for 17 min. Fractions (10) from each sample were analysed using LTQ-Orbitap Velos Pro in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800) in the velos orbitrap followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (the threshold value was set at 5000 and the minimum injection time was set at 200 ms) in LTQ with collision induced dissociation (CID). The resolution of the Orbitrap Velos was set at to 60,000. To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs were started.

### Data Protocol
Four biological replicates for PM and 3 biological replicates for splenic red pulp Mϕs were subjected to proteomic analysis. The raw mass spectrometric data were processed, searched and quantified using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and Andromeda as the search engine software (Cox et al., 2011). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin/P, allowing for cleavage of N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation; fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; database: Uniprot - mouse; minimum peptide length, 7; maximum missed cleavages, 2; PSM & Protein false discovery rate, 1%. Default MaxQuant settings included a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions, and a tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions. A reverse database was used to apply a maximum false positive rate of 1% for both peptide and protein identification. This cut-off was applied to individual spectra and whole proteins in the MaxQuant output. The match between runs feature was activated with default settings. For bioinformatic analysis, Perseus software (version 1.5.1.6) was used, all ‘Contaminant’, ‘Reverse’ & ‘Only identified by site’ proteins were removed from the data and the proteomic ruler (Wisniewski et al., 2014)  is used to calculate copy number per cell. Proteins above 2-fold change [log2(2)=1], proteins with nominal p-value less than 0.05 [-log10(0.05)=1.301] were considered as differentially expressed proteins.  All bioinformatics analyses were performed with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox and Mann, 2008;Cox et al., 2011;Tyanova et al., 2016)  and Excel is used for basic data analysis. Pathway analyses were performed using WEB-based Gene SeT AnaLysis Toolkit and bioinformatics tools based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Huang da et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue, Mouse, Lcmsms, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Professor of Glycoimmunology
Research Associate

### Submitter
Manjula Nagala

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paul Crocker
Professor of Glycoimmunology


