### Accession
PXD005026

### Title
A heterochromatin-dependent transcription machinery drives piRNA expression

### Description
Nuclear small RNA pathways safeguard genome integrity by establishing transcription-repressing heterochromatin at transposable elements. This inevitably also targets the transposon-rich source loci of the small RNAs themselves. How small RNA source loci are efficiently transcribed while transposon promoters are potently silenced, is not understood. Here, we show that transcription of Drosophila piRNA clusters—small RNA source loci in animal gonads—is enforced through RNA Polymerase II pre-initiation complex formation within repressive heterochromatin. This is accomplished through the TFIIA-L paralog Moonshiner, which is recruited to piRNA clusters via the Heterochromatin Protein-1 variant Rhino. Moonshiner triggers transcription initiation within piRNA clusters by recruiting the TATA box-binding protein (TBP)-related factor TRF2, an animal TFIID core variant. Thus, transcription of heterochromatic small RNA source loci relies on direct recruitment of the core transcriptional machinery to DNA via histone marks rather than sequence motifs, a concept that we argue is a recurring theme in evolution.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 200 µL ovaries were dissected from well-fed female Drosophila melanogaster flies in which the bait protein was expressed with a triple FLAG tag. The ovaries were homogenized in 1 mL IP Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM Pefabloc, 0.5% NP40) by 25 times douncing with a tight pestle. Lysate were then incubated on ice for 20 minutes and cleared by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 16.000 x g. Cleared lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma, M8823) for 1 hour and washed four times 10 minutes in IP Buffer and six times 30 seconds in Wash Buffer (20 mM HEPES, 2 mM MgCl2; 150 mM NaCl). Samples were then processed by on-bead digest with Lys-C and Glycine protease before they were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin.  The nano HPLC system used was a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 3h gradient, respectively 225 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35%B over the next 180min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for five min and decreases in 5min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1650, nominal resolution of 70 000, target value 3E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy 27%, isolation width of 2 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 s. Additionally, the underfill ratio was set to 20% resulting in an intensity threshold of 4E4. The peptide match feature and the exclude isotopes feature were enabled. The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1650, nominal resolution of 120 000, target value 3E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy 27%, isolation width of 2 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8, >8) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 40 s. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 2E4 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 8E4. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v1.0.0.6186 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84) against the drosophila sequence database called flybase (version dmel_all-translation-r6.06, 22,256 sequences; 20,222,850 residues). The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine and acetylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±30 mmu. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on peptide level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the phosphorylation sites within the peptides was performed with the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Our in-house-developed tool Peakjuggler was used for the peptide and protein quantification (publication in preparation).

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear small RNA pathways safeguard genome integrity by establishing transcription-repressing heterochromatin at transposable elements. This inevitably also targets the transposon-rich source loci of the small RNAs themselves. How small RNA source loci are efficiently transcribed while transposon promoters are potently silenced is not understood. Here we show that, in Drosophila, transcription of PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) clusters-small RNA source loci in animal gonads-is enforced through RNA polymerase II pre-initiation complex formation within repressive heterochromatin. This is accomplished through Moonshiner, a paralogue of a basal transcription factor IIA (TFIIA) subunit, which is recruited to piRNA clusters via the heterochromatin protein-1 variant Rhino. Moonshiner triggers transcription initiation within piRNA clusters by recruiting the TATA-box binding protein (TBP)-related factor TRF2, an animal TFIID core variant. Thus, transcription of heterochromatic small RNA source loci relies on direct recruitment of the core transcriptional machinery to DNA via histone marks rather than sequence motifs, a concept that we argue is a recurring theme in evolution.

### Keywords
Ovary, Transcription, Pirna, Drosophila

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Fabian Brennecke
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria


