### Accession
PXD002622

### Title
A Pilot Proteogenomic Study With Data Integration Identifies MCT1 and GLUT1 as Prognostic Markers in Lung Adenocarcinoma

### Description
We performed a pilot proteogenomic study to compare lung adenocarcinoma to lung squamous cell carcinoma using quantitative proteomics (6-plex TMT) combined with a customized Affymetrix GeneChip. Using MaxQuant software, we identified 51,001 unique peptides that mapped to 7,241 unique proteins and from these identified 6,373 genes with matching protein expression for further analysis. We found a minor correlation between gene expression and protein expression; both datasets were able to independently recapitulate known differences between the adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma subtypes. We found 565 proteins and 629 genes to be differentially expressed between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, with 113 of these consistently differentially expressed at both the gene and protein levels. We then compared our results to published adenocarcinoma versus squamous cell carcinoma proteomic data that we also processed with MaxQuant. We selected two proteins consistently overexpressed in squamous cell carcinoma in all studies, MCT1 (SLC16A1) and GLUT1 (SLC2A1), for further investigation. We found differential expression of these same proteins at the gene level in our study as well as in other public gene expression datasets. These findings combined with survival analysis of public datasets suggest that MCT1 and GLUT1 may be potential prognostic markers in adenocarcinoma and druggable targets in squamous cell carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed on tumor tissues isolated from six individual patients: three diagnosed with lung ADC and three with SCC. To aid tissue lysis, frozen samples were macerated in a tissue pulverizer. The pulverizer was then rinsed with 2 mL water, and each sample transferred to a 2-mL Eppendorf tube to lyse erythrocytes. Samples were centrifuged at 5,000g for 2 min, and the supernatant was removed. Lysis buffer (1.0 mL of 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, supplemented with 2% SDS) was added, and the samples were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. The samples were then heated for 5 min at 99°C and sonicated to reduce viscosity. After centrifugation at 16,000g for 15 min, the supernatant was collected. The protein amount in each sample was determined by using the bicinchoninic protein assay followed by an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation method. Three samples each of ADC and SCC (100 µg of lung tissue lysate) were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 99°C for 5 min and transferred into VIVACON 500 filter units. SDS-containing buffer was removed from the sample by centrifugation and exchanged with 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer. Proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and washed with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Porcine trypsin was used to digest the proteins in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (wt/wt).  The six samples were separately derivatized with 6-plex TMT reagents, according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. The ADC and SCC samples were labeled with TMT 126, 127, 128 and TMT 129, 130, 131, respectively. The labeled tryptic digests were pooled and concentrated by solid-phase extraction (MacroSpin columns 30-300 µg capacity). Samples were basified with 20 mM ammonium formate prior to injection onto a reversed-phase column (150×2.0 mm Gemini®NX-C18 3 µm 110Å) using an Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with ultraviolet detection at 214 nm with solvent A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10, in 5% acetonitrile) and solvent B (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10, in 90% acetonitrile). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 100 µL/min and eluted from the column with a linear gradient from 0% to 70% solvent B. Seventy-two time-based fractions were collected into a 96-well plate, with the first 18 and last 7 fractions pooled into 3 and together with all other fractions transferred to a total of 50 HPLC vials. Samples were acidified with 5% formic acid, organic solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator at 45°C, and peptides were resolubilized and diluted in 100 to 400 µL of 5% formic acid, depending on the intensities of the individual ultraviolet traces. Individual fractions were analyzed at pH 2.4 on an Agilent 1200 nano-HPLC system coupled to a hybrid linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer utilizing the Xcalibur software version 2.1 for data acquisition. Single fractions were loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm) with a binary pump at a flow rate of 45 μL/min. Loading and washing solvents were composed of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 70% methanol and 20% isopropanol (solvent B). The peptides were eluted by back-flushing from the trap column onto a 16-cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 μm packed with C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm). LC-MS solvents were composed of 0.4% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.4% formic acid in 70% methanol and 20% isopropanol (solvent B). Elution was achieved with a 27-min gradient ranging from 3% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25-min gradient from 30% to 70% solvent B and, finally, a 7-min gradient from 70% to 100% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 100 nL/min.   The analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode. The 10 most intense ions were isolated and fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) for peptide identification and relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 sec and a single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 (Si(CH3)2O)6) was used for internal mass calibration. The maximally allowed ion accumulation time was set to 500 and 200 ms for MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively. Overfilling of ion traps was prevented by automatic gain control set to 10^6 ions for a full Fourier transform MS scan and 5×10^5 ions for MS2 HCD scans. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 with a signal threshold of 2,000 counts for triggering an MS/MS event. HCD-MS2 spectra were acquired with 1 microscan at a resolution of 7,500.

### Data Protocol
Peptide intensities were extracted from MaxQuant output and input into Libaffy. Libaffy consists of a set of routines for accessing the various file types and post-processing them using a variety of algorithms, including iterative rank-order normalization (IRON). Peptide intensities were normalized using IRON with proteomic parameters and then input into R/RStudio with corresponding metadata. Peptides were filtered for posterior error probability >0.1, reverse sequences, non-human contaminant peptides, and missingness. Peptides were excluded from further analysis if there were more missing values than the larger of the two NSCLC sample sizes. Remaining peptide intensities were log2-transformed and mapped to possible protein matches.  In the event that peptides mapped to multiple proteins, called the protein inference problem, MaxQuant will choose the protein from a set of peptides based on which protein has the most matching peptides and would thus be perceived to be the most abundant. Constituent peptide intensities are then summed in MaxQuant to give the resulting protein intensity. The major drawback to this approach is that the next most abundant protein or proteins, even if they are very close to the abundance of the first protein, will not be included in the results. Additionally, the authors of MaxQuant point out that selecting the protein with the most peptides might not always be the best decision. Furthermore, the process of summing the peptide intensities to obtain the protein intensity can artificially lower the final protein intensity in the case of missing data, and this can be a pervasive issue since proteomic data are rife with missingness. We implemented a more liberal peptide-to-protein mapping methodology to address these issues. We began by mapping peptides to all possible proteins, and we then took the weighted mean (also known as Tukey’s biweight; implemented in the R Bioconductor package “affy”) to obtain a protein intensity that is more robust than the summation of intensities. The weighted mean penalizes outlier values in its calculation so it will more closely reflect the true intensity values for a particular protein. A Welch two-sample T-test was used on the resulting protein intensities to ascertain differentially expressed proteins between ADC and SCC.  We generated mapping tables using data from International Protein Index, UniProt, and Genbank to match the microarray probes to proteins. If a protein had multiple matching probes, then we chose the probe with the highest average intensity to use as the gene expression. Because our goal was to compare the gene expression to the protein expression, we filtered to only include results that were in both the protein expression dataset and the gene expression dataset.

### Publication Abstract
We performed a pilot proteogenomic study to compare lung adenocarcinoma to lung squamous cell carcinoma using quantitative proteomics (6-plex TMT) combined with a customized Affymetrix GeneChip. Using MaxQuant software, we identified 51,001 unique peptides that mapped to 7,241 unique proteins and from these identified 6,373 genes with matching protein expression for further analysis. We found a minor correlation between gene expression and protein expression; both datasets were able to independently recapitulate known differences between the adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma subtypes. We found 565 proteins and 629 genes to be differentially expressed between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, with 113 of these consistently differentially expressed at both the gene and protein levels. We then compared our results to published adenocarcinoma versus squamous cell carcinoma proteomic data that we also processed with MaxQuant. We selected two proteins consistently overexpressed in squamous cell carcinoma in all studies, MCT1 (SLC16A1) and GLUT1 (SLC2A1), for further investigation. We found differential expression of these same proteins at the gene level in our study as well as in other public gene expression datasets. These findings combined with survival analysis of public datasets suggest that MCT1 and GLUT1 may be potential prognostic markers in adenocarcinoma and druggable targets in squamous cell carcinoma. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002622.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Nsclc, Slc16a1, Glut1, Non-small cell lung cancer, Mct1, Slc2a1, Tmt, Lung adenocarcinoma, Lung squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
Paul Stewart

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Haura
Moffitt Cancer Center


