### Accession
PXD020323

### Title
Chemical genetics and proteome-wide site mapping reveal cysteine MARylation by PARP-7 on immune-relevant protein targets

### Description
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 7 (PARP-7) has emerged as a critically important member of a large enzyme family that catalyze ADP-ribosylation in mammalian cells. PARP-7 is a critical regulator of the innate immune response. What remains unclear is the mechanism by which PARP-7 regulates this process, namely because the protein targets of PARP-7 mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) are largely unknown. Here, we combine chemical genetics, proximity labeling, and proteome-wide amino acid ADP- ribosylation site profiling for identifying the direct targets and sites of PARP-7-mediated MARylation in a cellular context. We found that the inactive PARP family member, PARP13 (a critical regulator of the antiviral innate immune response) is a major target of PARP-7. PARP-13 is preferentially MARylated on cysteine residues in its RNA binding zinc finger domain. Proteome-wide ADP-ribosylation analysis reveals cysteine as a major MARylation acceptor of PARP-7. This study provides insight into PARP-7 targeting and MARylation site preference.

### Sample Protocol
CELL CUTURE: HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Millipore Sigma), and glutamax (Gibco) at 37C and 5% CO2. Transient transfections of HEK293T cells with 15 mg of expression vectors per 10-cm dish (70% confluency) were performed using the CalPhos system (Clontech) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were lysed in HEPES buffer supplemented with 1% Triton X-100, 100 microM fresh TCEP-HCl (Thermo Scientific), cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma-Aldrich), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell debris was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 X g for 5 min at 4C.   DIRECT TARGETS OF PARP-7 USING CHEMICAL GENETIC METHOD (COHE-662): Lysates from HEK 293T cells expressing WT- or IG-PARP-7 (1.169 mg) were diluted to a volume of 336 microliters in lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 1X cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), 0.5mM TCEP). The lysates were then split into 6 tubes of 48 microliters. To each tube, 12 microliters of 5X concentration (0.5 mM) 5-Bn-2e-NAD+ was added for a final concentration of 100 microM in each tube. The samples were then incubated for 2 h shaking at 30C. Following incubation, the samples were precipitated with 1 ml 4:1 cold MeOH: CHCl3 for 1hour at -20C to remove excess 5-Bn-2e-NAD+. The protein was then pelleted at 6,000g at 4C for 30 min. Methanol supernatant was completely removed and the pellet was allowed to dry for approximately 15 min. The pellet was resuspended in 30 microliters of 2% SDS and 30 microliters of PBS was added. To this, 30 microliters of 3X concentration click buffer was added (15.8 mM THPTA in PBS, 3.15 mM CuSO4 made fresh in 1X PBS, 0.75 mM Biotin-peg3-azide (Click Chemistry Tools) in DMSO, 15.8 mM sodium ascorbate in PBS, diluted to respective concentrations with 1X PBS). Click conjugation to biotin−peg3-azide was performed for 1 hr at RT. Following click conjugation, pooled WT-PARP-7 samples and pooled IG-PARP-7 samples were precipitated overnight with 8 mL cold MeOH at 20C. The next day, samples were pelleted at 6,000g 4C, sonicated for 5 s in cold methanol and pelleted again. This process was repeated 3 times with cold methanol and once with cold acetone. The protein was then re-dissolved in 2% SDS and subjected to enrichment using NeutrAvidin agarose (Pierce). Enriched protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin.   PARP-7 INTERACTOME USING BIOID PROXIMITY LABELING (COHE-501):   A proximity labeling approach commonly referred to as BioID was used for identifying intracellular PARP-7 interactors. In the BioID method, a protein of interest is fused to a promiscuous biotin ligase (BirA*). Upon addition of biotin to cultured cells, BirA* uses biotin as a substrate to generate a lysine-reactive adenylate-biotin that reacts with proteins proximal to the fusion protein. We generated a WT PARP-7 chimeric construct in which a Myc-tagged promiscuous biotin ligase (BirA*) was fused to the N-terminus of PARP-7 (Myc-BirA*- WT-PARP-7). We observed robust biotinylation of proteins across the full molecular weight range in HEK 293T cells expressing Myc-BirA*-WT-PARP-7, but not GFP-WT- PARP-7. Biotinylated proteins were enriched using NeutrAvidin Agarose and digested as above.   LC AND MASS SPECTROSCOPY:  Digests were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 0.1 x 20 mm NanoViper C18 peptide trap (Thermo Scientific) for 5 min at a 5 microliters/min flow rate in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid mobile phase. Peptides were separated using a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron particle, 75 micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific) using a 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient over 90 min (COHE-501) or 120 min (COHE-662) in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nanoliters/min flow rate using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution, 400 to 1600 (COHE-501) or 1500 (COHE-662) Da, maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC targets of 400K (COHE-501) or 200K (COHE-662). Data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap using HCD (NCE=35, 10K AGC target) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole (1.6 Da) for peptides with charges 2 to 6 (COHE-501) or 7 (COHE-662). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 sec with a tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Instrument files were converted to MS2-format files using MSConvert of the Proteowizard package (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/index.html). Database searching was performed with Comet (http://comet-ms.sourceforge.net/), version 2016.01 rev. 2. Basic parameters were set as follows: monoisotopic parent ion mass tolerance 1.25 Da, monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance 1.0005 Da, trypsin cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages, oxidized Met was specified as a variable modification, and alkylated Cys was specified as a fixed modification. COHE-501 used a UniProt human FASTA database (release 2018.01) with 93,789 sequences; COHE-662 used a UniProt canonical human reference proteome (release 2018.01) with 21,009 sequences. Both databases had common contaminants and sequence-reversed decoys added. The PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline) used the target/decoy method to control PSM FDR to less than 2%. Protein inference used basic and extended parsimony logic and 2 peptides per protein per sample. Enrichments comparisons used un-normalized spectral counts to find proteins having a minimum of 2-fold enrichments relative to controls. Each of the two enrichment experiments had two enriched samples and two controls.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 7 (PARP-7) has emerged as a critically important member of a large enzyme family that catalyzes ADP-ribosylation in mammalian cells. PARP-7 is a critical regulator of the innate immune response. What remains unclear is the mechanism by which PARP-7 regulates this process, namely because the protein targets of PARP-7 mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) are largely unknown. Here, we combine chemical genetics, proximity labeling, and proteome-wide amino acid ADP-ribosylation site profiling for identifying the direct targets and sites of PARP-7-mediated MARylation in a cellular context. We found that the inactive PARP family member, PARP-13-a critical regulator of the antiviral innate immune response-is a major target of PARP-7. PARP-13 is preferentially MARylated on cysteine residues in its RNA binding zinc finger domain. Proteome-wide ADP-ribosylation analysis reveals cysteine as a major MARylation acceptor of PARP-7. This study provides insight into PARP-7 targeting and MARylation site preference.

### Keywords
Marylation, Enzymatic targets, Parp-7, Chemical genetics, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Chemical Physiology and Biochemistry Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael S. Cohen
Department of Chemical Physiology and Biochemistry Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


