### Accession
PXD043084

### Title
ZNF524 directly interacts with telomeric DNA and supports telomere integrity

### Description
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear chromosomes. In humans, they consist of TTAGGG repeats, which are bound by dedicated proteins such as the shelterin complex. This complex blocks unwanted DNA damage repair at telomeres, e.g. by suppressing non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) through its subunit TRF2. We here describe ZNF524, a zinc finger protein that directly binds telomeric repeats with nanomolar affinity and reveal the base-specific sequence recognition by co-crystallization with telomeric DNA. ZNF524 localizes to telomeres and specifically maintains the presence of the TRF2/RAP1 subcomplex at telomeres without affecting other shelterin members. Loss of ZNF524 concomitantly results in an increase in DNA damage signaling and recombination events. Overall, ZNF524 is a direct telomere-binding protein involved in the maintenance of telomere integrity.

### Sample Protocol
BioID U2OS cell lines carrying BirA*-ZNF524 WT or BirA*-NLS were induced with 300 or 40 ng mL-1 doxycycline, respectively, 48 h prior to harvest. After 42 h, the cells were additionally treated with 50 µM biotin for 24 h to allow for the biotinylation of proteins proximal to the target protein. Subsequently, nuclear extract was prepared as described above. Biotinylated proteins were isolated from the extract using MyOne Streptavidin C1 Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific). To this end, 150 µL Dynabeads were washed with PBB+ buffer (420 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor [Roche]) and mixed with 200 µL of 3 µg µL-1 nuclear extract and 500 µL PBB+ buffer. After 2 h incubation at 4 °C on a rotating wheel, the beads were pelleted on a magnetic rack and washed thrice with ice cold PBB+ buffer. Finally, the isolated proteins were eluted in 25 µL 2x Laemmli buffer (Sigma Aldrich) by boiling for 5 min at 95 °C and the supernatant prepared for mass spectrometry measurement.  MS sample preparation Denatured proteins were separated on a 4-12% Bis-/Tris gel (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific) for 10 min (30 min for proteome) at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific). Proteins were stained with the Colloidal Blue Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions or fixed (7% acetic acid, 40% methanol) for 15 min and then stained with Coomassie Blue (Roth). For the proteome, each sample was divided into 4 fractions according to molecular weight. Each sample was cut individually with a clean scalpel into 1 mm x 1 mm pieces. The gel pieces were destained (50% 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), 50% ethanol) in several rounds, then dehydrated twice in 100% acetonitrile and its remnants removed using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf). The gel pieces were incubated with reduction buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT) for 60 min at 56 °C followed by incubation with alkylation buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 50 mM iodoacetamide) for 45 min at RT in the dark. The gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC once. Subsequently, two dehydration steps were performed and the acetonitrile was completely removed. The gel pieces were rehydrated in trypsin solution (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 1 or 2 µg trypsin per sample for proteome or BioID respectively, Promega) overnight at 37 °C, the supernatant was collected and the digested peptides were extracted by one round of incubation with extraction buffer (30% acetonitrile, 10% trifluoracetic acid), one round of 100% acetonitrile, another round of extraction buffer and finally two rounds of 100% acetonitrile for 15 min at RT with agitation. In each round, supernatants were recovered and combined. The acetonitrile was evaporated in the Concentrator Plus to reduce the volume to <200 µL. For stage tip purification, 2 layers of Empore C18 material (3M) were stacked in a 200 µL pipet tip and the material activated with methanol, equilibrated with mixture B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid/0.1% formic acid for proteome) and then washed with mixture A (0.5% formic acid/0.1% formic acid for proteome). After applying the sample, the material was washed with mixture A and the sample eluted in 30 µL mixture B. The excess acetonitrile was evaporated in the Concentrator Plus and final volume adjusted to 12 µL with mixture A.   MS measurements 5 µL of each sample were injected and loaded on an in-house packed C18 column (New Objective, 25 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) for reverse-phase chromatography. The EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) was mounted to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 2 h gradient from 2-40% MS grade acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 225 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to 20 MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 75 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) and searched against the human Uniprot database (95,934 entries). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met) and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For enzyme specificity, trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01 and for known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results. LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option were activated in the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomeres, Znf524, Osteosarcoma, Rap1, Alt, Genome integrity, Trf2

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS


