### Accession
PXD037562

### Title
Cms1 coordinates stepwise local 90S pre-ribosome assembly with timely snR83 release - table s1 corrected

### Description
Ribosome synthesis begins in the nucleolus with 90S pre-ribosome construction, but little is known about how the many different snoRNAs that modify the pre-rRNA are timely guided to their target sites. Here, we report a role for Cms1 in such a process. Initially, we discover CMS1 as null suppressor of a nop14 mutant impaired in Rrp12–Enp1 factor recruitment to the 90S. Further investigations detect Cms1 at the 18S rRNA 3'-major domain of an early 90S that carries H/ACA snR83, known to guide pseudouridylation at two target sites within the same subdomain. Cms1 co-precipitates with many 90S factors, but Rrp12-Enp1 encircling the 3'-major domain in the mature 90S is decreased. We suggest that Cms1 associates with the 3’-major domain during early 90S biogenesis to restrict premature Rrp12–Enp1 binding, but allows snR83 to timely perform its modification role before the next 90S assembly steps coupled with Cms1 release take place.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification of pre-ribosomal particles Yeast strains expressing tagged bait proteins, used for single-bait or split-bait tandem affinity purifications, were cultured at 30°C and harvested during the logarithmic growth phase (OD600 nm≈2.0). Cells were lysed mechanically using a cryogenic cell mill (Retsch MM400) and for two liter of cell powder 15ml of lysis buffer, containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, and 1 mM DTT, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFAST), was used. The lysate was cleared twice by centrifugation (4,600xg for 10 min at 4°C followed by 35,000xg for 20 min at 4°C) and the supernatant was loaded onto 500 µl IgG Sepharose 6 Fast Flow resin (GE Healthcare) for at least 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed twice, in batch mode (20 ml) and by gravity flow (10 ml), with purification buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 0.01% NP-40, and 1 mM DTT. Bound proteins were eluted by TEV protease cleavage for 1 h at 16°C. For the second affinity purification step, the TEV eluate was transferred to 50 µl Flag-agarose beads (Anti-Flag M2 Affinity Gel, Sigma–Aldrich) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed (7 ml), and bound proteins were eluted with purification buffer containing Flag peptide (final concentration 300 μg/mL). For cryo-EM analysis the elution buffer contained 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2% glycerol, 0.01% NP-40 and 1 mM DTT. Final eluates were either analyzed by SDS-PAGE on 4–12% polyacrylamide gels (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) followed by colloidal Coomassie staining (Roti Blue, Roth), or were further analyzed my mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Precipitated proteins from Flag eluates were analyzed by semiquantitative mass spectrometry at FingerPrints Proteomics (University of Dundee, UK) based on 1D nLC–ESI-MS/MS. The raw semiquantitative mass spectrometry data shown in Tables S1 and S2 were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008).

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome synthesis begins in the nucleolus with 90S pre-ribosome construction, but little is known about how the many different snoRNAs that modify the pre-rRNA are timely guided to their target sites. Here, we report a role for Cms1 in such a process. Initially, we discovered CMS1 as a null suppressor of a nop14 mutant impaired in Rrp12-Enp1 factor recruitment to the 90S. Further investigations detected Cms1 at the 18S rRNA 3' major domain of an early 90S that carried H/ACA snR83, which is known to guide pseudouridylation at two target sites within the same subdomain. Cms1 co-precipitates with many 90S factors, but Rrp12-Enp1 encircling the 3' major domain in the mature 90S is decreased. We suggest that Cms1 associates with the 3' major domain during early 90S biogenesis to restrict premature Rrp12-Enp1 binding but allows snR83 to timely perform its modification role before the next 90S assembly steps coupled with Cms1 release take place.

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, 90s pre-ribosome, Snorna, Cms1

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University
Biochemistry Center Heidelberg University of Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Benjamin Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Dr Ed Hurt
Biochemistry Center Heidelberg University of Heidelberg Germany


