### Accession
PXD032939

### Title
RNA interactome capture in Escherichia coli globally identifies RNA-binding proteins

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RPBs) are deeply involved in many fundamental cellular processes in bacteria and are vital for their survival. Despite this, few studies have so far been dedicated to globally identifying bacterial RBPs. We have adapted the RNA interactome capture (RIC) technique, originally developed for eukaryotic systems, to globally identify RBPs in bacteria. RIC takes advantage of the base pairing potential of poly(A) tails to pull-down mRNA-protein complexes. By overexpressing the poly(A) polymerase I, we drastically increase the frequency of polyadenylated RNA in E. coli, allowing us to pull down RNA-protein complexes using immobilized oligo-d(T) as bait. With this approach, we identified 167 putative RBPs, roughly half of which are already annotated as RNA-binding. We experimentally verified the RNA-binding ability of several proteins previously unknown to interact with RNA, including the uncharacterized protein YhgF. YhgF is exceptionally well conserved not only in bacteria, but also in archaea and eukaryotes. We identified YhgF in vivo RNA targets using CLIP-seq, two of which were verified using electromobility shift assays. Our findings present a simple and robust strategy for RBP identification in bacteria, provide a resource of new bacterial RBPs, and lays the foundation for further studies of the strongly conserved RBP Yhg

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of the samples corresponding to 20 µg protein were loaded onto centrifugal 30 kD filter devices (Microcon-30 kDa; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for filter-aided sample preparation. Briefly, the samples were washed with a buffer (pH 8.5) containing 100 mM Tris and 8 M urea. After reduction with 8 mM DTT, alkylation with 50 mM IAA and removal of excess IAA with 8 mM DTT the washing step was repeated each. Before enzymatic digestion with trypsin (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50 (weight/weight)) in a wet chamber at 37 °C for 16 h the samples were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 three times. The resulting peptides were washed from the filter with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the samples to a final concentration of 1 % (volume/volume) and they were dried at 45 °C. Finally, the samples were reconstituted in 3 % ACN and 0.1 % FA in water to a final concentration of 150 ng/µL.   Tryptic peptides (loading amount 300 ng protein) were separated on a nanoAcquity UPLC system equipped with a C18, 5μm, 180μm×20 mm trap column followed by a HSS-T3 C18 1.8μm, 75μm×250 mm analytical column (40 °C) and further analyzed in positive ionization mode with the UDMSE approach [2,3] on a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization source (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). Mobile phase A contained 0.1% FA and 3% DMSO in water and mobile phase B 0.1% FA and 3 % DMSO in ACN. At a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min a gradient was run from 3-40 % (volume/volume) over 120 min. Every 60 s a lock mass solution composed of 0.1 µM [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B and 1 µM leu-enkephalin was introduced through the reference channel. Method quality control was performed with HeLa digest samples (Thermo Scientific, Waltham,MA, USA) that were analyzed between the samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against a Uniprot database for E. coli K12 with inclusion of RNT1_ASPOR (Guanyl-specific ribonuclease T1) and  RNAS1_BOVIN (Ribonuclease pancreatic) with a false discovery rate of 0.01 obtained with a randomized database of the protein entries above by using ProteinLynx Global Server (version 3.0.3, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Minimum peptide matches per protein were 2 and minimum fragment ion matches per peptide and protein 1 and 3, respectively. One missed cleavage per peptide was allowed. Trypsin was set as digest reagent, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and acetyl lysine, C-terminal amidation, asparagine deamidation, glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation were as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RPBs) are deeply involved in fundamental cellular processes in bacteria and are vital for their survival. Despite this, few studies have so far been dedicated to direct and global identification of bacterial RBPs. We have adapted the RNA interactome capture (RIC) technique, originally developed for eukaryotic systems, to globally identify RBPs in bacteria. RIC takes advantage of the base pairing potential of poly(A) tails to pull-down RNA-protein complexes. Overexpressing poly(A) polymerase I in Escherichia coli drastically increased transcriptome-wide RNA polyadenylation, enabling pull-down of crosslinked RNA-protein complexes using immobilized oligo(dT) as bait. With this approach, we identified 169 putative RBPs, roughly half of which are already annotated as RNA-binding. We experimentally verified the RNA-binding ability of a number of uncharacterized RBPs, including YhgF, which is exceptionally well conserved not only in bacteria, but also in archaea and eukaryotes. We identified YhgF RNA targets in vivo using CLIP-seq, verified specific binding in vitro, and reveal a putative role for YhgF in regulation of gene expression. Our findings present a simple and robust strategy for RBP identification in bacteria, provide a resource of new bacterial RBPs, and lay the foundation for further studies of the highly conserved RBP YhgF.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rna interactome capture, Escherichia coli

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Uppsala University, Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences

### Submitter
Erik Jansson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Jansson
Uppsala University, Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences


