### Accession
PXD006343

### Title
Metaproteomics of phototrophic biomats from two soda lakes in the Canadian Rocky Mountains

### Description
This data is a case study done in the context of developing methods for assessing the taxonomic composition of microbial communities using metaproteomics. For this study with analyzed phototrophic biomats from two Soda Lakes in the Canadian Rocky Mountains using metaproteomics. For protein identification we generated a metagenome from which we predicted and annotated the protein sequences used to analyze the metaproteomes. The database is available in this PRIDE submission. Lake1 refers to Goodenough Lake (GEM, 51°19'47.64"N 121°38'28.90"W) and Lake2 referes to Last Chance Lake (LCM, 51°19'39.3" N 121°37'59.3"W).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Cells were disrupted in lysing matrix tubes A (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116910050) for 45 seconds at 6 m/s using a OMNI bead ruptor bead mill (Omni International, https://www.omni-inc.com/) and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The two soda lake samples were analyzed in technical quadruplicates by 1D-LC-MS/MS (1x 260 min and 3x 460 min runs for each). Two blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each 260 min run ~1 µg of peptide and for each 460 min run 2-4 µg of peptide were loaded onto a 2 cm, 75 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with eluent A (0.2% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) and eluent B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile). The pre-column was connected to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 35° C via the integrated heating module. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nl/min using either a 260 min (from 0% to 20% B in 200 min, in 40 min to 35% B, ending with 20 min at 100% B) or a 460 min gradient (from 0% to 20% B in 354 min, in 71 min to 35% B, ending with 35 min at 100% B). Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted and annotated from metagenomes that were generated using samples from the same soda lakes. Additional protein sequences from several eukaryotic genomes and transcriptomes were added. These eukaryotic protein sequences were chosen based on 18S rRNA amplicon sequencing of soda lake biomat samples. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database using an identity threshold of 95% (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/). The final database contained 4,171,024 protein sequences and is available in this PRIDE submission. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)) with one small modification. The “FidoCT” node in Proteome Discoverer was used for protein inference instead of the “protein validator” node. Proteins with a q-value of <0.01 were classified as high-confidence identifications and proteins with a q-value of 0.01–0.05 were classified as medium-confidence identifications. Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained, resulting in an overall FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial community structure can be analyzed by quantifying cell numbers or by quantifying biomass for individual populations. Methods for quantifying cell numbers are already available (e.g., fluorescence in situ hybridization, 16-S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing), yet high-throughput methods for assessing community structure in terms of biomass are lacking. Here we present metaproteomics-based methods for assessing microbial community structure using protein abundance as a measure for biomass contributions of individual populations. We optimize the accuracy and sensitivity of the method using artificially assembled microbial communities and show that it is less prone to some of the biases found in sequencing-based methods. We apply the method to communities from two different environments, microbial mats from two alkaline soda lakes, and saliva from multiple individuals. We show that assessment of species biomass contributions adds an important dimension to the analysis of microbial community structure.

### Keywords
1d-lc, Metagenomics, Metaproteomics, Biomass assessment, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary


