### Accession
PXD030383

### Title
Depletion of Mitochondrial Methionine Adenosyltransferase α1 Triggers Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease

### Description
Mitochondrial MATα1 is selectively depleted in alcohol-associated liver disease through a mechanism that involves the isomerase PIN1 and the kinase CK2. Alcohol activates CK2, which phosphorylates MATα1 at Ser114 facilitating interaction with PIN1, thereby inhibiting its mitochondrial localization. Blocking PIN1-MATα1 interaction increased mitochondrial MATα1 levels and protected against alcohol-induced mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
On-bead digestion and proteomic preparation and protein identification using mass spectrometry The co-IP sample underwent on bead trypsin/Lys-C digestion3. Briefly, the protein complex bound to the anti-MAT α1 antibody-protein A+G agarose IP were denatured and reduced by incubation in urea (2 M) in Tris-HCl (50 mM, pH 7.5) solution containing DTT (15 mM) for one hour at room temperature. The samples were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide (30 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark and incubated with 1 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) for overnight on a shaker at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% TFA. The samples were briefly centrifuged and the supernatant was de-salted using HLB plates (Oasis HLB 30 µm, 5 mg sorbent, Waters).  Mass spectrometry acquisition methods (DDA-MS) Data dependent acquisitions and Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) acquisitions were performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray ion source and connected to an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system with a 60-minute gradient48. Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 150 µm i.d. × 15 cm, Thermo) using a flow rate of 1.4 µL/min for 7 min at 1% B (mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) after which point, they were separated with a linear gradient of 5-20%B for 45 minutes, 20-35%B for 15 min, 35-85%B for 3 min, holding at 85%B for 5 minutes and re-equilibrating at 1%B for 5 minutes. Each sample was followed by a blank injection to both clean the column and re-equilibrate at 1%B. The nano-source capillary temperature was set to 300 °C and the spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV. For DIA analysis, MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 Hz from mass range 400-1000m/z. For MS1 scans the AGC target was set to 3×105 ions with a max fill time of 50 ms. DIA MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15000 Hz with fragmentation in the HCD cell at a normalized CE of 30. The MS2 AGC was set to 5e4 target ions and a max fill time of 22ms. DIA was performed using 4Da (150 scan events) windows over the precursor mass range of 400-1000 m/z and the MS2 mass range was set from 100-1500 m/z. For DDA analysis MS1 scans the AGC target was set to 4x105 ions with a max fill time of 50 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired using the TopSpeed method with a total cycle time of 3 seconds and an AGC target of 5x104 and a max fill time of 22 ms, and an isolation width of 1.6 Da in the quadrapole. Precursor ions were fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 30% and analyzed in the Orbitrap at 15,000K resolution. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and only MS1 signals exceeding 50000 counts triggered the MS2 scans, with +1 and unassigned charge states not being selected for MS2 analysis. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 15 seconds. These methodologies were consistent with those used in Robinson et al, 202048 and were identical for the phosphorylation site mapping experiment and the MATα1 interactome analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis For binding partner data analysis, DIA-MS results was assayed against the murine NASH library we described48.  Peak group extraction and FDR analysis was done as we outlined49. Briefly, raw intensity data for peptide fragments was extracted from DIA files using the open-source SWATH workflow automated targeted analysis of data-independent acquisition MS data against the sample specific peptide assay. Then, retention time prediction was made using the Biognosys iRT Standards spiked into each sample. Target and decoy peptides were then extracted, scored and analyzed using the mProphet algorithm (PyProphet version 2.1.2) to determine scoring cut offs consistent with 1% FDR. Peak group extraction data from each DIA file was combined using the ‘feature alignment’ script, which performs data alignment and modeling analysis across an experimental dataset. Finally, all duplicate peptides were removed from the dataset to ensure that peptide sequences are proteotypic to a given protein in our FASTA database.  For Ser114 phosphorylation analysis, first a spectra was obtained from DDA-MS acquisitions of a MATα1 immunoprecipitation. Then, Raw DIA-MS data was imported into Skyline (Skyline Daily, version 19.1.1.309)50, which was then used to visualize and manually validate the precursor area under the curve (XIC) of the Ser114 phosphorylated and unmodified peptides. A co-eluting precursor and fragment trace was observed consistent with phosphorylation of MATα1 Ser114.

### Publication Abstract
MAT&#x3b1;1 catalyzes the synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine, the principal biological methyl donor. Lower MAT&#x3b1;1 activity and mitochondrial dysfunction occur in alcohol-associated liver disease. Besides cytosol and nucleus, MAT&#x3b1;1 also targets the mitochondria of hepatocytes to regulate their function. Here, we show that mitochondrial MAT&#x3b1;1 is selectively depleted in alcohol-associated liver disease through a mechanism that involves the isomerase PIN1 and the kinase CK2. Alcohol activates CK2, which phosphorylates MAT&#x3b1;1 at Ser114 facilitating interaction with PIN1, thereby inhibiting its mitochondrial localization. Blocking PIN1-MAT&#x3b1;1 interaction increased mitochondrial MAT&#x3b1;1 levels and protected against alcohol-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and fat accumulation. Normally, MAT&#x3b1;1 interacts with mitochondrial proteins involved in TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation. Preserving mitochondrial MAT&#x3b1;1 content correlates with higher methylation and expression of mitochondrial proteins. Our study demonstrates a role of CK2 and PIN1 in reducing mitochondrial MAT&#x3b1;1 content leading to mitochondrial dysfunction in alcohol-associated liver disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Liver, Alcohol, Matα1

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Aleksandra Binek

### Lab Head
Dr Shelly C. Lu
Department of Medicine


