### Accession
PXD024949

### Title
Fast and global reorganization of the chloroplast protein biogenesis network during heat acclimation

### Description
Heat waves caused by global warming severely challenge photosynthesis and hence plant biomass production, but the mechanisms of its adjustment, repair and biogenesis during heat acclimation are elusive. We provide a global and time-resolved insight, how these processes are modulated during heat acclimation in chloroplasts, revealing profound modulation of protein biogenesis. Ribosome profiling with Chlamydomonas reinhardtii showed early translational downregulation during synthesis of photosynthesis core antenna proteins, a response that is conserved in Nicotiana tabacum. Our data suggest that these early effects may be caused by reduced translocation of ribosomes synthesizing thylakoid proteins, and that later heat acclimation alleviates these effects. Analysis of the proteinaceous interactome of plastid ribosomes demonstrates widespread remodeling of ribosome-associated processes that could be responsible for the early translational impacts and subsequent acclimation responses. The role of chlorophyll metabolism, protein targeting, and assembly of photosystem complexes as co-translational bottlenecks during heat acclimation are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Untagged cc1690 and Rpl5-HA lines were grown to early logarithmic phase (2x 106 cells mL-1) in HAP medium31, harvested by centrifugation at 4000 g and 23 °C for 2 min and resuspended in 40 °C prewarmed HAP or 25 °C HAP for the control. Heat was applied for 15 min and 3 h, respectively, while the control was treated similar and harvested after 15 at 25°C. After the respective incubation time, formaldehyde was added for 10 min at 0.37% for in vivo crosslinking. Crosslinking was quenched for 5 minutes by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 µg mL-1 chloramphenicol and 100 µg mL-1 cycloheximide. After incubation, cells were cooled rapidly using plastic ice cubes and harvested by centrifugation. Cells were pelleted at 4,000 g and 4 °C for 2 min and washed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 25 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2, 25 mM EGTA, 1 mM PMSF and 100 µg/mL CAP, or 800 mM of KCl and 100µg/mL puromycin instead of CAP for the high salt condition). Before lysis, 200 µg/mL Heparin and 100 U SUPERase·In™ RNase Inhibitor were added to each sample, except for the RNase digest samples. Cells were lysed in the respective lysis buffer including protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche and 1 mM PMSF) by Avestine pressure homogenization at 3 bar. After lysis, 1% (w/v) n-Dodecyl-beta-maltoside was added and incubated for 5 min rotating at 4 °C. The lysates were precleared by 15 min centrifugation at 4 °C and 15,000 g. For the RNase treatment, the RNA concentration was measured with a photometer and 1 U Ambion® RNase I (Thermo Fisher) per µg of RNA and 0.02 U TURBO™ DNase (Thermo Fisher) per µL lysate were added. Affinity purification was done with anti-HA Magnetic Beads (Thermo Scientific) for 90 minutes at 4 °C and constant gentle mixing. Beads were thoroughly washed three times with ice-cold HKM-T buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 25 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2 and 0.05% (v/v) Tween20 and another three times with the same buffer without Tween20. During the first washing step 10 µL of SUPERase·In™ were added to the RNAse treatment samples and incubated for 10 min to quench the RNase. Proteins were eluted with 2x SDS-PAGE buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v) SDS, 0.005% (w/v) Bromphenol blue) and incubated for 5 min at 96 °C. After transfer into fresh tubes, protein crosslinks were reverted by additional incubation for 5 min at 96 °C in the presence of 0.1 M DTT. HA-affinity purification samples were briefly separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and excised into a low molecular weight (<55 kDa) and a high molecular weight (>55 kDa) gel slice.An in-gel tryptic digest and peptide elution was performed using standard protocols. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm C18 column and directly injected into a Q Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 90 min gradient of 2-95% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a constant flow rate was used to elute peptides. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent fashion using a top15 method for peptide sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.3.3 using default parameters (35). MS/MS spectra were searched against a Chlamydonomas database (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) concatenated with reverse copies of all sequences and a list of amino acid sequences of frequently observed contaminants (minimal peptide length = 7, minimal peptide = 1 (razor or unique), PSM FDR = 0.01). Label-free quantification (minimal ratio count = 2 ) and “match between runs” (matching time window = 0.7 min, alignment time window = 20 min) was enabled (35). All raw files, MaxQuant results and parameter files are available at ProteomeXchange (see Data Availability). Statistical analysis MS data was analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.3.2. (36). All biological replicates were grouped and Log2 Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) intensities (Supplemental Dataset) were filtered to contain valid values in at least two of the three replicates in at least one group of each comparison. To enable statistical evaluation, missing values were imputed with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution with a mean (m) and standard deviation (sd) chosen to best simulate low abundance values close to the detection limit of the instrument (m=mmeasured-1.8, sd = sdmeasured x 0.3; for each replicate m and sd were calculated based on all measured log2 LFQ intensities). A modified t-test implemented in the Perseus software package was used to identify proteins with significantly enriched LFQ intensity in the HA pulldown reactions compared to control pulldown. Results were calculated using the indicated significance thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthesis is a central determinant of plant biomass production, but its homeostasis is increasingly challenged by heat. Little is known about the sensitive regulatory principles involved in heat acclimation that underly the biogenesis and repair of chloroplast-encoded core subunits of photosynthetic complexes. Employing time-resolved ribosome and transcript profiling together with selective ribosome proteomics, we systematically deciphered these processes in chloroplasts of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. We revealed protein biosynthesis and altered translation elongation as central processes for heat acclimation and showed that these principles are conserved between the alga and the flowering plant Nicotiana tabacum. Short-term heat exposure resulted in specific translational repression of chlorophyll a-containing core antenna proteins of photosystems I and II. Furthermore, translocation of ribosome nascent chain complexes to thylakoid membranes was affected, as reflected by the increased accumulation of stromal cpSRP54-bound ribosomes. The successful recovery of synthesizing these proteins under prolonged acclimation of nonlethal heat conditions was associated with specific changes of the co-translational protein interaction network, including increased ribosome association of chlorophyll biogenesis enzymes and acclimation factors responsible for complex assembly. We hypothesize that co-translational cofactor binding and targeting might be bottlenecks under heat but become optimized upon heat acclimation to sustain correct co-translational protein complex assembly.

### Keywords
Heat acclimation, Photosynthesis biogenesis, Protein complex assembly, Protein synthesis, Translational regulation, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics TU Kaiserslautern Germany

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Storchova
Molecular Genetics TU Kaiserslautern Germany


