### Accession
PXD015371

### Title
STRAP regulates alternative splicing fidelity during lineage commitment of mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
STRAP protein was IP'd and corresponding binding proteins were identified by high resolution nanoLCMS2 vs a control experiment.

### Sample Protocol
IP enriched protiens were denatured, reduced, and separated by 1D PAGE, followed by digestion of 6 MW fractions encompassing the entire lane for each sample. All fractions were digested by trypsin, and analyzed by nano-LCMS2 using an Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
We converted the .raw files to MzXML universal files, searched the data with SEQUEST using a UniProt species specific db, and all data were uploaded to Scaffold for peptide filting, protein grouping, and relative quantification by spectral counting

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing (AS) is involved in cell fate decisions and embryonic development. However, regulation of these processes is poorly understood. Here, we have identified the serine threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (STRAP) as a putative spliceosome-associated factor. Upon Strap deletion, there are numerous AS events observed in mouse embryoid bodies (EBs) undergoing a neuroectoderm-like state. Global mapping of STRAP-RNA binding in mouse embryos by enhanced-CLIP sequencing (eCLIP-seq) reveals that STRAP preferably targets transcripts for nervous system development and regulates AS through preferred binding positions, as demonstrated for two neuronal-specific genes, Nnat and Mark3. We have found that STRAP involves in the assembly of 17S U2 snRNP proteins. Moreover, in Xenopus, loss of Strap leads to impeded lineage differentiation in embryos, delayed neural tube closure, and altered exon skipping. Collectively, our findings reveal a previously unknown function of STRAP in mediating the splicing networks of lineage commitment, alteration of which may be involved in early embryonic lethality in mice.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Stem cells, Strap

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Director of the UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry/ Proteomics Shared Facility

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr james mobley
Director of the UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry/ Proteomics Shared Facility


