### Accession
PXD005718

### Title
Regulation of somatosensory mechanotransduction by Annexin A6

### Description
Sensory neuron mechanically-activated slowly adapting currents have been linked to noxious mechanosensation. We identified a Conotoxin, Noxious Mechanosensation Blocker -1, that blocks such currents selectively. Using an active biotinylated form of the toxin we identified 67 binding proteins in sensory neurons and sensory neuron-derived cell lines using mass spectrometry. Annexin A6 was the most frequently identified binding protein. Annexin A6 knockout mice showed an enhanced sensitivity to mechanical stimuli. Rapidly adapting currents were enhanced and slowly adapting channels diminished. The percentage of neurons expressing slowly adapting currents fell and non-responsive neurons increased. Conversely, overexpression of annexin A6 in DRG neurons inhibited rapidly adapting currents without effects on slowly adapting currents. Co-expression of annexin A6 with Piezo 2 led to an inhibition of Piezo-mediated rapidly adapting currents. AAV-mediated gene delivery of annexin A6 to sensory neurons in a mouse model of osteoarthritis attenuated mechanical pain. These data demonstrate a role for annexin A6 in somatosensory mechanotransduction.

### Sample Protocol
Seven 10 cm plates of sub-confluent, actively dividing ND-C cells were treated for three days with D-MEM containing 1 mM dibromo-cAMP and 0.2% FBS. The cultures were washed 3X with PBS and incubated with 5uM biotinylated NMB-1 for 3.5 minutes. After wash, chilled 4% PFA was added to cells for 10 minutes and washed 3X. Extraction buffer containing protease inhibitors, 0.1% SDS and 1% Triton X-100 was added directly to the plate. The cells were scraped and extracted for three hours on ice. The protein extract was vortexed, spun down and incubated with prepared Neuroavidin gel matrix (ThermoFisher Scientific) overnight at 4 C. The beads were washed three times and the bound proteins eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions by heating to 95 C for 10 minutes in 2% or 5% beta mercaptoethanol. Control samples were processed as above omitting biotinylated NMB-1. Elutions from NMB-1 column were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis using a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (1.5 mm x 10 well, Invitrogen) using MOPS buffer. The gel was stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie blue (Sigma). Each lane was excised into 16 bands that were cut into 1-2 mm cubes and in-gel digested overnight using trypsin (sequencing grade; Roche). Peptides were extracted from gel bands twice with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo). Peptides were resuspended using 0.5% formic acid were analysed online using an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ FT hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) equipped with a nanospray ion source. Peptides were desalted on-line using a micro-Precolumn cartridge (C18 Pepmap 100, LC Packings) and then separated using a 30 min RP gradient (4-32% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) on a BEH C18 analytical column (235 μm id x 10 cm) (Waters). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent acquisition mode controlled by Xcalibur 2.0. The instrument was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the FTICR cell) acquired at a 15 resolution of 100,000 at m/z 400, with the top five most abundant multiply-charged ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. LC-MS/MS analysis of NMB-1 binding proteins Elutions from NMB-1 pulldown experiments were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis using a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (1.5 mm x 10 well, Invitrogen) using MOPS buffer. The gel was stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie blue (Sigma). Each lane was excised into 16 bands that were cut into 1-2 mm cubes and in-gel digested overnight using trypsin (sequencing grade; Roche). Peptides were extracted from gel bands twice with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo). Peptides were resuspended using 0.5% formic acid were analysed online using an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ FT hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) equipped with a nanospray ion source. Peptides were desalted on-line using a micro-Precolumn cartridge (C18 Pepmap 100, LC Packings) and then separated using a 30 min RP gradient (4-32% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) on a BEH C18 analytical column (235 μm id x 10 cm) (Waters). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent acquisition mode controlled by Xcalibur 2.0. The instrument was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the FTICR cell) acquired at a resolution of 100,000 at m/z 400, with the top five most abundant multiply-charged ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed using BioWorks V3.3 (Thermo Electron) and searched using Mascot server 2.2 (Matrix Science) against a mouse IPI sequence database (June, 2007) using following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 2 mis-cleavages, 20 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with 3 variable modifications of Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), and Oxidation (M). False discovery rates determined by reverse database searches and empirical analyses of the distributions of mass deviation and Mascot Ion Scores were used to establish score and mass accuracy filters. Application of these filters to this dataset resulted in a < 1% false discovery rate as 16 assessed by reverse database searching. Protein hits from all datasets were BLAST-clustered using a threshold of 95% sequence homology over at least 50% of sequence length. Proteomics data processing All data were processed using BioWorks V3.3 (Thermo Electron) and searched using Mascot server 2.2 (Matrix Science) against a mouse IPI sequence database (June, 2007) using following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 2 mis-cleavages, 20 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with 3 variable modifications of Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), and Oxidation (M). False discovery rates determined by reverse database searches and empirical analyses of the distributions of mass deviation and Mascot Ion Scores were used to establish score and mass accuracy filters. Application of these filters to this dataset resulted in a < 1% false discovery rate as assessed by reverse database searching. Protein hits from all datasets were BLAST-clustered using a threshold of 95% sequence homology over at least 50% of sequence length.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Ltq-ft, Nd-c cells

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


