### Accession
PXD027966

### Title
Chromatin-associated RNA degradation contributes to silencing of Polycomb target genes

### Description
Polycomb Repressive Complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) are histone-modifying and -binding complexes that mediate the formation of facultative heterochromatin and are required for silencing of developmental genes and maintenance of cell fate. Multiple pathways of RNA decay work together to establish and maintain heterochromatin in fission yeast, including a recently identified role for a conserved RNA degradation complex called the rixosome or RIX1 complex. Whether RNA degradation also plays a role in the stability of mammalian heterochromatin remains unknown. Here we show that the rixosome contributes to silencing of many Polycomb targets in human cells. The rixosome associates with human PRC complexes and is enriched at promoters of Polycomb target genes. Importantly, depletion of either the rixosome or Polycomb results in accumulation of paused and elongating RNA polymerase at Polycomb-target genes. We identify point mutations in the RING1B subunit of PRC1 that disrupt the interaction between PRC1 and the rixosome and result in diminished silencing, suggesting that direct recruitment of the rixosome to chromatin is required for silencing. Finally, we show that the RNA kinase activity of the rixosome and the XRN2 exoribonuclease, which degrades RNAs with 5’ mono-phosphate groups generated by the rixosome, are required for silencing. Our findings suggest that rixosome-mediated degradation of nascent RNA is conserved from fission yeast to human, although in human cells the rixosome degrades RNA in facultative rather than constitutive heterochromatin.

### Sample Protocol
. Protein was eluted from beads using 500 mM ammonium hydroxide and the eluate was dried via vacuum centrifugation. We added 20 µl of 8 M urea, 100 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to the bead. We added 5mM TCEP and incubated the mixture for 15 min at room temperature. We then added 10 mM of iodoacetamide for 15min at room temperature in the dark. We added 15 mM DTT to consume any unreacted iodoacetamide. We added 180µl of 100 mM EPPS pH 8.5. to reduce the urea concentration to <1 M, 1 µg of trypsin, and incubated at 37⁰C for 6 hrs. The solution was acidified with 2% formic acid and the digested peptides were desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
All label-free mass spectrometry data were collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Famos Autosampler (LC Packings) and an Accela600 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼20 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded ~2 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 1 hr method from 5 to 29% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ∼300 nL/min. The scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with the following parameters: resolution 70,000, scan range 300−1500 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 105, maximum injection time 250 ms, and centroid spectrum data type. We selected the top twenty precursors for MS2 analysis which consisted of HCD high-energy collision dissociation with the following parameters: resolution 17,500, AGC 1 × 105, maximum injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Th, normalized collision energy (NCE) 25, and centroid spectrum data type. The underfill ratio was set at 9%, which corresponds to a 1.5 × 105 intensity threshold. In addition, unassigned and singly charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to automatic. Mass spectrometric data analysis. Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human uniprot database which was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were altered to a 1% FDR. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) are histone-modifying and -binding complexes that mediate the formation of facultative heterochromatin and are required for silencing of developmental genes and maintenance of cell fate<sup>1-3</sup>. Multiple pathways of RNA decay work together to establish and maintain heterochromatin in fission yeast, including a recently identified role for a conserved RNA-degradation complex known as the rixosome or RIX1 complex<sup>4-6</sup>. Whether RNA degradation also has a role in the stability of mammalian heterochromatin remains unknown. Here we show that the rixosome contributes to silencing of many Polycomb targets in human cells. The rixosome associates with human PRC complexes and is enriched at promoters of Polycomb target genes. Depletion of either the rixosome or Polycomb results in accumulation of paused and elongating RNA polymerase at Polycomb target genes. We identify point mutations in the RING1B subunit of PRC1 that disrupt the interaction between PRC1 and the rixosome and result in diminished silencing, suggesting that direct recruitment of the rixosome to chromatin is required for silencing. Finally, we show that the RNA endonuclease and kinase activities of the rixosome and the downstream XRN2 exoribonuclease, which degrades RNAs with 5' monophosphate groups generated by the rixosome, are required for silencing. Our findings suggest that rixosomal degradation of nascent RNA is conserved from fission yeast to human, with a primary role in RNA degradation at facultative heterochromatin in human cells.

### Keywords
Rna degradation, Rixosome, Prc1, Rix1, Prc2, Polycomb

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Danesh Moazed
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


