### Accession
PXD041907

### Title
The Toxoplasma protein phosphatase 6 catalytic subunit (TgPP6C) is essential for cell cycle progression and virulence

### Description
Protein phosphatases are post-translational regulators of Toxoplasma gondii proliferation, tachyzoite-bradyzoite differentiation and pathogenesis. Here, we identify the putative protein phosphatase 6 (TgPP6) subunits of T. gondii and elucidate their role in the parasite lytic cycle. The putative catalytic subunit TgPP6C and regulatory subunit TgPP6R likely form a complex whereas the predicted structural subunit TgPP6S, with low homology to the human PP6 structural subunit, does not coassemble with TgPP6C and TgPP6R. Functional studies showed that TgPP6C and TgPP6R are essential for parasite growth and replication. The ablation of TgPP6C significantly reduced the synchronous division of the parasite's daughter cells during endodyogeny, resulting in disordered rosettes. Moreover, the six conserved motifs of TgPP6C were required for efficient endodyogeny. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed that ablation of TgPP6C predominately altered the phosphorylation status of proteins involved in the regulation of the parasite cell cycle. Deletion of TgPP6C significantly attenuated the parasite virulence in mice. Immunization of mice with TgPP6C-deficient type I RH strain induced protective immunity against challenge with a lethal dose of RH or PYS tachyzoites and Pru cysts. Taken together, the results show that TgPP6C contributes to the cell division, replication and pathogenicity in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
Tachyzoites of the WT and RHΔpp6c were used to infect T-175 cell culture plastic flasks containing monolayers of HFFs using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5. To compensate for the low rate of cell division in mutant strain, RHΔpp6c was cultured for a longer duration compared to wild type. Therefore, cells infected by WT or RHΔpp6c tachyzoites were incubated for 36 h or 48 h, respectively, to maximize the number of tachyzoites inside the PVs, followed by washing with PBS and storage at –80 °C. For protein extraction, lysis buffer (1% SDS, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation) was added to each sample and vortexed for 5 min. The mixture was sonicated in an ice bath (sonication for 3 s, stop for 5 s, 25% power, power 220 W) and lysed for 3 min, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration of each sample was determined by BCA method.
For trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis, 30 μg of the protein solution was used for electrophoresis, followed by enzymatic digestion of the same amount of protein, and the volume was adjusted to the same volume with lysis buffer. Then, 1 volume of pre-cooled acetone was added, followed by vortexing and addition of 4 times of acetone at –20 °C/2 h. After centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min, acetone was added for washing. After the precipitate was air-dried, triethylammonium bicarbonate was added, and the ultrasound machine was used to break up the precipitate. Trypsin was added at 1:50 protease-to-protein mass ratio and the enzyme was hydrolyzed overnight. Dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 5 mM at 56 °C for 30 min. Then, iodoacetamide was added to make a final concentration of 11 mM, followed by incubation at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Finally, the peptides were desalted by Strata X SPE column. The peptides were dissolved in loading buffer solution (50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid), the supernatant was transferred to IMAC microspheres suspension and incubated on a rotary shaker with gentle shaking. To remove non-specifically adsorbed peptides and elute the enriched phosphopeptides, IMAC microspheres were washed sequentially with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and then an elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added,
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A, loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Solvent A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and solvent B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The gradient settings were 0-70 min 6%~24%B, 70-84 min 24%~35%B, 84-87 min 35%~80%B and 87-90 min 80%B, and the flow rate was maintained at 500nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 system. The peptides were subjected to capillary ion source for analsyis using TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). The electrospray voltage and scan range were 1.60 kV and 100-1700 m/z, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For bioinformatics analysis, the resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against T. gondii GT1 database ToxoDB (https://toxodb.org) using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Fold-Change (FC) > 1.5 or < –1.5 and P < 0.05 were set as the threshold for differentially phosphorylated proteins. The significantly enriched gene ontology (GO) terms of the differentially phosphorylated proteins were identified by comparing to the parasite genome in ToxoDB database (https://toxodb.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprotection, Toxoplasma gondii; phosphoprotein phosphatase 6 catalytic subunit; endodyogeny; cell division; phosphoproteomics; virulence

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China

### Submitter
Qinli Liang

### Lab Head
Dr xingquan zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


