### Accession
PXD014504

### Title
Glycosaminoglycan Domain Mapping of cellular chondroitin/dermatan sulfates

### Description
Here we report a simple and versatile approach for domain mapping of complex mixtures of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), GAGDoMa. The approach is based on orthogonal enzymatic depolymerization of the GAGs, generating internal oligosaccharide, non-reducing end, and linkage region GAG domains, nanoflow reversed-phase dibutylamine ion-pairing chromatography and negative mode higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS. GAGDoMa provides a detailed insight into the GAGome, and will be an important tool for the understanding of GAGs in cellular physiology and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
The xyloside 2-hydroxynaphthyl beta-D-xylopyranoside was used to display and amplify the chondroitin/dermatan sulfate GAGs expressed by two human cell lines, CCD-1095Sk cells and HCC70 cells (American Type Culture Collection). The cells were cultured as monolayers according to manufacturer’s instructions. At 70% confluency, the cells were preincubated in serum-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 Ham medium (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 h, followed by incubation with fresh medium supplemented with 100 uM of 2-naphthyl beta-D-xylopyranoside. After 48 h, the media were collected and the xyloside-primed GAGs isolated by diethylaminoethyl-Sepharose (GE Healthcare) and octyl-Sepharose (Sigma-Aldrich) chromatography, and then ethanol precipitation. The xyloside-primed GAGs were purified using a Superose 12 HR 10/30 column coupled to a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 Quaternary Analytical System and collected based on fluorescence of the naphthyl aglycon (excitation wavelength=229 nm, wavelength lambda=342 nm). Approximately 15 ug of xyloside-primed GAGs, as roughly estimated using the 1,9-dimethylmethylene blue method, were used for depolymerization with 100 mU chondroitinase ABC (EC 4.2.2.20) (Seikagaku) or 50 mU of each chondroitinase AC-I and -II (EC 4.2.2.5) (Seikagaku) in 50 mM NH4OAc pH 8.0 at 37°C for 16 h, or 50 mU chondroitinase B (EC 4.2.2.19) (R&D Systems) or heparinase II and III (EC 4.2.2.8) (overexpressed in E.coli, gift from Prof. Jian Liu) in 50 mM NH4OAc, 4 mM CaCl2 pH 7.3 at 37°C for 16 h. Samples were heat-inactivated and lyophilized before analyzed using LC-MS/MS.  Samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1200 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 400 ng of depolymerized xyloside-primed GAGs or 200–400 pg of disaccharide standards were used for each analytic run. The analytes were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 um Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (particle size 5 um; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 30 cm x 75 um analytical column packed in-house with 3 um Reprosil-Pur C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Germany) at 300 nl/min flow using a stepwise elution profile: from 0 to 30% B in 1 min, 30% B for 9 min, from 30 to 40% B in 1 min, 40% B for 9 min, from 40 to 50% B in 1 min, 50% B for 9 min, from 50 to 60% B in 1 min, 60% B for 9 min, from 60 to 70% B in 1 min, 70% B for 9 min, from 70 to 100% B in 1 min, 100% B for 14 min. The standards were analyzed using a shorter elution profile: from 0 to 30% B in 1 min, 30% B for 11 min, from 30 to 60% B in 1 min, 60% B for 11 min, from 60 to 100% B in 1 min, 100% B for 15 min. Solvent A was 5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM acetic acid in water, solvent B was 70% methanol, 5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM acetic acid. The column oven temperature was 50°C. Nano-Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in negative ionization mode at 1.8 kV with the ion transfer capillary temperature 325°C. Each sample was run at least three times with different MS/MS selection and fragmentation settings at normalized collision energies (NCEs) 60%, 70%, and 80% or only at NCE 80%; alternatively, NCE 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, and 60% were applied to each precursor (see raw files). For all runs, the automatic gain control (AGC) target in the full MS spectra was 10^6, precursor isolation window was 5 Da and the HCD spectra were recorded at 15,000 resolution with the first m/z 100 and an AGC target of 10^5; precursor ions with unassigned charge states were rejected. As a comparison, disaccharide standards (approximately 100 ng per analytical run) were analyzed by microflow LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RS chromatography system equipped with an in-house-made flow split and coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The analytes were separated using an Acquity BEH C18 column (300 Å pore size, 1.7 um particle size, 300 um x 150 mm column dimensions; Waters) under stepwise isocratic elution at approximately 2 ul/min flow. The following elution profile was used: 100% A-solvent (5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in H2O) for 13 min, at 30% B-solvent (5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in 70% MeOH) for 15 min, then at 60% B for 10 min, and at 100% B for 19 min. The electrospray source was operated in negative ionization mode at 3.5 kV. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 30,000 resolution in the m/z range 215–2,000 with the AGC target at 10^6. The 10 most intense precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 4.0 m/z units without a dynamic exclusion, fragmented using HCD at the NCE of 70% and 80%, and the MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with the first m/z 100 and the AGC target 10^5; precursor ions with unassigned charge states were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Glycomics data were processed using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and interpreted manually. For the data presentation, representative spectra were chosen in which the precursor masses were given as the monoisotopic masses to four decimal places and the annotated fragment masses were given to two decimal places of the highest intensity isotope peak.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are polysaccharides produced by most mammalian cells and involved in a variety of biological processes. However, due to the size and complexity of GAGs, detailed knowledge about the structure and expression of GAGs by cells, the glycosaminoglycome, is lacking. Here we report a straightforward and versatile approach for structural domain mapping of complex mixtures of GAGs, GAGDoMa. The approach is based on orthogonal enzymatic depolymerization of the GAGs to generate internal, terminating, and initiating domains, and nanoflow reversed-phase ion-pairing chromatography with negative mode higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) for structural characterization of the individual domains. GAGDoMa provides a detailed structural insight into the glycosaminoglycome, and offers an important tool for deciphering the complexity of GAGs in cellular physiology and pathology.

### Keywords
Higher-energy collision dissociation, Glycosaminoglycans, Glycomics, Negative ionisation mode, Dermatan sulfate, Gags, Ion-pairing reversed-phase chromatography, Hcd, Orbitrap elite, Chondroitin sulfate

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Jonas Nilsson
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


