### Accession
PXD019151

### Title
Secretome characterization of nucleus pulposus (NP) cells subjected to ER stress

### Description
Objective: Induction of ER stress has been shown to promote NP cell apoptosis and disc degeneration. However, little is known about its regulation by hypoxia and its contribution to extracellular matrix homeostasis.   Methods: NP cells were culture under hypoxia (1% O2) and normoxia (21% O2) to assess ER stress status. Tunicamycin and thapsigargin were used to induce canonical ER stress pathways and effects on cell secretome were assessed by proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. The relevance of these findings to aging and degeneration was investigated by analyzing microarray data of NP tissues from aged mice (GSE134955) and degenerated human discs (GSE70362).  Results: NP cells exhibited lower ER stress levels under hypoxia. ER stress inducers tunicamycin and thapsigargin promoted a canonical unfolded protein response. UPR further induced HIF-1 activity under hypoxia. NP cell secretome under ER stress showed an increased secretory pathway with a concomitant decrease in collagens, HAPLN1, and cell adhesion related proteins. Similar to our cell culture studies, NP tissues from aged mice and degenerated human discs presented higher levels of UPR markers and decreased levels of matrix components.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome Collection and Concentration NP cells were isolated from Sprague Dawley rats in accordance with approved protocols by Jefferson's IACUC. Cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Corning, 10-013-CV) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich, F6178) supplemented with antibiotics in T25 flasks until confluent (P0). Cells were passage into T75 flasks for expansion. The secretome of NP cells (P2) was collected following protocol by Fraga et al. (doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2013.06.028). Briefly, cells were seeded at a density of 12,000 cells/cm2 and maintained for 2 days in culture under hypoxia [in a Hypoxia Workstation (InvivO2 300, Baker Ruskinn, UK) with a mixture of 1% O2, 5% CO2, and 94% or 90% N2]. Then cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated with Opti-MEM medium (31985070, Thermo Fisher), 0% FBS with or without tunicamycin (5 mg/mL) or thapsigargin (40 nM) for 24 h. Following the treatment, the medium was collected and centrifuged at 1,200 rpm, for 10 min to remove any cell debris, concentrated (100 ×) by centrifugation using a 5 kDa cut-off concentrator (Vivaspin, GE Healthcare, UK) and frozen at -80°C until used for proteomic analysis.  Mass Spectrometry analysis To characterize the secretome, a non-targeted quantitative proteomic analysis by SWATH-MS [Anjo et al., doi:10.1002/pmic.201400221 (2015); Anjo et al., doi:10.1002/pmic.201600278 (2017)] was performed. The dried secretome samples were solubilized in 30 µL Laemmli buffer containing 1 µg of a recombinant protein (MBP-GFP) to be used as internal standard (IS) and retention time calibrator [Anjo et al., doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120163 (2019)]. Twenty-five microliters of each sample were used for SWATH-aMS analysis, and 5 µL of each replicate were combined to create representative pools of each experimental group to be used for protein identification/library generation (Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) experiments). All samples were digested with trypsin by Short-GeLC approach [Anjo et al., doi:10.1002/pmic.201400221 (2015); Anjo et al., DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7119-0_8 (2017)] with acrylamide as a alkylating agent. Samples were analyzed on a Triple TOFTM 5600 System (ABSciex®) in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of the pooled samples and, SWATH (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra) acquisition of each individual sample. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXPTM C18CL (300 μm ID × 15cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5μL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-2 min linear gradient from 2 to 5 %, 2-45 min linear gradient from 5 % to 30 % and, 45-46 min to 35 % of acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA and 5% DMSO. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (NewObjective). IDA experiments were performed for the three fractions of the condition-specific pooled samples, being the mass spectrometer set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000  – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, ABSciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and the same chromatographic conditions used as in the IDA run described above. A set of 60 windows of variable (width containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 250 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according with the window.

### Data Protocol
A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. Libraries were obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v5.0.1, ABSciex®), using the following parameters: i) searched against a database composed by the Rattus norvegicus database from SwissProt (release at May 2020; 8,094 sequences) and the sequences of the recombinant proteins used as internal standard (MBP-GFP - IS) [Anjo et al., doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120163 (2019)]; ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR [doi:10.1021/pr070492f (2008) and doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-179 (2009)]. Data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®), peptides and target fragment ions were selected automatically from the library using the criteria described in Lambert et al (Nature methods (2013)). After retention time adjustment using the IS peptides [Anjo et al., doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120163 (2019)], up to 20 peptides, with up to 5 fragments each, were chosen per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins in library file that were identified below 5% local FDR. The target fragment ions were automatically selected and peak groups were scored following the Lambert et al (Nature methods (2013)). Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis. Peptide that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least two of the three biological replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 minutes with 100 ppm XIC width. The levels of the proteins were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein that met the criteria described above (an adaptation of Collins et al. Nature methods (2013)) and normalized to the internal standard [Anjo et al., doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120163 (2019)].

### Publication Abstract
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is shown to promote nucleus pulposus (NP) cell apoptosis and intervertebral disc degeneration. However, little is known about ER stress regulation by the hypoxic disc microenvironment and its contribution to extracellular matrix homeostasis. NP cells were cultured under hypoxia (1% partial pressure of oxygen) to assess ER stress status, and gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches were used to assess the role of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1&#x3b1; in this pathway. In addition, the contribution of ER stress induction on the NP cell secretome was assessed by a nontargeted quantitative proteomic analysis by sequential windowed data independent acquisition of the total high-resolution mass spectra-mass spectrometry. NP cells exhibited a lower ER stress burden under hypoxia. Knockdown of HIF-1&#x3b1; increased C/EBP homologous protein, protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) levels, whereas HIF-1&#x3b1; stabilization decreased the expression of ER stress markers Ddit3, Hsp5a, Atf6, and Eif2a. Interestingly, ER stress inducers tunicamycin and thapsigargin induced HIF-1&#x3b1; activity under hypoxia while promoting the unfolded protein response. NP cell secretome analysis demonstrated an impact of ER stress induction on extracellular matrix secretion, with decreases in collagens and cell adhesion-related proteins. Moreover, analysis of transcriptomic data of NP tissues from aged mice and degenerated human discs showed higher levels of unfolded protein response markers and decreased levels of matrix components. Our study shows, for the first time, that hypoxia and HIF-1&#x3b1; attenuate ER stress responses in NP cells, and ER stress promotes inefficient extracellular matrix secretion under hypoxia.

### Keywords
Er stress, Collagens, Hypoxia, Secretome, Nucleus pulposus

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


