### Accession
PXD008954

### Title
Comparative proteomics of three species of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria under ammonia starved and ammonia replete conditions

### Description
In this experiment, we used advanced proteomics techniques to discern differences in energy allocation between three strains of ammonia oxidizing bacteria: Nitrosomonas europaea, Nitrosomonas ureae, and Nitrosospira multiformis, during ammonia starved and ammonia replete conditions. Replicate cultures in late log phase from the three strains were starved of ammonia for 24 hours and compared to replicate control cultures grown for the same period. All three species were grown with three biological replicates for each condition and species with the exception of two replicates from the N. ureae starved cultures due to sample processing loss. This study has, to our knowledge, produced the first complete proteomes of Nitrosospira multiformis and Nitrosomonas ureae.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from all sample pellets using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described in Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Methods, 6[5]). Briefly, SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl , 0.1 M DTT) was added in a 1:10 pellet:buffer ratio to sample pellets.  Samples were heated at 95°C for 10 minutes and vortexed periodically. This was followed by five minutes of water bath sonication. Once lysed, samples were centrifuged for five minutes at 21,000 x g to clear debris. Thirty microliters of the lysate were then mixed with 200 µL of UA solution (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl) in a 10 kDa Molecular Weight Cutoff (MWCO) 500 µL centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 minutes.  Two hundred microliters of UA were added again and the centrifuge step was repeated.  One hundred microliters of IAA solution (0.05 M Iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes after a brief mix at 600 rpm for one minute.  After the incubation, the samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 14,000 x g to remove all IAA solution. One hundred microliters of UA solution were then added and the samples were centrifuged for 20 minutes at 14,000 x g. This washing step was repeated two more times.  Then 100 µL of ABC buffer (50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate) were added and the samples were again centrifuged for 20 minutes. This step was also repeated two more times.  One microgram of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to each filter in 40 µL of ABC buffer.  The samples were briefly incubated at 600 rpm shaking for one minute and then placed in a wet chamber overnight at 37°C.  After 16 hours, the peptides were eluted by centrifuging for 20 minutes at 14,000 x g. Fifty microliters of 0.5 M NaCl solution were added to the filter and the samples were centrifuged again for 20 minutes at 14,000 x g to elute the remaining peptides. Approximate protein concentration was determined using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).          Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC-MS/MS runs were set up and prepared in a similar fashion to Hamann et al. (2016, Nature, 534). For each run, 20 µL of extracted peptide was first separated using an RSLCnano System UltiMate 3000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The maximum volume of peptide (20 µL) was loaded per sample as the BCA assay showed low protein concentration for all samples.  Once separated on the LC, the samples were then transferred to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 45°C via an integrated heating module.  The analytical column was connected via an EASY-Spray source to the Orbitrap mass spectrometer.  Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nL/min using a 260 minute gradient which was programmed as follows: the first 14 minutes of the program contained 98% eluent A solution (0.1% formic acid), and 2% eluent B solution (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), in the following minute eluent B solution went up to 5%, minutes 15-200 gradually raised the percent of eluent B solution to 31%, minutes 200-240 increased the percent of eluent B solution to 50%, then in minute 241, eluent B solution went up to 99% and stayed at this concentration for the final 20 minutes. In between each sample, two washes with acetonitrile and one blank were run to reduce and assess carry over. Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization and analyzed by the Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer at 70,000 resolution, and MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer at 17,500 resolution.  The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass as described in Olsen et al. (2005, Mol. Cell Proteomics. 4) with the modification that lock mass was detected in the full scan rather than by a separate selected ion monitoring scan injection.  Roughly 140,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample run.

### Data Protocol
A database for each specific strain was made using the complete genomes from each of Nitrosomonas europaea (Chain et al., 2003, J. Bacteriol. 185), Nitrosospira multiformis (Norton et al., 2008, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74), and Nitrosomonas ureae (Kozlowski et al., 2016, Am. Soc. Microbiol. 4). Common contaminating proteins were also added to each database. The program Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to analyze proteomics data for each strain separately.  Each constructed database was first digested in silico with trypsin.  Then, the MS/MS spectra for each strain were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node from the Proteome Discoverer program.  The following parameters were chosen as filters for the MS/MS searches: maximum two missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance and maximum three equal dynamic modifications per peptide. The three dynamic modifications included oxidation on methionine (+ 15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl addition on cysteine (+ 57.021 Da) and an acetyl group on the peptide’s N terminus (+ 42.011 Da). False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Percolator Node in Proteome Discoverer (Spivak et al., 2009, J. Proteome Res. 8). The Percolator algorithm was run with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, and a relaxed target FDR of 0.05.   Search results for all samples were combined into a multiconsensus report with Proteome Discoverer, which was used for all downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) are important members of terrestrial, marine, and industrial microbial communities and play a fundamental role in the Nitrogen cycle within these systems. They are responsible for the first step of nitrification, ammonia oxidation to nitrite. Although AOB are widespread and essential to environmental and industrial systems, where they regularly experience fluctuations in ammonia availability, no comparative studies of the physiological response of diverse AOB species at the protein level exist. In the present study, we used 1D-LC-MS/MS proteomics to compare the metabolism and physiology of three species of ammonia AOB, <i>Nitrosomonas europaea</i>, <i>Nitrosospira multiformis</i>, and <i>Nitrosomonas ureae</i>, under ammonia replete and ammonia starved conditions. Additionally, we compared the expression of orthologous genes to determine the major differences in the proteome composition of the three species. We found that approximately one-third of the predicted proteome was expressed in each species and that proteins for the key metabolic processes, ammonia oxidation and carbon fixation, were among the most abundant. The red copper protein, nitrosocyanin was highly abundant in all three species hinting toward its possible role as a central metabolic enzyme in AOB. The proteomic data also allowed us to identify pyrophosphate-dependent 6-phosphofructokinase as the potential enzyme replacing the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle enzyme Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase missing in <i>N. multiformis</i> and <i>N. ureae</i>. Additionally, between species, there were statistically significant differences in the expression of many abundant proteins, including those related to nitrogen metabolism (nitrite reductase), motility (flagellin), cell growth and division (FtsH), and stress response (rubrerythrin). The three species did not exhibit a starvation response at the proteome level after 24 h of ammonia starvation, however, the levels of the RuBisCO enzyme were consistently reduced after the starvation period, suggesting a decrease in capacity for biomass accumulation. This study presents the first published proteomes of <i>N. ureae</i> and <i>N. multiformis</i>, and the first comparative proteomics study of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, which gives new insights into consistent metabolic features and differences between members of this environmentally and industrially important group.

### Keywords
1d-lc, Ammonia, Nitrogen cycle, Nitrosomonas, Nitrification, Nitrosospira, Proteomes, Comparative proteomics, Ammonia oxidizing bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Jackie Zorz

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA


