### Accession
PXD020212

### Title
Proteomic Discovery and Validation of Diagnostic Plasma Biomarkers for Pulmonary Tuberculosis

### Description
Despite more than a century fighting against tuberculosis, the World Health Organisation has estimated that around 1.7 million people died of tuberculosis in 2016 and over a quarter of the world’s population is infected. One of the critical hurdles for stopping tuberculosis transmission is early and effective diagnosis of patients with the active pulmonary disease. Although important innovations in molecular diagnosis have been recently developed (e.g. Xpert MTB/RIF, Cepheid Inc., USA), there are no suitable tests for population screening at point-of-care. The current tuberculosis diagnosis pipeline presents a highly variable performance and requires access to reference laboratory facilities. A non-sputum based rapid test with high specificity and sensitivity could save ~400,000 lives per year. Therefore, new biomarkers for diagnosis are urgently required for identifying patients with early symptoms and to expedite treatment. Variable sensitivity and specificity can be overcome using a combination of multiple biomarkers (5). Proteins, as ultimate biological effectors, are ideal candidates for diagnostic biomarkers; consequently, proteomic studies are a crucial platform for biomarker discovery in tuberculosis. This work aims to develop a multi-marker panel for tuberculosis diagnosis with high performance capable of differentiating tuberculosis patients from relevant controls. Quantitative Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (qMudPIT) is applied for biomarker discovery identifying candidates for early diagnosis of tuberculosis. The multidimensional method optimised in this work led to the identification of 5022 plasma proteins and 3577 quantified proteins using iTRAQ labelling. Known and completely novel markers for active tuberculosis in plasma were identified including a peptide derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Complementary statistical and bioinformatic analysis were applied to prioritise candidates for validation in one or two independent cohorts. The plasma proteomic profile here described represents a power strategy for biomarker discovery and the panel proposed has the potential to be translated to a rapid test and which might contribute to tuberculosis control.

### Sample Protocol
The general workflow for the plasma proteomics analysis is illustrated in the and consists of five steps: (1) High-Performance Size Exclusion Chromatography (HP-SEC), (2) dialysis purification, (3) trypsinisation, (4) Stable isotope labelling, (5) peptide prefractionation using alkaline reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) (6) SPE purification on selected fractions and (7) on-line acidic RP-HPLC coupled to tandem mass spectrometry, nHPLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The general workflow for the plasma proteomics analysis is illustrated in the and consists of five steps: (1) High-Performance Size Exclusion Chromatography (HP-SEC), (2) dialysis purification, (3) trypsinisation, (4) Stable isotope labelling, (5) peptide prefractionation using alkaline reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) (6) SPE purification on selected fractions and (7) on-line acidic RP-HPLC coupled to tandem mass spectrometry, nHPLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
BACKGROUNDTuberculosis (TB) kills more people than any other infection, and new diagnostic tests to identify active cases are required. We aimed to discover and verify novel markers for TB in nondepleted plasma.METHODSWe applied an optimized quantitative proteomics discovery methodology based on multidimensional and orthogonal liquid chromatographic separation combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry to study nondepleted plasma of 11 patients with active TB compared with 10 healthy controls. Prioritized candidates were verified in independent UK (n = 118) and South African cohorts (n = 203).RESULTSWe generated the most comprehensive TB plasma proteome to date, profiling 5022 proteins spanning 11 orders-of-magnitude concentration range with diverse biochemical and molecular properties. We analyzed the predominantly low-molecular weight subproteome, identifying 46 proteins with significantly increased and 90 with decreased abundance (peptide FDR &#x2264; 1%, q &#x2264; 0.05). Verification was performed for novel candidate biomarkers (CFHR5, ILF2) in 2 independent cohorts. Receiver operating characteristics analyses using a 5-protein panel (CFHR5, LRG1, CRP, LBP, and SAA1) exhibited discriminatory power in distinguishing TB from other respiratory diseases (AUC = 0.81).CONCLUSIONWe report the most comprehensive TB plasma proteome to date, identifying novel markers with verification in 2 independent cohorts, leading to a 5-protein biosignature with potential to improve TB diagnosis. With further development, these biomarkers have potential as a diagnostic triage test.FUNDINGColciencias, Medical Research Council, Innovate UK, NIHR, Academy of Medical Sciences, Program for Advanced Research Capacities for AIDS, Wellcome Centre for Infectious Diseases Research.

### Keywords
Plasma, Tuberculosis, Hyper-fractionation, Biomarkers, Shotgun, Wgcna, Itraq

### Affiliations
Director | Proteome Exploration Laboratory | Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Division of Biology and Biological Engineering
Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK

### Submitter
Diana Garay

### Lab Head
Dr Spiro Garbis
Director | Proteome Exploration Laboratory | Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Division of Biology and Biological Engineering


