### Accession
PXD020735

### Title
Radiation response in human cardiac endothelial cells investigated by DIA-MS

### Description
The endothelium is the barrier separating blood and tissue. Radiation-induced enhanced inflammation leading to permeability of this barrier may increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was to investigate the onset of endothelial inflammatory pathways after radiation exposure. Human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCECest2) were exposed to radiation doses of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 2.0 and 10 Gy (60Co-γ). The cells were harvested 4 h, 24 h, 48 h and 1 wk post-irradiation. The proteomics analysis was performed in a label-free data-independent acquisition mode. The data were validated using bioinformatics and immunoblotting. The low- and moderate-dose-treated samples showed only small proteome changes. In contrast, an activation of DNA-damage repair, inflammation, and oxidative stress pathways was seen after high-dose treatments (2 and 10 Gy). The level of the DNA damage response protein DDB2 was enhanced early at the 10 Gy dose. The expression of proteins belonging to the inflammatory response or cGAS-STING pathway (STING, STAT1, ICAM1, ISG15) increased in a dose-dependent manner showing the strongest effects at 10 Gy after one week. This study suggests a connection between radiation-induced DNA damage and induction of inflammation and supports inhibition of cGAS-STING pathway in the prevention of radiation-induced cardiovascular disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and irradiation Human telomerase-immortalized coronary artery endothelial cells (HCECest2) were cultured at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 as described previously (Lowe and Raj 2014). Cells were grown in Human MesoEndo Cell Growth Medium Kit (Cell Applications, Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) until confluency. Cells were irradiated in a Caesium-137 source closed cabinet with ɣ-doses of 0 Gy, 0.25 Gy, 0.5 Gy, 2 Gy and 10 Gy (HWM-D-2000, dose rate 400 mGy/min) and were harvested after 4 h, 24 h, 48 h and one week to investigate radiation effects. During the experiment the cells were not passaged but every two days new medium was applied. The cells were harvested by removing the medium, washing twice with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline, scraped and centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min. Supernatant was discarded and the cell pellets were frozen at -80 °C until further usage. Four replicates of each time and dose point were made independent of each other.  Cell lysis All cell pellets were lysed with freshly prepared RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) containing phosphatase inhibitor (PhosStop, Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany) and protease inhibitor (cOmpleteTM, Roche) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein concentration was determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration was measured at 595 nm on an Infinite M200 (Tecan GmbH, Crailsheim, Germany).  Sample preparation  Sample preparation was done using FASP digest [28]. The HRM Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) was used for all samples according to manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) measurement MS data were acquired in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) as described previously [29] with the following changes: Peptides were eluted from column at 250 nl/min using increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 41 % over a 105 minutes gradient. Precursor peptides were isolated with 37 variable windows spanning from 300 to 1650 m/z at 30 000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and automatic injection time.  Spectral library Selected LC-MS/MS DDA data encompassing 43 raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific) using Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA) search engine node maintaining 1% peptide and protein FDR threshold. The peptide spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (Version 10, Biognosys) with default settings using the Proteome Discoverer result file. Spectronaut was equipped with the SwissProt human database (Release 2017.02, 20194 sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a few spiked proteins (e.g., Biognosys iRT peptide sequences). The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 11505 protein groups and 417843 peptide precursors.  Spectronaut analysis and data processing Mastermix containing peptides of all treatments was used to obtain the same quality overall measurements. The DIA MS data were analyzed using the Spectronaut 12 software applying default settings with the exception: quantification was limited to proteotypic peptides, no protein FDR was applied, data filtering was set to Qvalue 20% percentile, summing-up peptide abundances. Statistical analysis  For statistical analysis the normalized abundances were filtered for proteins identified with more than one unique peptide using the vsn-package (version 3.52.0) of R mean standard deviation. Plots were generated to look for variation between the different replicates. The normalized abundances were log2 transformed. Potential batch effects were corrected with the random effect model included in the limma-package (version 3.40.2) applying the duplicate correlation function on the replicate factor. Thereafter, fold changes and p-values were calculated based on dose- and time-dependency by setting contrasts either on 0 Gy or the time point 4 h. Dose, time and replicate were set as separate factors. By applying the q-value package (version 2.16.0) p-values were corrected to q-values using the Storey-correction method (Storey 2002). At least three biological replicates were used for all experiments. Proteins were considered significantly deregulated when the fold change of ± 1.3 in one of the dose and time points was reached and the false discovery rate q was ≤ 0.05 (Storey-corrected).  Bioinformatics Proteins were grouped based on the time and dose. Grouped proteins were further investigated for pathway affiliation using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen, Inc., CA, https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis).

### Publication Abstract
Radiation-induced inflammation leading to the permeability of the endothelial barrier may increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was to investigate potential mechanisms in vitro at the level of the proteome in human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCECest2) that were exposed to radiation doses of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 2.0 and 10 Gy (60Co-&#x3b3;). Proteomics analysis was performed using mass spectrometry in a label-free data-independent acquisition mode. The data were validated using bioinformatics and immunoblotting. The low- and moderate-dose-irradiated samples (0.25 Gy, 0.5 Gy) showed only scarce proteome changes. In contrast, an activation of DNA-damage repair, inflammation, and oxidative stress pathways was seen after the high-dose treatments (2 and 10 Gy). The level of the DNA damage response protein DDB2 was enhanced early at the 10 Gy dose. The expression of proteins belonging to the inflammatory response or cGAS-STING pathway (STING, STAT1, ICAM1, ISG15) increased in a dose-dependent manner, showing the strongest effects at 10 Gy after one week. This study suggests a connection between the radiation-induced DNA damage and the induction of inflammation which supports the inhibition of the cGAS-STING pathway in the prevention of radiation-induced cardiovascular disease.

### Keywords
Ddb2, Ionizing radiation, Proteomics, Cgas-sting-pathway, Inflammation, Stat1, Endothelial cells, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Institute for Radiation Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Soile Tapio
Institute for Radiation Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany


