### Accession
PXD013619

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of Francisella

### Description
Francisella possesses a non-canonical T6SS that is essential for efficient phagosomal escape and access to the cytosol of infected macrophages. Using a global and site-specific phosphoproteomic analysis of Francisella we identified here a unique phosphorylation site on IglB, the TssC homologue and a key component of the T6SS contractile sheath. Phosphorylation of the sheath may constitute a previously unrecognized mechanism contributing to the dynamics of assembly-disassembly of the T6SS.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, F. novicida was analysed in three independent biological replicates. Protein concentration was determined by DC assay (Biorad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An estimated 1.2 mg of proteins for each biological replicates were digested following a FASP protocol [Lipecka, 2016 #7235] slightly modified. Briefly, proteins were reduced using 100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1h at 60°C. Proteins were then split into four samples of 300 µg and applied on 30 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Microcon, Millipore, Germany, Cat No MRCF0R030). Samples were mixed with 200 µL of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (UA buffer) and centrifuged for 20 min at 15,000 x g. Filters were washed with 200 µL of UA buffer. Proteins were alkylated for 30min by incubation in the dark at room temperature with 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer. Filters were then washed twice with 100 µL of UA buffer (15,000 x g for 15 min) followed by two washes with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (15,000 x g for 10 min). Finally, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added to digest the proteins in 1:50 ratio for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 10min followed by one wash with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and vacuum dried. Phosphopeptides enrichment by titanium dioxide (TiO2) and phosphopeptides purification by graphite carbon (GC). Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out using a Titansphere TiO2 Spin tip (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere PHOS-TiO, GL Sciences Inc, Japan) an estimated 1.2 mg of digested proteins for each biological replicate. Briefly, the TiO2 Spin tips were conditioned with 20 µL of solution A (80% acetonitrile, 0,1% TFA), centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2min and equilibrated with 20µL of solution B (75% acetonitrile, 0,075% TFA, 25% lactic acid) followed by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 2 min. Peptides were resuspended in 10 µL of 2% TFA, mixed with 100 µL of solution B and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10min. Sample was applied back to the TiO2 Spin tips two more times in order to increase the adsorption of the phosphopeptides to the TiO2. Spin tips were washed with, sequentially, 20 µL of solution B and two times with 20 µL of solution A. Phosphopeptides were eluted by the sequential addition of 50 µL of 5% NH4OH and 50 µL of 5% pyrrolidine. Centrifugation was carried out at 1,000 x g for 5 min. Phosphopeptides were further purified using GC Spin tips (GL-Tip, Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc, Japan). Briefly, the GC Spin tips were conditioned with 20 µL of solution A, centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2 min and equilibrated with 20 µL of solution C (0,1% TFA in HPLC-grade water) followed by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 2 min. Eluted phosphopeptides from the TiO2 Spin tips were added to the GC Spin tips and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 5 min. GC Spin tips were washed with 20 µL of solution C. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 70 µL of solution A (1,000 x g for 3 min) and vacuum dried. nanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification. Samples were resuspended in 12 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (180 min), 40% to 80% (6 min). At 181 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Phosphopeptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-8 acquisition method. Phosphopeptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 1 x 106 counts with maximum injection time set to 250 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 2 x 105 with maximum injection time set to 250 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 1.800 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Following nanoLC-MS/MS acquisition. The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot F. tularensis subsp. novicida database (release 28-04-2014, 1719 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) were set as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously[Cox, 2008 #7237]. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output.  The phosphopeptides output table and the corresponding logarithmic intensities were used for phosphopeptide analysis. The phosphopeptide table was expanded to separate individual phosphosites, and we kept all sites identified at least once in the three independent replicates of the analysis of F. novicida.  All data analysis of mass spectrometry data was performed in Perseus 1.6.0.7. For functional class annotation, we also integrated COG and EggNog databases in Perseus 1.6.0.7, freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009225.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial pathogen <i>Francisella tularensis</i> possesses a noncanonical type VI secretion system (T6SS) that is required for phagosomal escape in infected macrophages. KCl stimulation has been previously used to trigger assembly and secretion of the T6SS in culture. By differential proteomics, we found here that the amounts of the T6SS proteins remained unchanged upon KCl stimulation, suggesting involvement of post-translational modifications in T6SS assembly. A phosphoproteomic analysis indeed identified a unique phosphorylation site on IglB, a key component of the T6SS sheath. Substitutions of Y139 with alanine or phosphomimetics prevented T6SS formation and abolished phagosomal escape whereas substitution with phenylalanine delayed but did not abolish phagosomal escape in J774-1 macrophages. Altogether our data demonstrated that the Y139 site of IglB plays a critical role in T6SS biogenesis, suggesting that sheath phosphorylation could participate to T6SS dynamics.Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013619; and on MS-Viewer, key lkaqkllxwx.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Francisella, Type vi secretion system

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Plateforme protéomique 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Plateforme protéomique 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France


