### Accession
PXD018807

### Title
Copper detoxification machinery of the brain-eating amoeba Naegleria fowleri involves copper-translocating ATPase and the antioxidant system

### Description
Copper is a trace metal that is necessary for all organisms but toxic when present in excess. Different mechanisms to avoid copper toxicity have been reported to date in pathogenic organisms such as Cryptococcus neoformans and Candida albicans. However, little if anything is known about pathogenic protozoans despite their importance in human and veterinary medicine. Naegleria fowleri is a free-living amoeba that occurs naturally in warm fresh water and can cause a rapid and deadly brain infection called primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM). Here, we describe the mechanisms employed by N. fowleri to tolerate high copper concentrations, which include various strategies such as copper efflux mediated by a copper-translocating ATPase and upregulation of the expression of antioxidant enzymes and obscure hemerythrin-like and protoglobin-like proteins. The combination of different mechanisms efficiently protects the cell and ensures its high copper tolerance, which can be advantageous both in the natural environment and in the host. Nevertheless, we demonstrate that copper ionophores are potent antiamoebic agents; thus, copper metabolism may be considered a therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
N. fowleri cells supplemented with 25 μM CuSO4 were used as a control, and cells supplemented with 100 μM or 1 mM copper were used for the copper overload investigation. The cells (grown in triplicate) were washed three times with PBS and pelleted. Whole-cell proteomic analysis of the samples was carried out using the method described by Mach et al. (64) employing nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data were searched with MaxQuant software (72) against the AmoebaDB⁠ (23) N. fowleri database downloaded on 6th Aug 2018. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine (Unimod #: 4) was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (Unimod #: 35) was allowed as a variable modification. Further processing of the data was performed with Perseus software (73). Normalized label-free quantitation values of intensities were used. We filtered out reverse hits, potential contaminants and proteins identified only by site. Then, we took the log of the intensities (binary logarithms) and filtered out proteins with insufficient numbers of valid quantification values (leaving only those with at least 2 values in at least one group). The Student’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used to evaluate significantly changed proteins at the 5% false discovery rate level. Only the proteins that changed more than 1.5 fold or those found in just one condition and having a normalized intensity greater than 23 were taken into account. The selected proteins were manually annotated using HHpred (74) or by sequence alignment with homologous proteins from other organisms using BLAST (75)⁠. Bioinformatics analysis was performed using Geneious Prime® 2019.2.3 (www.geneious.com).

### Publication Abstract
Copper is a trace metal that is necessary for all organisms but toxic when present in excess. Different mechanisms to avoid copper toxicity have been reported to date in pathogenic organisms such as Cryptococcus neoformans and Candida albicans. However, little if anything is known about pathogenic protozoans despite their importance in human and veterinary medicine. Naegleria fowleri is a free-living amoeba that occurs naturally in warm fresh water and can cause a rapid and deadly brain infection called primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM). Here, we describe the mechanisms employed by N. fowleri to tolerate high copper concentrations, which include various strategies such as copper efflux mediated by a copper-translocating ATPase and upregulation of the expression of antioxidant enzymes and obscure hemerythrin-like and protoglobin-like proteins. The combination of different mechanisms efficiently protects the cell and ensures its high copper tolerance, which can be advantageous both in the natural environment and in the host. Nevertheless, we demonstrate that copper ionophores are potent antiamoebic agents; thus, copper metabolism may be considered a therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Naegleria fowleri, Copper transporting atpase, Copper, Hemerythrin, Ionophores

### Affiliations
Charles University
Robert Sutak, Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec, Czech Republic.

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Sutak
Robert Sutak, Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec, Czech Republic.


