### Accession
PXD027923

### Title
Analysis of the impact of DICER1 and DROSHA on the angio-genic capacity of human endothelial cells

### Description
RNAi-mediated knockdown of DICER1 and DROSHA, enzymes critically involved in miRNA biogenesis, has been postulated to affect the homeostasis and the angiogenic capacity of human endothelial cells. To re-evaluate this issue, we reduced the expression of DICER1 or DROSHA by RNAi-mediated knockdown and subsequently investigated the effect of these interventions on the angiogenic capacity of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) in vitro (proliferation, migration, tube formation, endothelial cell spheroid sprouting) and in a HUVEC xenograft assay in immune incompetent NSGTM mice in vivo. In contrast to previous reports, neither knockdown of DICER1 nor knockdown of DROSHA profoundly affected migration or tube formation of HUVEC or the angiogenic capacity of HUVEC in vivo. Furthermore, knockdown of DICER1 and the combined knockdown of DICER1 and DROSHA tended to increase VEGF-induced BrdU incorporation and induced angiogenic sprouting from HUVEC spheroids. Consistent with these observations, global proteomic analyses showed that knockdown of DICER1 or DROSHA only moderately altered HUVEC protein expression profiles but additively reduced, for example, expression of the angiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin-1. In conclusion, global reduction of miRNA biogenesis by knockdown of DICER1 or DROSHA does not inhibit the angiogenic capacity of HUVEC. Further studies are therefore needed to elucidate the influence of these enzymes in the context of human endothelial cell-related angiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteome analyses, Protein Isolation and TMT Labeling For TMT labeling experiments, HUVEC were transduced with lentiviral vectors for stable delivery of shRNA directed against DICER1, DROSHA or DICER1 and DROSHA or for stable expression of non-targeting shRNA control, respectively. 72 hours post transduction, cells were washed, harvested, and lysed using commercial lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology) supplemented with a premade protease- and phosphatase-cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were subsequently stored on ice and homogenized by sonication, after which protein concentrations were quantified by BCA analysis according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Aliquots of cell lysates containing 100 μg total protein were taken and further processed for LCMS analysis following an adapted FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) protocol. Briefly, protein samples were incubated and washed with UA (8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) ,pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP) in 0.5 ml Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter units (30 kD cutoff, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) by centrif-ugation at 14,000 g for 2 x 10 min, alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) at RT for 20 min in the dark and washed twice with 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 (2 x 10 min at 18,000 g) before incubation with 40 µl of trypsin (2 µg) in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 at 37 °C overnight. Digests were labeled with TMT 10plex isobaric labels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol before the differently labeled samples were combined for subsequent analyses.   LC–MS/MS Analysis Peptide solutions were analyzed by liquid chromatography / tandem mass spec-trometry (LC-MS/MS) on Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC systems coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a an EASY-Spray™ ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an RP C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 μl/min and washed with 0.1 % (v/v) TFA for 15 min at 30 μL/min before elution and separation on a self-packed RP C18 separation column (PicoFrit, 75 μM × 250–500 mm, 15 µm tip diam-eter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch, Germany) equilibrated with 3% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1 % (v/v) FA (formic acid), solvent B: ACN, 0.08 % (v/v) FA). A gradient from 3–40 % solvent B within 360 min at 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides from the separation column. Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode using stepped HCD (high energy collisional dissociation, normalized collision energies (NCE): 30, 35, 40 %) and CID (collisional induced dissociation, NCE: 35 %) for fragmentation. For data acquisition, each high-resolution full scan (m/z 300 to 1,500, R = 120,000, target value (TV) 400,000, max. injection time (IT) 50 ms) in the orbitrap was followed by high-resolution (R = 60,000, TV 50,000, IT 50 ms, isolation window 1.3 Th) in the orbitrap and low resolution product ion scans in the linear ion trap (TV 10,000, IT 50 ms, isolation window 2 Th) for charge states 2+ to 7+ within 5 seconds, starting with the most intense signal in the full scan mass spectrum. Dynamic exclusion (duration 45 s, window ± 2 ppm) was enabled. The Xcalibur software (version 4.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for data acquisition

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot database (UP000005640, Taxonomy Homo sapiens, 78,120 entries) using the Byonic algorithm (version 2.16.2 Protein Metrics Inc.). A maximum mass deviation of 15 ppm was applied for precursor ions, whereas for product ions, max. 0.6 Da (linear ion trap data) and 30 ppm (orbitrap data) were allowed. Oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein N-termini, and phosphorylation of S, T and Y were set as variable modifications, and carbami-domethylation of cysteines modification of peptide N-termini as well as modifications of Lys by the TMT label were included as fixed modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were considered for peptides and allowing for semi-specific digestion. Automatic score cut for peptide output and protein FDR was left for downstream pro-cessing (as recommended). Individual results files were exported as mzIdentML files with associated MGF spectra files, and imported into Scaffold 5 (Proteome Software Inc). Proteins were accepted at 95% FDR threshold for quantification. Quantification was performed using the TMT reporter ion ratio derived from the FT HCD spectra.

### Publication Abstract
RNAi-mediated knockdown of DICER1 and DROSHA, enzymes critically involved in miRNA biogenesis, has been postulated to affect the homeostasis and the angiogenic capacity of human endothelial cells. To re-evaluate this issue, we reduced the expression of DICER1 or DROSHA by RNAi-mediated knockdown and subsequently investigated the effect of these interventions on the angiogenic capacity of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) <i>in vitro</i> (proliferation, migration, tube formation, endothelial cell spheroid sprouting) and in a HUVEC xenograft assay in immune incompetent NSG<sup>TM</sup> mice <i>in vivo</i>. In contrast to previous reports, neither knockdown of DICER1 nor knockdown of DROSHA profoundly affected migration or tube formation of HUVEC or the angiogenic capacity of HUVEC <i>in vivo</i>. Furthermore, knockdown of DICER1 and the combined knockdown of DICER1 and DROSHA tended to increase VEGF-induced BrdU incorporation and induced angiogenic sprouting from HUVEC spheroids. Consistent with these observations, global proteomic analyses showed that knockdown of DICER1 or DROSHA only moderately altered HUVEC protein expression profiles but additively reduced, for example, expression of the angiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin-1. In conclusion, global reduction of miRNA biogenesis by knockdown of DICER1 or DROSHA does not inhibit the angiogenic capacity of HUVEC. Further studies are therefore needed to elucidate the influence of these enzymes in the context of human endothelial cell-related angiogenesis.

### Keywords
Dicer1; drosha; rna interference, Endothelial cells; angiogenesis; microrna biogenesis

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther-Üniversität Halle-Wittenberg
Prof. Dr. Ralf Benndorf Abteilung für Klinische Pharmazie und Pharmakotherapie Institut für Pharmazie Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Matt Fuszard

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf A. Benndorf
Prof. Dr. Ralf Benndorf Abteilung für Klinische Pharmazie und Pharmakotherapie Institut für Pharmazie Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg


