### Accession
PXD017250

### Title
A TMT-based quantitative proteome analysis to elucidate the TSWV induced signaling cascade in susceptible and resistant cultivars of Solanum lycopersicum

### Description
Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), transmitted by small insects known as thrips, is one of the major threats to tomato productivity across the globe. In addition to tomato, this virus infects more than 1000 other plants belonging to 85 families and is a cause of serious concern. Very little, however, is known about the molecular mechanim of TSWV induced signaling in plants. Here, we used a TMT-based quantitative proteome analysis to investigate the protein profiles of tomato leaves of two cultivars (cv 2621and 2689; susceptible and resistant respectively to TSWV infection) following TSWV inoculation. This approach resulted in the identification of 5112 proteins of which 1022 showed significant changes in response to TSWV. While the proteome of resistant cultivar majorly remain unaltered, proteome of susceptible cultivar showed distint differences following TSWV infection. TSWV modulated proteins in tomato included those with functions previously implicated in plant defence incuding secondary metabolism, ROS detoxification, MAP kinase signaling, Calcium signaling and jasmonate biosynthesis, among others. Taken together, these results provide new insights into the TSWV induced signaling in tomato leaves and may be useful in future to manage this deadly disease of plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and TMT labelling was carried out. In brief, proteins from the control and TSWV infected leaves of susceptible and resistant cultivars were extracted using Tris‐Mg/NP‐40 buffer (0.5 M Tris‐HCl (pH 8.3), 2% v/v NP‐40, 20 mM MgCl2) followed by TCA/Acetone precipitation of the proteins. Protein pellets thus obtained were dissolved in the denaturation buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT in 100mM TEAB buffer pH8.5. Trypsin digestion was carried out using FASP method and peptides so obtained were quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s protocol. For TMT-labeling, 40 μg of peptides from each sample labeled with 170 μg of TMT reagents dissolved in anhydrous ACN using a TMT 10-plex kit with each sample labeled in four replicates and two pooling samples (prepared for normalization between runs by combining 20 μg of the peptide from each individual sample). Prior to incubation of the peptides with TMT reagents, additional ACN was added to a final concentration of 30% (v/v). After incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Finally, all the labeled peptides from different samples and pooled references were combined together and lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 2% ACN and desalted using Oasis® HLB 1cc (360 mg) solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried down, dissolved again in 15 mM ammonium formate containing 2% ACN and fractionated into 12 fractions using an in-house developed stage tip containing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) and POROS™ 20 R2 reversed-phase resin (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), as per the method described previously.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the rice protein database (88, 647 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two-missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification while TMT-labeled N-term, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length of six amino acids was specified and “match between runs” (MBR) was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min. The allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analyses, hierarchical clustering analysis (HCL), and principal component analysis (PCA) were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Hits were only retained if they were quantified in at least 70% of the total replicates. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphopeptides that were reproducibly identified in at least two out of three replicates of at least one sample with score >40 and delta score >7 were considered as valid identification and used for the further analysis. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Multiple sample test (ANOVA) threshold of 0.05 was applied to identify the significant differences (≥1.5 fold change) in the protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
<b>:</b> Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), transmitted by small insects known as thrips, is one of the major threats to tomato productivity across the globe. In addition to tomato, this virus infects more than 1000 other plants belonging to 85 families and is a cause of serious concern. Very little, however, is known about the molecular mechanism of TSWV induced signaling in plants. Here, we used a tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative proteome approach to investigate the protein profiles of tomato leaves of two cultivars (cv 2621 and 2689; susceptible and resistant to TSWV infection, respectively) following TSWV inoculation. This approach resulted in the identification of 5112 proteins of which 1022 showed significant changes in response to TSWV. While the proteome of resistant cultivar majorly remains unaltered, the proteome of susceptible cultivar showed distinct differences following TSWV inoculation. TSWV modulated proteins in tomato included those with functions previously implicated in plant defense including secondary metabolism, reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification, mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling, calcium signaling and jasmonate biosynthesis, among others. Taken together, results reported here provide new insights into the TSWV induced signaling in tomato leaves and may be useful in the future to manage this deadly disease of plants.

### Keywords
Tandem-mass tags (tmt), Plant-pathogen interaction, Signaling, Map kinase, Proteomics, Tswv, Tomato

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, South Korea


