### Accession
PXD017862

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid of preeclamptic and normotensive pregnant women compared to non-pregnant women analyzed with mass spectrometry.

### Description
The objective of the present study was to study whether pregnancy-related proteins are associated with preeclampsia.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples from 30 preeclamptic patients, 30 normotensive pregnant women, and 29 non-pregnant women were obtained. CSF samples (1 mL) were obtained during the spinal anesthesia procedure before caesarean section in pregnant women. In non-pregnant women, this sample was obtained while performing the spinal anesthesia for an elective surgical procedure. The needle used during the spinal puncture was a 25 or 27 Gauge atraumatic needle. The CSF sample was collected before the administration of anesthetics. Within one hour after sampling the CSF samples were centrifuged and cells in the pellet were discarded. The CSF was aliquoted and stored immediately at -20ºC and subsequently stored within 8 hours at -80ºC.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in two ways: 1) for peptide and subsequent protein identifications the raw data were processed and analyzed as previously described (van den Berg et al., 2016) using Progenesis software (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle‐upon‐Tyne, UK) (“Progenesis method”) and 2) using Scaffold software (Proteome Software, version 4.7.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) in which just proteins identified by Mascot were loaded and analysed (“Scaffold method”).

### Publication Abstract
Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific multiorgan disorder in which impaired placental functioning and excessive oxidative stress play an important role. We previously showed distinct differences between cerebrospinal fluid proteins in patients with preeclampsia and normotensive pregnant women. An additional group of nonpregnant women was included to study the presence of pregnancy-related proteins in normotensive and preeclamptic pregnancies and whether pregnancy-related proteins were associated with preeclampsia. Cerebrospinal fluid samples were tryptically digested and subsequently measured with a nano-LC-tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometry system. Proteins were identified by shotgun proteomic analysis based on a data-dependent acquisition method. Proteins identified in preeclampsia, normotensive pregnant controls, and nonpregnant groups were compared to the Progenesis method according to the criteria as previously described and with a secondary analysis using a Scaffold method including Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing. For preeclampsia, the Progenesis and the Scaffold method together identified 15 (eight proteins for both analyses with one overlap) proteins that were significantly different compared to normotensive control pregnancies. Three of these 15 proteins, which were elevated in cerebrospinal fluid of preeclamptic women, were described to be pregnancy proteins with a calcium-binding function. Using two analysis methods (Progenesis and Scaffold), four out of 15 differential proteins were associated with pregnancy, as described in the literature. Three out of the four pregnancy-related proteins were elevated in preeclampsia. Furthermore, the contribution of elevated (<i>n</i> = 4/15) and downregulated (<i>n</i> = 2/15) calcium-binding proteins in preeclampsia is remarkably high (40%) and needs to be elucidated further.

### Keywords
Blood-brain barrier; cerebrospinal fluid; preeclampsia; pregnancy; calcium-binding proteins

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Lab Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Lab Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


