### Accession
PXD037046

### Title
Proteomic characterization of plasma membrane-enriched fraction from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv Samsun) pollen tubes.

### Description
Pollen germination and subsequent pollen tube elongation are essential for successful land plant reproduction. These processes are achieved through well-documented activation of membrane trafficking and cell metabolism. Despite this, our knowledge of the dynamics of cellular phospholipids remains scarce. In this project, we analyzed the turnover of the glycerolipid composition during the establishment of cell polarity and elongation processes in tobacco pollen and described the proteo-lipid composition of pollen plasma membrane-enriched. To achieve this, we have combined several techniques, such as lipidomics, live-cell microscopy, and plasma membrane isolation coupled with mass spectrometry-based proteomic characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane-enriched fraction was isolated from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv Samsun) pollen tube culture, using Minute™ Plant Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation Kit (Invent Biotechnologies, Inc.). Briefly, 0.15 g of dry tobacco pollen was germinated for 3 hours, and pollen tubes were collected by gentle filtration using a vacuum pump with a Miracloth filter. The sample was then split into two fractions, plasma membrane-enriched fraction was isolated according to the manufacturer’s instructions, flash-frozen in the liquid nitrogen, and kept at -80 °C. The samples were on-filter digested (eFASP, DOI: 10.1021/pr4010019) by trypsin. The resulting peptides were separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Mass Spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as describe previously (DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M114.041012,DOI: 10.3390/cells9122547). The peptides were trapped and desalted with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 30 μL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 column (5 μm, 5 mm by 300-μm internal diameter (ID); Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (2 μm, 50-cm by 75-μm ID; ThermoFisher Scientific). The 125-min elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min was set to 5% phase B (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile) and 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) for the first 1 min. Then, the content of acetonitrile was increased gradually. The orbitrap mass range was set from m/z 350 to 2000, in the MS mode, and the instrument acquired fragmentation spectra for ions of m/z 100 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
A Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification using Sequest and Amanda as search engines against a database of Nicotiana tabacum downloaded from UNIPROT June 2020 and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tobacco, Plasma membrane, Polarity, Pollen, Pollen tube, Tip growth

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, CAS
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubálek
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, CAS


