### Accession
PXD024443

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals dendritic cell- specific STAT signaling after α2-3–linked sialic acid ligand binding

### Description
Dendritic cells (DCs) are key initiators of the adaptive immunity, and upon recognition of pathogens are able to skew T cell differentiation to elicit appropriate responses. DCs possess this extraordinary capacity to discern external signals using receptors that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns. These can be glycan-binding receptors that recognize carbohydrate structures on pathogens or pathogen-associated patterns that additionally bind receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). This study explores the early signaling events in DCs upon binding of α2-3 sialic acid (α2-3sia) that are recognized by Immune inhibitory Sialic acid binding immunoglobulin type lectins. α2-3sias are commonly found on bacteria, e.g. Group B Streptococcus, but can also be expressed by tumor cells. We investigated whether α2-3sia conjugated to a dendrimeric core alters DC signaling properties. Through phosphoproteomic analysis, we found differential signaling profiles in DCs after α2-3sia binding alone or in combination with LPS/TLR4 co-stimulation. α2-3sia was able to modulate the TLR4 signaling cascade, resulting in 109 altered phosphoproteins. These phosphoproteins were annotated to seven biological processes, including the regulation of the IL-12 cytokine pathway. Secretion of IL-10, the inhibitory regulator of IL-12 production, by DCs was found upregulated after overnight stimulation with the α2-3sia dendrimer. Analysis of kinase activity revealed altered signatures in the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. PhosphoSTAT3 (Ser727) and phosphoSTAT5A (Ser780), involved in the regulation of the IL-12 pathway, were both downregulated. Flow cytometric quantification indeed revealed de- phosphorylation over time upon stimulation with α2-3sia, but no α2-6sia. Inhibition of both STAT3 and -5A in moDCs resulted in a similar cytokine secretion profile as α-3sia triggered DCs. Conclusively, this study revealed a specific alteration of the JAK-STAT pathway in DCs upon simultaneous α2-3sia and LPS stimulation, altering the IL10:IL-12 cytokine secretion profile associated with reduction of inflammation. Targeted control of the STAT phosphorylation status is therefore an interesting lead for the abrogation of immune escape that bacteria or tumors impose on the host.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2.5•10E7 day 4 moDCs were stimulated at 37°C with 1 µM of the dendrimer with or without LPS (Sigma-Aldrich). After 30 minutes, the cells were immediately cooled to 4°C by placement on ice and washed using pre-cooled 4°C PBS. Lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M CH4N2O, 1 mM Na3VO4, 2.5 mM Na4P2O7, and 1 mM Na2C3H7PO6) was freshly prepared and added to the cells. After vortexing the cells were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. 45 mM DDT was added to 10 mg protein, incubated for 30 minutes at 55°C, followed by reduction of the lysate. Subsequent addition of 110 mM iodoacetamide solution alkylated the protein lysate. The urea concentration was then diluted to 2 M with 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0 for digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (enzyme:protein 1:100 w/w). After acidification to 1% TFA, the tryptic peptides were then captured through solid-phase extraction with the OASIS HLB-based cartridges (Waters Corporation). After washing with 0.1% TFA, the peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile. Titanium dioxide (TiOx) chromatography was applied to capture the phosphopeptides. 500 µg desalted tryptic digests were diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/mL lactic acid, 0.07% TFA/53% acetonitrile). 200 µL pipette tips were fitted with a 16G-needle punch of a C8 disk EMPORE, on which 2.5 mg TiO2 was added. The TiOx bed was preconditioned with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile before equilibration with 0.3 g/mL lactic acid in 0.07% TFA/54% acetonitrile, allowing capture of phosphorylated serine and threonine peptides of the tryptic digest. After sequential washing of the bedding with lactic acid, and 0.1% TFA + 80% acetonitrile, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 0.5% and 5% (v/v) piperidine in 20% (v/v) phosphoric acid to quench the basic solution. Pipette tips (200 µL) were fitted with a 16G-needle punch of an EMPORE disk of poly(StyreneDivinylBenzene) material, preconditioned with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile, and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. After loading the enriched phosphopeptide mixture, the bedding was washed with 0.1% TFA. Through centrifugal filtration, the phosphopeptides were eluted in 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile, dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide, Peptide and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human reference proteome FASTA file (downloaded February 2015, 20197 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked (for the phospho-experiment).   Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized (‘normalised intensity) on the median of the log10 transformed intensity distribution. Protein IDs from the Lysate analysis were quantified using either spectral counting or LFQ. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) are key initiators of the adaptive immunity, and upon recognition of pathogens are able to skew T cell differentiation to elicit appropriate responses. DCs possess this extraordinary capacity to discern external signals using receptors that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns. These can be glycan-binding receptors that recognize carbohydrate structures on pathogens or pathogen-associated patterns that additionally bind receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). This study explores the early signaling events in DCs upon binding of &#x3b1;2-3 sialic acid (&#x3b1;2-3sia) that are recognized by Immune inhibitory Sialic acid binding immunoglobulin type lectins. &#x3b1;2-3sias are commonly found on bacteria, e.g. Group B <i>Streptococcus</i>, but can also be expressed by tumor cells. We investigated whether &#x3b1;2-3sia conjugated to a dendrimeric core alters DC signaling properties. Through phosphoproteomic analysis, we found differential signaling profiles in DCs after &#x3b1;2-3sia binding alone or in combination with LPS/TLR4 co-stimulation. &#x3b1;2-3sia was able to modulate the TLR4 signaling cascade, resulting in 109 altered phosphoproteins. These phosphoproteins were annotated to seven biological processes, including the regulation of the IL-12 cytokine pathway. Secretion of IL-10, the inhibitory regulator of IL-12 production, by DCs was found upregulated after overnight stimulation with the &#x3b1;2-3sia dendrimer. Analysis of kinase activity revealed altered signatures in the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. PhosphoSTAT3 (Ser727) and phosphoSTAT5A (Ser780), involved in the regulation of the IL-12 pathway, were both downregulated. Flow cytometric quantification indeed revealed de- phosphorylation over time upon stimulation with &#x3b1;2-3sia, but no &#x3b1;2-6sia. Inhibition of both STAT3 and -5A in moDCs resulted in a similar cytokine secretion profile as &#x3b1;-3sia triggered DCs. Conclusively, this study revealed a specific alteration of the JAK-STAT pathway in DCs upon simultaneous &#x3b1;2-3sia and LPS stimulation, altering the IL10:IL-12 cytokine secretion profile associated with reduction of inflammation. Targeted control of the STAT phosphorylation status is therefore an interesting lead for the abrogation of immune escape that bacteria or tumors impose on the host.

### Keywords
Human, Dendritic cells, Phosphoproteomics, Modc, Jak-stat, Α2-3 sialic acid, Label-free, Lps, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


