### Accession
PXD018964

### Title
Integrated analysis of sialotranscriptome and sialoproteome of the brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus (s.l.): insights into gene expression during blood feeding

### Description
Tick salivary glands secrete a complex saliva into their hosts which modulates vertebrate hemostasis, immunity and tissue repair mechanisms. In this work, we explored using transcriptomic and proteomic analysis the sialome of Rhipicephalus sanguineus (s.l.) adult female ticks feeding on a rabbit. Instead of grouping the ticks by days of feeding, we instead grouped them into six groups based on their weights which better demarks their feeding physiological state. We also included an unfed group. All groups had three replicates except for the unfed group that had two replicates. A total of 687 million reads from 20 libraries were assembled from which 71,643 coding sequences were extracted, 28,921 of which had a TPM (transcripts per million) of 10 or larger in at least one library. The translated transcripts served as a target database for a proteomic study, which identified 2,125 polypeptides. The correlations between transcriptional and translational results in the different groups were evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
After removal from the host, ticks were rinsed with ethanol 70% following a second rinsing with nuclease-free water. Ticks were dissected within two hours after removal from the host. Tick salivary glands were dissected in a fresh ice-cold PBS, pH 7.4. After dissection, salivary glands were washed gently in a fresh ice-cold PBS. After washing, dissected SGs were stored immediately in RNAlater prior to extracting total RNA. After removal from RNAlater, SGs were gently washed in nuclease-free phosphate-buffered saline pH 7.4, and immediately transferred to TRIzol® reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Total RNA and protein were isolated according to manufacturer’s specifications. Protein pellet was resuspended into Tris-HCl 100 mM, urea 8 M, pH 8.0. Protein concentration was measured using BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit, following the manufacturer’s recommendations and samples were stored at -80 °C upon usage. Approximately 6ug of protein from each sample was adjusted to a final volume of 30 µL with 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 in 8M urea. The samples were reduced in 5 mM DTT for 1 hour at room temperature followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes. The concentration of urea was reduced to 1.5 M by the addition of 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and 0.5 µg of LysC protease was added and incubated for 15 hours at 30°C. The urea concentration was reduced to 0.8 M with 100mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1µg of trypsin was added and incubated for 6 hours at 30 °C. The pH was adjusted to 2.5 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the samples were desalted on an Oasis HLB micro-elution plate. The peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile (AcCN) and the solvent was removed under vacuum at 50°C. The residue was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, 3% AcCN for injection.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2  and searched with ProLuCID against R. sanguineus database (71,643 entries) concatenated with Oryctolagus cuniculus from Uniprot reference database (21,176 entries) and reverse sequences of all entries. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20 ppm fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tick: saliva: proteome: parasite

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH
Laboratory of Bacteriology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Lucas Tirloni

### Lab Head
Dr Jose M. C. Ribeiro
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH


