### Accession
PXD019749

### Title
Berberine treated colon cancer cells LC-MSMS

### Description
This study aims to identify the underlying crucial proteins and regulatory networks associated with berberine treatment in colon cancer by using both proteomics analyses. Overall,this study shed a light for elucidating the related regulatory signalling pathways and discovering potential targets for berberine in colon cancer.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 and DLD1 cells were respectively treated with different concentrations (0 µM, 20 µM, 40 µM) of BBR, and the control (0 µM) was added with same amount of DMSO.After 48 h of treatment, the medium was removed and cells were rinsed three times with cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The cells were lysed directly with 8 M urea / 1 M NH4HCO3 solution and sonicated on ice until the solutions became clear.Denatured proteins in the 8 M urea / 1 M NH4HCO3 buffer from each sample was reduced by 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and then alkylated by 15 mM IAM at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The reaction was terminated by 2.5 mM DTT at room temperature for 10 min. The protein solutions were diluted two-fold with deionized water and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; enzyme to protein, 1:100, w/w) at 37 °C for 2 h with shaking. The solutions were further diluted four-fold, and proteins were digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; enzyme to protein, 1:100, w/w) at 37 °C with shaking. The digested samples were adjusted by 1% TFA to ensure the pH < 2. Then samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was retained. The peptides were desalted with C18 column (Waters, USA) and eluted by 60% ACN/ 0.1% TFA

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human proteome database using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3). The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The false discovery rates (FDR) of both peptide and protein identification were set to 1%.For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. The normalization of label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed based on the total intensities of all detected peaks in each LC-MS data . The medium of normalized ratios from non-modified peptides were used for the protein quantitation. Data processing and cluster analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.0.31. Contaminants and protein groups identified by a single peptide were filtered from the data set. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated as the percentage of reverse database matches out of total forward and reverse matches.

### Publication Abstract
Colon cancer is one of the most lethal malignancies worldwide. Berberine has been found to exert potential anti-colon cancer activity in vitro and in vivo, although the detailed regulatory mechanism is still unclear. This study aims to identify the underlying crucial proteins and regulatory networks associated with berberine treatment of colon cancer by using proteomics as well as publicly available transcriptomics and tissue array data. Proteome profiling of berberine-treated colon cancer cells demonstrated that among 5130 identified proteins, the expression of 865 and 675 proteins were changed in berberine-treated HCT116 and DLD1 cells, respectively. Moreover, 54 differently expressed proteins that overlapped in both cell lines were mainly involved in mitochondrial protein synthesis, calcium mobilization, and metabolism of fat-soluble vitamins. Finally, GTPase ERAL1 and mitochondrial ribosomal proteins including MRPL11, 15, 30, 37, 40, and 52 were identified as hub proteins of berberine-treated colon cancer cells. These proteins have higher transcriptional and translational levels in colon tumor samples than that of colon normal samples, and were significantly down-regulated in berberine-treated colon cancer cells. Genetic dependency analysis showed that silencing the gene expression of seven hub proteins could inhibit the proliferation of colon cancer cells. This study sheds a light for elucidating the berberine-related regulatory signaling pathways in colon cancer, and suggests that ERAL1 and several mitochondrial ribosomal proteins might be promising therapeutic targets for colon cancer.

### Keywords
Berberine, Lc-msms, Colon cancer cells

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, China
College of Life Science, Northwest University, China

### Submitter
Pengfei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
College of Life Science, Northwest University, China


