### Accession
PXD044449

### Title
Ecophysiology and interactions of a novel taurine-respiring bacterium in the mouse gut

### Description
Taurine-respiring gut bacteria produce H2S with ambivalent impact on host health. We report the isolation and ecophysiological characterization of the first taurine-respiring mouse gut bacterium. Taurinivorans muris represents a new widespread species that differs from the human gut sulfidogen Bilophila wadsworthia in its sulfur metabolism pathways and host distribution. T. muris specializes in taurine respiration in vivo, seemingly unaffected by mouse diet and genotype, but is dependent on other bacteria for release of taurine from bile acids. This dataset contains the total proteomic data from three independent growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Harvested cells, from three different growth conditions (Taurine, Sulfolactate, Thiosulfate) were disrupted using a UP50H – Compact Lab Homogenizer (Hielscher Ultrasound Technology, Germany) at cycle 0.5 and amplitude of 100%. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 10,000 x g) and the crude cell extracts were submitted to total proteomic analysis at the Proteomics Centre of the University of Konstanz. The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion with EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the proteins inferred from the LT0009 genome using Mascot (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer v 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Trypsin enzyme cleavage, static cysteine alkylation by chloroacetamide, and variable methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse gut, Taurine-respiration, Taurinivorans muris

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz, Microbial Ecology and Limnic Microbiology
Department of Biology, Microbial Ecology and Limnoc Microbiology, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Sabrina Borusak

### Lab Head
Dr David Schleheck
Department of Biology, Microbial Ecology and Limnoc Microbiology, University of Konstanz


