### Accession
PXD011757

### Title
Tc1 and Tc2 secretion proteome evaluation

### Description
The goal of this project is to dissect the mechanism by which Tc1 and Tc2 effector subtypes effect cell physiology in vitro. I utilized cellular proteomics to determine Tc1 and Tc2 secretion patterns and identify inflammatory factors that regulate cell polarization and physiology in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and peptides were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for proteomic analysis. The trypsinized peptide mixture was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences and Swiss Prot database (January 18, 2017 version). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.05 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Oral and gum health have long been associated with incidence and outcomes of cardiovascular disease. Periodontal disease increases myocardial infarction (MI) mortality by sevenfold through mechanisms that are not fully understood. The goal of this study was to evaluate whether lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from a periodontal pathogen accelerates inflammation after MI through memory T-cell activation. We compared four groups [no MI, chronic LPS, <i>day 1</i> after MI, and <i>day 1</i> after MI with chronic LPS (LPS + MI); <i>n</i> = 68 mice] using the mouse heart attack research tool 1.0 database and tissue bank coupled with new analyses and experiments. LPS + MI increased total CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in the left ventricle versus the other groups (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05 vs. all). Memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells (CD44<sup>&#xa0;+&#xa0;</sup>CD27<sup>+</sup>) were 10-fold greater in LPS + MI than in MI alone (<i>P</i> = 0.02). Interleukin (IL)-4 stimulated splenic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells away from an effector phenotype and toward a memory phenotype, inducing secretion of factors associated with the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling that promoted monocyte migration and decreased viability. To dissect the effect of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells after MI, we administered a major histocompatibility complex-I-blocking antibody starting 7 days before MI, which prevented effector CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell activation without affecting the memory response. The reduction in effector cells diminished infarct wall thinning but had no effect on macrophage numbers or MertK expression. LPS + MI + IgG attenuated macrophages within the infarct without effecting CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, suggesting these two processes were independent. Overall, our data indicate that effector and memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells at post-MI <i>day 1</i> are amplified by chronic LPS to potentially promote infarct wall thinning.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Although there is a well-documented link between periodontal disease and heart health, the mechanisms are unclear. Our study indicates that in response to circulating periodontal endotoxins, memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are activated, resulting in an acceleration of macrophage-mediated inflammation after MI. Blocking activation of effector CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells had no effect on the macrophage numbers or wall thinning at post-MI <i>day 1</i>, indicating that this response was likely due in part to memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells.

### Keywords
Tc1 and tc2 secretion

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, G378 Jackson MS 39216-4505
University of Mississippi Medical Center

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Flynn
University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, G378 Jackson MS 39216-4505


