### Accession
PXD013860

### Title
Alterations in lipid profile of the aging kidney identified by MALDI imaging mass spectrometry

### Description
During aging, the kidney undergoes functional and physiological changes that are closely affiliated with chronic kidney disease (CKD). There is increasing evidence supporting the role of lipid or lipid-derived mediators in the pathogenesis of CKD and other aging-related diseases. To understand the role of lipids in various metabolic processes during kidney aging, we conducted MALDI imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS) analysis in kidneys harvested from young (2 months old, n=3) and old mice (24 months old, n=3). MALDI-IMS analysis showed an increase in ceramide level and a decrease in sphingomyelin (SM) and phosphatidylcholine (PC) levels in kidneys of old mice. The increased expression of cPLA2 and SMPD1 protein in aged kidney was confirmed by immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis. Our MALDI-IMS data showed the altered distribution of lipids in aged kidney as indicative of aging-related functional changes of the kidney. Combined analysis of MALDI-IMS and IHC confirmed lipidomic changes and expression levels of responsible enzymes as well as morphological changes.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen tissue sections were thaw-mounted on glass slides coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The prepared slides were dried in a desiccator for approximately 20 min and stored at -80°C until use. A PS270 (Mr. Procon Boy FWA Platinum Airbrush, 0.2mm) combined with PS313 (Mr. Linear Compressor L5/Regulator Set with Pressure Gauge) and PS282 (Drain and Dust Catcher for Air Brush) was used to spray a total of 3 ml of the binary matrix solution for 50 μm resolution IMS and DHB or 9AA solution for high resolution IMS onto each tissue section. After matrix application, the homogeneity of the matrix on the tissue was assessed using the Chip-1000 (Shimadzu Biotech, Kyoto, Japan) scanning image. The MTP slide adaptor (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) mounted with the tissue section ITO glass slide was directly transferred to the MALDI mass spectrometer and analyzed

### Data Protocol
SCiLS lab software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany, Version was SCiLS Lab 2018b Core) was used for data analysis. The spectra from the whole kidney sections of young and old mice were compared with total ion count (TIC) normalization to obtain a list of lipids that showed significant differences in distribution. The regions of interest (ROIs) were set for the cortex and medulla compartmental structures with TIC normalization. For the additional high-resolution IMS study (5 µm resolution), the kidney sections of young and old mice were prepared and analyzed as described above. Differences in intensity between young and old mouse kidney were assessed by t-test (P<0.05) with molecular ion peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Kefir is a fermented dairy product, associated to health benefits because of being a probiotic and due to the presence of molecules with biological activity. In this work, we have profiled the peptide composition of goat milk kefir at three different fermentation times using a peptidomics approach, in order to study changes in peptide concentrations and patterns of protein digestion throughout the fermentation time. We identified 2328 unique peptides corresponding to 22 protein annotations, with a maximum of peptides found after 24&#x202f;h fermentation. We established different digestion patterns according to the nature of the proteins, and quantified the changes in the peptides appearing in all the fermentation times. We also identified 11 peptides that matched exactly to sequences with biological activity in databases, almost all of them belonging to caseins. This is the most comprehensive proteomic analysis of goat milk kefir to date.

### Keywords
Renal fibrosis, Lipidomics, Chronic kidney disease, Ckd, Ims

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University
Department of Applied Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, Global Center for Pharmaceutical Ingredient Materials, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Kyung Hee Medical Science Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

### Submitter
Joon Won Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, Global Center for Pharmaceutical Ingredient Materials, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Kyung Hee Medical Science Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.


