### Accession
PXD003299

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the rat canalicular membrane reveals expression of a complex system of P4-ATPases in liver

### Description
Transport processes in the canalicular membrane are key elements in bile formation and are the driving force of the enterohepatic circulation of bile salts. The canalicular membrane is constantly exposed to the detergent action of bile salts. One potential element protecting the canalicular membrane from the high canalicular bile salt concentrations may be bile salt resistant microdomains, however additional factors are likely to play a role. To obtain insight into the molecular composition of the canalicular membrane, the proteome of highly purified rat canalicular membrane vesicles was determined. Isolated rat canalicular membrane vesicles were stripped from adhering proteins, deglycosylated and protease digested before shot gun proteomic analysis. Expression of individual candidates was studied by PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemisty. A total of 2449 proteins were identified and 1282 were membrane or membrane associated proteins. About 50 % of the proteins identified here were absent from previously published liver proteomes. In addition to ATP8B1, four more P4-ATPases were identified. ATP8A1 and ATP9A shows expression specific to the canalicular membrane, ATP11C in the basolateral membrane and adjacent intracellular vesicles and ATP11A in an intracellular vesicular compartment partially colocalizing with RAB7A. This study helped to identify additional P4-ATPases from rat liver particularly in the canalicular membrane, previously not known to express in liver. These identified ATPases might be involved in transmembrane lipid homeostasis. The two newly identified P4-ATPases in the canalicular membrane may protect the canalicular membrane from the detergent action of bile salts.

### Sample Protocol
2 mg of cLPM were re-suspended and homogenized in 0.2M Na2CO3 along with protease inhibitor (Mini Complete, Roche) and were centrifuged at 100,000gav for 1hr at 4°C. The protein estimation was carried out using the BCA protein assay kit (Interchim, France). In solution digest: 2mg of extracted protein was first subjected to PNGase F (New England Biolabs, USA) treatment overnight at 37°C as instructed by the supplier on a thermoshaker (500rpm) for deglycosylation of the glycoproteins. This was followed by diluting the proteins in 20mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) and 0.1% Rapigest SF surfactant (Waters, UK). The samples were reduced using 5mM DTT for 30min at 60°C and alkylated using 45mM iodoacetamide for 30min in darkness at room temperature (RT). The reaction was quenched by adding 30mM DTT at RT for 10min. The resulting sample was then digested using trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega, Switzerland) at a ratio of 1:20 at 37°C for 3.5h at 700 rpm followed by centrifugation for 10min at maximum speed on table top centrifuge. The supernatant (S1) was collected and kept aside. The pellet was further digested by adding chymotrypsin and trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37⁰C at 700rpm. The reaction was stopped by adding 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluroacetic acid at 37°C, 30min rotating at 700 rpm and the supernatant (S2) was collected. S1 and S2 were pooled for further analysis. Pre-fraction by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography: To decrease the complexity of proteins pre-fractionation was performed using SCX chromatography. Peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in buffer A (10 mMKH2PO4, pH 2.7, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile), before loading onto the polysulfoethyl aspartamide A column (2.1 × 200 mm; PolyLC, USA) on an Agilent HP1100 binary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were eluted using an increasing KCl gradient (10–40 min, 0–30% buffer B; 40–60min 30–100% buffer B; (buffer B: 10mM KH2PO4, pH 2.7, 500mM KCl 30% (v/v) acetonitrile) and fractions of ~0.6 ml were collected. Eluted peptides were pooled based on the chromatogram into seventeen fractions. The fractions were desalted using ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Germany) following vendors protocol. MS acquisition: The desalted tryptic peptides were vacuum concentrated and resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled to an Eksigent nano LC system (Eksigent Technologies, USA). Peptide separation was obtained using self-packed reverse phase tip-column (75µm × 80 mm) packed with C18 material (AQ, 3 M, 200 Å; Bischoff GmbH, Germany,) as previously described in [12].

### Data Protocol
Data refinement and protein identification: Mascot distiller 2.3 was used to extract the peak list from all MS raw files [13]. The peak lists were searched against Rat Genome Database (RGD) that has been concatenated with its reversed sequences and elongated by common contaminants (e.g. human keratins and bovine proteins) using MASCOT 2.3 (Matrix Science, UK, www.matrixscience.com) [14]. The carbamidomethyl (Cys) was kept as fixed modification and oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn), acetylation N-term protein, and Gln  pyro-Glu (N-term Gln) were set as variable modifications. Precursor ions subjected to MS/MS were searched with a parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion error tolerance of 0.8 Dalton and a maximum of one missed cleavage on tryptic peptides were allowed. Mascot results were uploaded to Scaffold (Proteome Software, USA) [15] and later processed using Microsoft Excel 2010 (Microsoft Corp, USA) and analyzed using Pivot tables.

### Publication Abstract
Transport processes in the canalicular membrane are key elements in bile formation and are the driving force of the enterohepatic circulation of bile salts. The canalicular membrane is constantly exposed to the detergent action of bile salts. One potential element protecting the canalicular membrane from the high canalicular bile salt concentrations may be bile salt resistant microdomains, however additional factors are likely to play a role. To obtain more insights into the molecular composition of the canalicular membrane, the proteome of highly purified rat canalicular membrane vesicles was determined. Isolated rat canalicular membrane vesicles were stripped from adhering proteins, deglycosylated and protease digested before subjecting the samples to shot gun proteomic analysis. The expression of individual candidates was studied by PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. A total of 2449 proteins were identified, of which 1282 were predicted to be membrane proteins. About 50% of the proteins identified here were absent from previously published liver proteomes. In addition to ATP8B1, four more P4-ATPases were identified. ATP8A1 and ATP9A showed expression specific to the canalicular membrane, ATP11C at the bLPM and ATP11A in an intracellular vesicular compartment partially colocalizing with RAB7A and EEA1 as markers of the endosomal compartment. This study helped to identify additional P4-ATPases from rat liver particularly in the canalicular membrane, previously not known to be expressed in liver. These P4-ATPases might be contributing for maintaining transmembrane lipid homeostasis in hepatocytes.

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Proteomics, Cell localization, Phospholipid homeostasis

### Affiliations
University Hospital Zurich 
University Hospital Zurich, Clinical Pharmacology, Switzerland

### Submitter
Pururawa Mayank Chaubey

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Stieger
University Hospital Zurich, Clinical Pharmacology, Switzerland


