### Accession
PXD013941

### Title
Interacting partners of Rac1 (P29S/Q61L) compared to constitutively active Rac1 (Q61L)

### Description
Interactors of double mutant Rac1 (P29S/Q61L) compared to constitutively active Rac1 (Q61L).

### Sample Protocol
GFP-Trap pulldown:  Transiently transfected COS7 cells expressing GFP, GFP-Rac1 (Q61L), or GFP-Rac1 (P29S/Q61L) were washed twice with ice-cold PBS on ice and scraped with 400 μL of lysis buffer. Lysates were kept on ice 30 mins and thoroughly mixed every 10 mins by pipetting/vortexing.  Soluble proteins were collected after a 10 min centrifugation step at 15000 rpm and protein concentrations were measured as with PrescisionRed.  Pre-equilibriate the GFP_TRAP_A beads by washing 3 times in 500 ul Wash buffer.   NB: retain around 100 ul buffer after each spin as to not aspirate off beads. 1.5 mg of protein were mixed with 25 μL of pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap_A beads (>500 ul final) and incubated 2 hours at 4°C with gentle agitation. Retain 20-40 ug of protein for input lane. Beads were then washed 3 times with 500 μL of washing buffer, spinning at 3000 rpm at 4°C. 25 μl of Digestion buffer was added and kept at 4 ℃.  On-beads proteolytic digestion Immunoprecipitation were run in triplicate, and purified proteins were digested on beads using a method described by Hubner et al. [1]. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry Tryptic digests obtained were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The eluting peptide solutions were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition.   [1] Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions. J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [1] version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine [2], querying both UniProt [3] Chlorocebus sabaeus (13/03/2017; 19,228 entries) and Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries) plus the sequence of GFP-Rac1 (Q61→L) and GFP-Rac1 (P29→S and Q61→L) construct used in the experiment. Combined databases were searched assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin allowing for two miscleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For label-free quantification, proteins were quantified according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant [4]. Three independent replicates were generated per condition (GFP control and two RAC-1 mutants used in the immunoprecipitations), and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a t-test based analysis (5% FDR).  [1] Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372.  [2] Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.  [3] The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148.  [4] Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. A., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N. and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513-2526].

### Publication Abstract
Fam49 proteins, now referred to as CYRI (CYFIP-related Rac Interactor), are evolutionarily conserved across many phyla. Their closest relative by amino acid sequence is CYFIP, as both proteins contain a domain of unknown function DUF1394. We recently showed that CYRI and the DUF1394 can mediate binding to Rac1 and evidence is building to suggest that CYRI plays important roles in cell migration, chemotaxis and pathogen entry into cells. Here we discuss how CYRI proteins fit into the current framework of the control of actin dynamics by positive and negative feedback loops containing Rac1, the Scar/WAVE Complex, the Arp2/3 Complex and branched actin. We also provide data regarding the interaction between Rac1 and CYRI in an unbiassed mass spectrometry screen for interactors of an active mutant of Rac1.

### Keywords
Cos7 cells, Gfp trap pulldown, Rac1

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK


