### Accession
PXD003018

### Title
Myeloma cancer cells can corrupt mesenchymal stromal senescent cells and impair their anti-tumor activity

### Description
Senescent cells secrete many molecules, which contribute to the prevention of cancer progression. We induced MSC senescence by oxidative stress, DNA damage, and replicative exhaustion. The first two are considered inducers of acute senescence while extensive proliferation triggers replicative senescence also named chronic senescence. We cultivated cancer cells in the presence of acute and chronic senescent MSC conditioned media and evaluated proliferation, DNA damage, apoptosis and senescence.

### Sample Protocol
MSC cultures Lipoaspirates were obtained from healthy donors undergoing plastic surgery after informed consent. Dispersion of adipose tissue was achieved by collagenase digestion. After digestion,  the ability of lipid-filled adipocytes to float was used to separate them from the stromal vascular fraction by centrifugation. The stromal pellets were washed with PBS and then further purified on Histopaque density gradient (GE Healthcare, UK). Mononuclear cells fractions were collected and cultivated in in DMEM containing 10% FBS. These cells (passage 0) were further amplified to carry out experiments at passage 2 and 10 (replicative senescence) as reported. Acute senescence induction Previously we demonstrated that H202 or doxorubicin treatments may induce senescence of MSCs [29]. According to our earlier experience, adipose MSC cultures (passage 2) were treated for 30 min with 300 μM H202. Following treatment, the medium was removed, and the complete medium was added. After 24 hours cells were used for the preparation of conditioned media. For the induction of DNA double strand breaks, MSCs were incubated for 16 hours with 1 μM doxorubicin. Following treatment, the medium was removed and the complete medium was added; after 24 hours cells used for the preparation of conditioned media.  Preparation of conditioned media (CM) from naïve and primed senescent MSCs  To prepare conditioned media from cancer primed cells we co-cultivated acute or chronic senescent MSCs with ARH-77cells for 24 hours. Cancer cell lines and treatment with conditioned media Exponentially growing cultures were incubated in their medium supplemented with 50% CM obtained from naïve and primed senescent MSCs. Cell cycle analysis For each assay, cells were collected and fixed in 70% ethanol followed by PBS washes. and dissolved in a hypotonic buffer containing propidium iodide. Samples were acquired on a Muse EasyCyte flow cytometer (Merck Millipore, Germany) and analyzed with a standard procedure using EasyCyte software. Annexin V assay Apoptotic cells were detected by using a fluorescein-conjugated Annexin V kit on a Muse EasyCyte flow cytometer, following the manufacturer’s instructions.  In situ senescence-associated beta-galactosidase assay The percentage of senescent cells was calculated by the number of blue, beta-galactosidasepositive cells out of at least 500 cells in different microscope fields, as already reported [30]. Immunocytochemistry for detection of gamma-H2AX and Ki67 Gamma-H2AX and Ki67 were detected according to manufacturers’ protocols. Hoechst 33342 staining was performed and the cells were observed through a fluorescence microscope (Leica Italia, Italy). The percentage of gamma-H2AX and Ki67 positive cells was calculated by counting at least 500 cells in different microscope fields. CM preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis Five mL of naïve or ARH77-primed MSC secretomes were collected from culture dishes without disturbing the attached cells, then culture debris were removed by centrifugation at 10000 g. Supernatants were used for the StartaClean beads protein pooling. Dried beads were mixed with 1x Laemmli gel loading buffer and run on a gradient gel 4-15% SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX Stain Free Precast Gels, BIO-RAD, USA). Electrophoresis was carried out at 100 V. Following electrophoresis, gels were stained with Coomassie and the gel lanes of interest were excised for in-gel digestion as previously described [31]. After digestion, the peptides were eluted from the gel matrix by immersion of the reaction tube in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min with sequentially elution of 0.4% formic acid in 3% ACN, 0.4% formic acid in 50% ACN and 100% ACN. The supernatant containing the peptides was centrifuged, transferred to low binding tubes, desalted with ZipTip C18 (Millipore, Merck). Following that, the extracted peptides were dried and stored at – 80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Detailed protocol in supplementary file 5. LC-MS/MS analysis Tandem mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ instrument (AB SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA) coupled to Eksigent expert nano-LC 400 system (AB SCIEX). MS and MS/MS data was acquired using Analyst® TF v.1.6 (AB SCIEX). Mass spectrometry data was analyzed by using ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta (AB SCIEX) for the peptide identifications. Detailed protocol in supplementary file 5.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) and network analysis The proteins expressed in the secretomes were analyzed with the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships - http://www.pantherdb.org), DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery - http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems Inc. – http//www.ingenuity.com/product/ipa) In PANTHER the protein classification was performed according the ontology terms: biological processes, molecular functions, and molecular classes. For the PANTHER analysis we used the statistics overrepresentation (default setting) to compare classifications of multiple clusters of lists to a reference list to statistically identify over- or underrepresentation of PANTHER ontologies. The selected p-value was set at 0.05. In DAVID, we used the Functional Annotation Clustering tool to identify proteins in the most important biological functional groups. In DAVID, a significant enrichment score for a group indicates that the proteins are involved in a cluster that may have a significant function in a given dataset. The parameters for clustering were those that refer to medium classification stringency (EASE enrichment threshold: 1.0). Clusters were ranked according a Group Enrichment Score, which is calculated by considering the geometric mean of member's pvalues in a corresponding annotation cluster.  Differentially expressed proteins were imported into IPA for the identification of the canonical pathways. This analysis identified the pathways from the IPA canonical pathway library that were present exclusively in naïve or primed secretomes. Fischer’s exact test was used to calculate a P value that would determine the probability of the association between the genes in the dataset and the canonical pathway is explained by chance alone. The selected P value was set at 0.05. Statistical analysis Statistical significance was determined by using ANOVA analysis followed by Student’s t and Bonferroni’s tests. Mixed-model variance analysis was used for data with continuous outcomes. All data were analyzed with a GraphPad Prism version 5.01 statistical software package (GraphPad, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Senescent cells secrete several molecules that help to prevent the progression of cancer. However, cancer cells can also misuse these secreted elements to survive and grow. Since the molecular and functional bases of these different elements remain poorly understood, we analyzed the effect of senescent mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC) secretome on the biology of ARH-77 myeloma cells. In addition to differentiating in mesodermal derivatives, MSCs have sustained interest among researchers by supporting hematopoiesis, contributing to tissue homeostasis, and modulating inflammatory response, all activities accomplished primarily by the secretion of cytokines and growth factors. Moreover, senescence profoundly affects the composition of MSC secretome. In this study, we induced MSC senescence by oxidative stress, DNA damage, and replicative exhaustion. While the first two are considered to induce acute senescence, extensive proliferation triggers replicative (i.e., chronic) senescence. We cultivated cancer cells in the presence of acute and chronic senescent MSC-conditioned media and evaluated their proliferation, DNA damage, apoptosis, and senescence. Our findings revealed that senescent secretomes induced apoptosis or senescence, if not both, to different extents. This anti-tumor activity became heavily impaired when secretomes were collected from senescent cells previously in contact (i.e., primed) with cancer cells. Our analysis of senescent MSC secretomes with LC-MS/MS followed by Gene Ontology classification further indicated that priming with cancer profoundly affected secretome composition by abrogating the production of pro-senescent and apoptotic factors. We thus showed for the first time that compared with cancer-primed MSCs, na&#xef;ve senescent MSCs can exert different effects on tumor progression.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cells; senescence; secretome; apoptosis; cancer

### Affiliations
Erciyes University, GENKOK
Erciyes University Genom and Stem Cell Center

### Submitter
servet ozcan

### Lab Head
Dr Servet Özcan
Erciyes University Genom and Stem Cell Center


