### Accession
PXD012241

### Title
The role of the Ser/Thr kinase PrkC of Clostridium difficile in cell wall homeostasis and antimicrobial resistance.

### Description
Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of antibiotic associated diarrhea in adults. During infection, the bacteria must rapidly respond and adapt to the host environment by being able to activate survival strategies. Ser/Thr kinases (STKs) are involved in signal transduction and regulate numerous physiological processes. PrkC of C. difficile is STK with two PASTA domains. We showed that this protein was membrane associated and localized at the septum. We observed that prkC deletion affects the cell morphology with an increased mean size, heterogeneity in length and the presence of abnormal septa. A ∆prkC mutant was able to sporulate and germinate but had a reduced motility and formed more biofilms than the wild-type strain. Moreover, a ∆prkC mutant showed an increased sensitivity to antimicrobial compounds targeting the envelope such as deoxycholate, a secondary bile salt, cephalosporins acting on peptidoglycan synthesis, cationic antimicrobial peptides and lysozyme. This increased susceptibility was not associated to differences in the structure of peptidoglycan or of polysaccharide II (PSII). A proteomic study showed that the majority of C. difficile proteins associated to the cell wall are less abundant in the ∆prkC mutant compared to the WT strain. Finally, the ∆prkC mutant presented a delay in gut establishment in a hamster model of infection while its virulence was not significantly affected.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of C. difficile strains were centrifuged after 6 h of growth in TY at 37°C. To extract cell wall associated proteins (CWP), the pelleted cells were washed twice with PBS, resuspended at a final OD600nm of 100 in 75 mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 15% glycerol, 0.75% SDS, 7.5% β-mercaptoethanol and boiled for 10 min at 100°C. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA, washed twice with 90% cold ace-tone, dried. CWP were resupended in Urea 8 M / NH4HCO3 100 mM and sonicated on ice. Subsequently, total proteins were reduced with TCEP and then alkylated with iodoacetamide.Proteins were digested with rLys-C and then digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin . The digestion was stop with Formic acid and peptides were desalted on C18 Sep-Pak Cartridge. Peptides were resuspended with ACN 2% / FA 0.1%. DDA acquisitions were performed on a Q Exactive HF couple to a proxeon nLC-1000 chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2 using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against an internal Clostridium difficile database containing 3,957 proteins and the contaminant file included in MaxQuant. Second peptides was enabled to identify co-fragmentation events and match between runs accepted a match time window of 0.7 min for an alignment time window of 20 min. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode. Unique and razor peptides, included modified peptides, with at least 2 ratio count were accepted for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Clostridium difficile</i> is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in adults. During infection, <i>C. difficile</i> must detect the host environment and induce an appropriate survival strategy. Signal transduction networks involving serine/threonine kinases (STKs) play key roles in adaptation, as they regulate numerous physiological processes. PrkC of <i>C. difficile</i> is an STK with two PASTA domains. We showed that PrkC is membrane associated and is found at the septum. We observed that deletion of <i>prkC</i> affects cell morphology with an increase in mean size, cell length heterogeneity, and presence of abnormal septa. A &#x394;<i>prkC</i> mutant was able to sporulate and germinate but was less motile and formed more biofilm than the wild-type strain. Moreover, a &#x394;<i>prkC</i> mutant was more sensitive to antimicrobial compounds that target the cell envelope, such as the secondary bile salt deoxycholate, cephalosporins, cationic antimicrobial peptides, and lysozyme. This increased susceptibility was not associated with differences in peptidoglycan or polysaccharide II composition. However, the &#x394;<i>prkC</i> mutant had less peptidoglycan and released more polysaccharide II into the supernatant. A proteomic analysis showed that the majority of <i>C. difficile</i> proteins associated with the cell wall were less abundant in the &#x394;<i>prkC</i> mutant than the wild-type strain. Finally, in a hamster model of infection, the &#x394;<i>prkC</i> mutant had a colonization delay that did not significantly affect overall virulence.

### Keywords
Clostridium difficile, Qexactive hf, Shotgun proteomics, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, InstitutPasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Dupuy
Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, InstitutPasteur, Paris, France


