### Accession
PXD027196

### Title
CD95/Fas suppresses NF-B activation through recruitment of KPC2 in a CD95L/FasL-independent mechanism

### Description
CD95 expression is preserved in triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) and CD95 loss in these cells triggers the induction of a pro-inflammatory program promoting the recruitment of cytotoxic NK cells impairing tumor growth. Herein, we identify a novel interaction partner of CD95, Kip1 ubiquitination-promoting complex protein 2 (KPC2) using an unbiased proteomic approach. Independently of CD95L, CD95/KPC2 interaction contributes to the partial degradation of p105 (NFκB1) and the subsequent generation of p50 homodimers, which transcriptionally represses NF-κB-driven gene expression. Mechanistically, KPC2 interacts with the C-terminal region of CD95 and serves as an adaptor to recruit RelA (p65) and KPC1, which acts as E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase promoting the degradation of p105 into p50. Loss of CD95 in TNBC cells releases KPC2, limiting the formation of the NF-κB inhibitory homodimer complex (p50/p50), promoting NF-κB activation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, that could account for the immune landscape remodeling in TNBC cells

### Sample Protocol
HEK/293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding either wild-type (CD95(WT)-BirA), CD95 devoid of its intracellular region (CD95(1-175)-BirA) or CD95 transmembrane domain (TM-BirA) fused in frame with BirA-R118G sequence. After 24h, Biotin (50 µM) was incubated with cells for 16 hours. After 3 PBS washes, cells were scraped in lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NacL, 0,4% SDS, 1mM DTT, 2% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors), sonicated. Cell lysate was incubated with High-Capacity Streptavidin Agarose beads (Pierce) overnight at 4°C. Beads were washed once in 2% SDS, twice in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40), twice in TAP buffer (50 mM Hepes pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol) and once in PBS. Precipitated proteins were then analyzed by immunoblotting or mass spectrometry. Protein mixtures were TCA-precipitated overnight at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C. Pellet were washed twice with 500 µL cold acetone and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Washed pellet were then urea-denatured with 8 M urea in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Both reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature and under agitation (850 rpm). Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 6h, followed by an overnight modified trypsin digestion (Promega) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 2 M urea. Both LysC and Trypsin digestions were performed at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Trypsic peptides were then analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC  (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with an Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo Scientific, San Jose Califronia). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate. Briefly, peptides were separated on a C18 nano-column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile and analyzed in a Top 20 CID (Collision-induced dissociation) data-dependent mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching against Mus Musculus Uniprot Proteome database using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M), N-term acetylation were set as variable modification and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Proteins were identified with a minimum of two unique peptides and were filtered with False Discovery Rate <1%. Lastly quantitative values were obtained from Extracted Ion Chromatogram (Precursor Ions Area Detector node)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nf-kappab, Kpc2, Fas, Inflammation, P65

### Affiliations
CNRS
CRIBL, Université Limoges, Limoges, France.

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Legembre
CRIBL, Université Limoges, Limoges, France.


