### Accession
PXD024337

### Title
Immunoprecipitated PARP1 interactome

### Description
Poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) elicit anti-tumour activity in homologous recombination defective cancers by promoting cytotoxic, chromatin-bound, “trapped” PARP1 DNA lesions. How cells process trapped PARP1 remains unclear. By exploiting wild-type or trapping-resistant PARP1 transgenes combined with rapid immunoprecipitation mass-spectrometry of endogenous proteins (RIME) and Apex2-proximity labelling, we generated proteomic profiles of trapped and non-trapped PARP1 complexes. This combined approach identified an interaction between PARP1 and the ubiquitin system including its central component - the ubiquitin-regulated p97 ATPase (aka VCP).

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins and streptavidin-captured proteins were digested on beads and peptides were processed as previously described (Hillier et al., Sci Reports 2019).  The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (ThermoFisher). The peptides were first loaded on a PepMap C18 trap (100 m i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 m) at 10 l/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, and then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 m) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 4-32% ACN/0.1% FA in 90 min with the cycle at 120 min. Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 375–1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC (Automatic Gain Control) set at 40,000 and maximum injection time at 50 ms.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 5) with intensity above 8,000 counts (for Lumos) or 10,000 counts (for Fusion) were fragmented in HCD (higher collision dissociation) cell at 30% collision energy, and the isolation window at 1.6 Th.  The fragment ions were detected in ion trap with AGC at 10,000 and 35 ms maximum injection time. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 40 s with ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were carried out using Mascot (version 2.4) against the Uniprot human reference database (January 2018, 21123 sequences) with the following parameters: Trypsin was set as digestion mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. Acetylation at the N terminus, oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were set at 1% FDR using Mascot Percolator. Protein identification required at least one peptide with a minimum score of 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apex2 proximity labelling, Vcp, Parp1, Trapped parp1, Rime, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


