### Accession
PXD008151

### Title
Analysis of bovine leukocyte antigen (BoLA)-associated peptides by LC-MS

### Description
An increasing amount of MHC presented peptides identified by mass spectrometry (MS ligands) has been published. Handling and interpretation of MS ligand data is in general challenging due to the poly-specificity nature of the data.  We here outline a general pipeline for dealing with this challenge, and accurately annotate ligands to the relevant MHC-I molecule they were eluted from by use of GibbsClustering and binding motif information inferred from in-silico models.  We illustrate the approach here in the context of MHCI molecules (BoLA) of cattle. Next, we demonstrate how such annotated BoLA MS ligand data can readily be integrated with in-vitro binding affinity data in a prediction model with very high and unprecedented performance for identification of BoLA-I restricted T cell epitopes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed and then lysed using 10 ml lysis buffer (1% Igepal 630, 300 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and protease inhibitors) per 10E9 cells. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 500 g for 10 min followed by 15,000 g for 60 min. BoLA complexes were captured using a pan anti-BoLA class I antibody IL-88 that was covalently conjugated to protein A sepharose immunoresin (GE healthcare) at a concentration of 5mg/ml. Bound complexes were washed sequentially using buffers of 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0 containing 150 mM NaCl, then 400 mM NaCl, and finally 0mM NaCl. BoLA-associated peptides were eluted using 5 ml 10% acetic acid and dried. Affinity column-eluted material was re-suspended in 120 μl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile in water). Samples were loaded onto a 4.6 x 50 mm ProSwiftTM RP-1S column (Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a 500 μl/min flow rate over 10 min from 2-35 % buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Sample fractions were collected from 2-15 min. Protein detection was performed at 280 nm. Fractions up to 12 min that did not contain ß2-microglobulin were combined, dried and further analysed by LC-MS2. Samples were suspended in 20 μl loading buffer and analysed on an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system online coupled to a QExactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column using a1h or 2h linear gradient from 5% buffer A to 35% buffer B at a flow rate of 250 nl/min (approx. 600 bar). Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a nano Easy Spray source (Thermo Scientific). Subsequent isolation and higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) was induced on the 20 most abundant ions per full MS scan with an accumulation time of 128 ms and an isolation width of 1.0 Da. All fragmented precursor ions were actively excluded from repeated selection for 8 s.

### Data Protocol
Sequence interpretations of MS2 spectra were performed using a database containing all bovine UniProt entries combined with the all annotated Theileria parva proteins (35,992 entries total; bovine SwissProt entries: 5,995, bovine Trembl entries: 25,911, Theileria parva entries: 4,084). Spectral interpretation was performed using PEAKS 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
LC-MS/MS has become the standard platform for the characterization of immunopeptidomes, the collection of peptides naturally presented by major histocompatibility complex molecules to the cell surface. The protocols and algorithms used for immunopeptidomics data analysis are based on tools developed for traditional bottom-up proteomics that address the identification of peptides generated by tryptic digestion. Such algorithms are generally not tailored to the specific requirements of MHC ligand identification and, as a consequence, immunopeptidomics datasets suffer from dismissal of informative spectral information and high false discovery rates. Here, a new pipeline for the refinement of peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) is proposed, based on the assumption that immunopeptidomes contain a limited number of recurring peptide motifs, corresponding to MHC specificities. Sequence motifs are learned directly from the individual peptidome by training a prediction model on high-confidence PSMs. The model is then applied to PSM candidates with lower confidence, and sequences that score significantly higher than random peptides are rescued as likely true ligands. The pipeline is applied to MHC class I immunopeptidomes from three different species, and it is shown that it can increase the number of identified ligands by up to 20-30%, while effectively removing false positives and products of co-precipitation. Spectral validation using synthetic peptides confirms the identity of a large proportion of rescued ligands in the experimental peptidome.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Bola

### Affiliations
University of Oxford,  Target Discovery Institute Mass Spectrometry Laboratory The Jenner Insitute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford,  Target Discovery Institute Mass Spectrometry Laboratory The Jenner Insitute


