### Accession
PXD006077

### Title
Mouse Stereocilia Capping Protein Immunoaffinity Purification

### Description
Capping protein controls stereocilia length and width during hair bundle development. To determine what other proteins are involved in capping protein regulation, we carried out immunoaffinity purifications targeted at either CAPZA or CAPZB2. The starting material for immunopurification was crude stereocilia membranes isolated from mouse inner ear.

### Sample Protocol
We carried out two parallel immunoaffinity purification experiments, each with 67.5 ears worth of mouse inner ear enriched stereocilia membranes. Membranes were solubilized with RIPA buffer, and extracts were passed sequentially over control and anti-CAPZ (mAb 5B12.3 and mAb 3F2.3) antibodies coupled to magnetic beads. Beads were eluted with SDS, and samples were processed with the eFASP method to generate peptides. Two technical replicates for each of the experiments was carried out; peptides were separated, detected, and quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Control of the dimensions of actin-rich processes like filopodia, lamellipodia, microvilli, and stereocilia requires the coordinated activity of many proteins. Each of these actin structures relies on heterodimeric capping protein (CAPZ), which blocks actin polymerization at barbed ends. Because dimension control of the inner ear's stereocilia is particularly precise, we studied the CAPZB subunit in hair cells. CAPZB, present at &#x223c;100 copies per stereocilium, concentrated at stereocilia tips as hair cell development progressed, similar to the CAPZB-interacting protein TWF2. We deleted <i>Capzb</i> specifically in hair cells using <i>Atoh1-Cre</i>, which eliminated auditory and vestibular function. <i>Capzb</i>-null stereocilia initially developed normally but later shortened and disappeared; surprisingly, stereocilia width decreased concomitantly with length. CAPZB2 expressed by in utero electroporation prevented normal elongation of vestibular stereocilia and irregularly widened them. Together, these results suggest that capping protein participates in stereocilia widening by preventing newly elongating actin filaments from depolymerizing.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hearing, Auditory, Twinfilin, Hair bundle, Actin, Hair cells, Capz, Balance, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  USA

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  USA


