### Accession
PXD022292

### Title
Primary angle closure glaucoma is characterized by altered  extracellular matrix homeostasis in the iris

### Description
Purpose. To characterize the proteome of the iris in primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG). Experimental Design. In this cross-sectional study, iris samples were obtained from surgical iridectomy of 48 adults with PACG and five normal controls. Peptides from iris were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Verification of proteins of interest was conducted using selected reaction monitoring on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. The main outcome was proteins with a log2 two-fold difference in expression in iris between PACG and controls. Results. There were 3,446 non-redundant proteins identified in human iris, of which 165 proteins were upregulated and 251 proteins were downregulated in PACG compared with controls. Thirty-two upregulated proteins were either components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) (fibrillar collagens, EMILIN-2, fibrinogen, fibronectin, matrilin-2), matricellular proteins (thrombospondin-1), proteins involved in cell-matrix interactions (integrins, laminin, histidine-rich glycoprotein, paxillin), or protease inhibitors known to modulate ECM turnover (-2 macroglobulin, tissue factor pathway inhibitor 2, papilin). Two giant proteins, titin and obscurin, were up- and down-regulated, respectively, in the iris in PACG compared with controls.  Conclusions and Clinical Relevance. This proteomic study shows that ECM composition and homeostasis is altered in the iris in PACG.

### Sample Protocol
The study was conducted using iris tissue samples from 48 patients, age range 43-83 y, with PACG undergoing surgical iridectomy at King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia and five normal eye bank eyes. PACG was defined as an eye with an occludable angle and features indicating that trabecular obstruction by the peripheral iris has occurred, such as peripheral anterior synechiae, elevated intraocular pressure, iris whorling, “glaucomfleken” lens opacities, or excessive pigment deposition on the trabecular surface, with evidence of glaucomatous optic neuropathy.[18] Five human donor eyes were obtained from the SightLife, Bethlehem, PA. Eyes were selected from five adults (3 males, 2 female), age range 51-76 y, with brown iris color and no history of eye disease or previous eye surgery. The causes of death were myocardial infarction (1), end-stage renal disease (2), and cancer, not on chemotherapy (2). Time of death to enucleation was 3-7 h for all subjects. Globes were placed in eye bank vials and refrigerated until received at the Wilmer Eye Institute. Time from enucleation to tissue freezing was 24-36 h for all subjects.  For PACG eyes, the iris tissue was obtained during trabeculectomy. A peripheral iridectomy was performed following a sclerostomy at the base of the scleral flap during trabeculectomy. The base of the iris was grasped with Colibri forceps and retracted outside the posterior ledge of the opening in a tangential manner. The iris was cut using DeWecker or Vannas scissors. Iris tissue samples were obtained using a similar surgical approach in control eyes. Iris samples were placed in a sample collection container with a small amount of saline to avoid drying of the tissue. The specimen was immediately transported on ice to the laboratory where the saline was removed. The iris tissue was transferred to a cryotube, quickly snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Written, informed consent was obtained from all participants. The protocol for this study was approved by the institutional review boards of King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital and the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Iris tissue samples were thawed and suspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 42 mM KCl, ¬¬0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1mM dithiothreitol, 1 phosphatase inhibitor [Pierce, PI78420], 1 protease inhibitor [Sigma, P8340]). Tissue samples were pooled into one vial (six iris samples/vial) because of the small volume of iris tissue as shown in Supplementary Table 1. After pooling the iris tissue, there were eight separate vials of pooled iris tissue from 48 PACG subjects and five separate vials of pooled iris tissue from five controls. Each vial of control tissue represented one control eye. Pooled iris samples were homogenized using a motorized handheld Eppendorf mortar/pestle until tissue was no longer clumped. Samples were then sonicated three times for 10 sec/each on ice and spun for 15 min, 14,000  g, at room temperature.  Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the Pierce microBCA kit. Samples were processed by in-solution digestion with trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5073) at 37C overnight with shaking. The digested samples were desalted with Strata X high performance polymeric solid phase extraction 96-well plates (Phenomenex) and eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile for three times, and then dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water and spiked with 5 fmol/L calibration peptides (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture). Samples were run liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a 195 min gradient of 2-32% acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by a 25 min ramp to 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. EASY-Spray source was run at 35°C using a 25 cm x 75 m integrated spray tip column. Peptides were trapped at 1180 bar on a 2 cm x 75 m trapping column. The trap was a 3 m particle, and the column was 2 m Acclaim PepMap C18. The Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer was operated in a positive ion mode, and the data-dependent product-ion mode was applied for all analyses. MS1 data were acquired with top 8 most intense spectra, at a resolution of 70,000, survey scans of m/z 400- 2000 Th, and a target value of 1 × 106. Peptide precursors passing a peptide match setting of ‘preferred’ with charge state 2–5 were sampled for MS2. High energy collisional dissociation spectra were performed with an isolation width of 1.3 Th, 28% NCE, target value of 5 × 105, and the max injection time was 55 msec. The dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration=120 sec. All individual samples were run with two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS data from the Orbitrap analysis were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.5.1.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) and X! Tandem (version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1, The Global Proteome Machine Organization). The Sprot human database (20170829 database, 20218 entries) was searched using Mascot, assuming trypsin digestion. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated Uniprot human database (52,398 entries) assuming trypsin digestion. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.01 Da and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included in Mascot were deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine. Variable modifications specified in X! Tandem included deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, Glu->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, ammonia-loss of the N-terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, acetylation of the N-terminus, carbamylation of lysine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine.  Scaffold (version 4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, as described in detail elsewhere.[19] Scaffold assigns probabilities to search engine on peptide identifications using the PeptideProphet algorithm and protein identifications using the ProteinProphet algorithm. Peptide identifications were accepted only for a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm[20] with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted for a FDR <1.0% combined with at least 2 identified peptides with minimum 7 amino acids in length. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.[21] Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Scaffold computes protein groupings on two levels: first, within a single MS/MS sample, and second, across all MS/MS samples in the experiment to come up with an experiment wide protein identification list.[19] Protein quantification was conducted using spectrum counting normalized by the average number of spectra across all biosamples (Scaffold v. 4.11, Proteme Software, Portland, OR). Raw MS data files from the SRM analysis were imported into Skyline 20.1 (McCoss Lab, University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA) and processed for quantitation according to Stergachis and colleagues.[22] The peak area of quantifiable 1-3 transitions were summed up for each peptide; the peak area for 1-3 peptides were then summed up to represent the value for each protein. Two peptide minimum was required for protein verification by SRM. Mean peak area of each protein was averaged across triplicate technical replicates. For two group comparisons of PACG vs control using results from the Orbitrap analysis, we characterized the differential expression of proteins between groups by the using both a log2 fold change with a cut-off of 2 and P <0.05. Log2 fold change was calculated as the mean expression value of spectral counts in group A)/(mean expression value in group B). For two group comparisons of PACG vs control using results from the SRM analysis, we compared peak areas for each protein using ANOVA and t-tests, with a level of significance at P <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eye, Iris, Proteomics, Primary angle closure glaucoma, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Wilmer Eye Institute, Smith Building, M015, 400 N Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21287
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Pingbo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Semba, M.D.
Wilmer Eye Institute, Smith Building, M015, 400 N Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21287


