### Accession
PXD005218

### Title
Tracking effects of SIL1 increase: taking a closer look beyond the consequences of elevated expression level

### Description
SIL1 acts as a co-chaperone for the major ER-resident chaperone BiP and thus plays a role in many BiP-dependent cellular functions such as protein folding control and unfolded protein response. Whereas increase of BiP upon cellular stress conditions is a well-known phenomenon, elevation of SIL1 under stress conditions was thus far solely studied in yeast and different studies indicated an adverse effect of SIL1 increase. This is seemingly in contrast with the beneficial effect of SIL1 increase in surviving neurons in neurodegenerative disorders such as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Alzheimer disease. In the present study, we systematically addressed these controversial findings. Using cell biological, morphological and biochemical methods, we could demonstrate that that SIL1 is increased in various mammalian cells and neuronal tissues upon induction of cellular stress. Investigation of heterozygous SIL1/Sil1 mutant cells and tissues supported this finding. Moreover, SIL1 protein was found to be stabilized during ER stress. Increased SIL1 initiates ER stress in a concentration-dependent manner which is in accordance with the described adverse effect of increased SIL1. However, our results also suggest that protective levels are achieved by the secretion of excessive SIL1 and GRP170 (no longer perturbing ER homeostasis) and that moderately increased SIL1 also ameliorates cellular fitness under stress conditions. Results of our immunoprecipitation studies indicate that under cellular stress conditions SIL1 might act in a BiP-independent manner. Unbiased proteomic studies revealed that elevated SIL1 levels alter the expression of several proteins including crucial players in neurodegeneration, especially in Alzheimer disease. This finding is in accordance with our observation of increased SIL1-immunoreactivity in surviving neurons of Alzheimer disease autopsy cases and supports the assumption that SIL1 plays a protective role in neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma). Post-nuclear supernatants were heated in 80 mM Tris pH 6.8, 10 % glycerol, 2 % sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 0.002 % bromphenol blue for 15 minutes at 56°C. Mouse cerebrum slices were transferred into lysis buffer containing 125 mM Tris, pH 6.4, 4 % SDS, 10 % β-mercaptoethanol, 10 % glycerin, 0.001 % bromophenol blue, 4 M urea and protease inhibitor mix and lysed by sonication for 20 s (one to one second pulses). Samples were immediately cooled on ice for 5 minutes and then also heated for 15 min at 56 °C. Protein concentrations were determined with the BCA protein assay–reducing agent compatible kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In each case, 10 μg protein of cell or tissue homogenate were loaded on 10 % polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were separated for 120 minutes at 120 V. Separated proteins were transferred on Immobilon-P PVDF membrane (0.45 μm, Millipore®) with the help of the tank-blot technique overnight at 5 V. Membranes were blocked with 1% casein buffer (1% casein (Roche) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and 0.1 % NP40 (Sigma) as a 1:1 composition with maleic acid buffer, which is composed of 100 mM maleic acid (Sigma) and 150 mM NaCl, for two hours and washed four times in TBS with 0.1 % NP40 for 5 minutes. After incubation with different primary antibodies over night at 4°C, PVDF-membranes were washed three times in TBS with 0.1 % NP40, and incubated for 1 hour with a horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody (Sigma) or goat anti-mouse antibody (Sigma) at 1: 25,000, dilutions, respectively. Membranes were washed three times for 10 min in TBS at any of one time followed by horse radish peroxidase- or alkaline phosphatase-chemiluminescence (SuperSignal West Pico and SuperSignal West Femto; Pierce) detection on CL-X Posure TM films (Thermo Scientific). Cell lysis and carbamidomethylation In order to obtain unbiased insights into the beneficial function of elevated SIL1, two proteomic studies were performed: for processing of global protein profile, three biological triplicates, each with approximately 1 mg of each HEK293 cells overexpressing SIL1-TAP for 18 h and respective controls were lysed in 0.5 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, and Complete Mini, respectively. Subsequently, samples were ultra-sonicated for 10 sec on ice (one-to-one sec pulses). Afterwards, samples were centrifuged at 4°C and 12,000 g for 15 min. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min, followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 30 min. For further profiling of membrane and membrane-associated proteins, three biological replicates with approximately 1 mg of each HEK293 cells overexpressing SIL1-TAP for 18 h and respective controls were collected in 1 mL of 0.1 M NaHCO3 (pH 10.7) buffer containing Complete Mini on ice for 30 min. Afterwards, samples were centrifuged at 68,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The membrane fractions which pelleted at the bottom of the tubes were collected and resuspended in 0.5 ml of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, and Complete Mini. Later on, the samples were processed in the same manner as the membrane profile for measurement of protein concentration and carbamidomethylation.    Sample preparation and trypsin digestion Sample cleaning and proteolysis were based on the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol [1, 2]. Briefly, cell lysates corresponding to 100 µg of protein were diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) buffer [3] and placed on on the centrifugal devices (PALL Nanosep, 30 KDa cutoff). The devices were centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 20 min. All of the centrifugation steps following below were performed under the same conditions. To eliminate residual SDS, three washing steps were carried out with 100 µL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). For buffer exchange, the devices were washed thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). To the concentrated proteins, 100 µL of proteolysis buffer comprising of trypsin (Promega) (1:25 w/w ratio of protease to substrate), 0.2 M GuHCl and 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8), was added and incubated at 37°C for 14 h. The generated tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by 50 µL of ultra-pure water. Finally, peptides were acidified by addition of 10 % TFA (v/v) to pH < 3.0 and the digests were quality controlled as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the acquired label free quantitative MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). For both, the global and the membrane enriched proteomic comparison, triplicate measurements of SIL1-overexpressing cells were compared to the corresponding control triplicates. Alignment of MS raw data was conducted by Progenesis which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. After peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-200 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics, analysis of variance (ANOVA) and principal component analysis (PCA). After alignment, MS/MS spectra were exported as mgf peak lists. To maximize the number of identified peptides and proteins at a given quality we used our PeptideShaker software 0.38.5 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/) for interpretation of peptide and protein identifications. Therefore, peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 16th of September 2014, containing 20,194 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science), MS-GF+ Beta (v10024) and X!Tandem Jackhammer (2013.09.01.1) with the help of searchGUI 1.21.0. Trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was selected as enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed and oxidation of Met was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Combined search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % on the protein level and exported using the advanced PeptideShaker features that allow direct re-import of the quality-controlled data into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met were excluded for further analysis. For each protein, the average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis) from the triplicate analyses was calculated to determine the ratios between the controls and SIL1 overexpressing samples. Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) at least two unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average log2 ratio < -0.71 or > 0.77 (corresponding to 1.68-fold regulation; log2 ratios of 1.02) for comparative global profile were considered as regulated. These regulated values were calculated due to the proteome difference between the two parties in which the center of the profile was an average of log2 ratios of the normalized data from each protein and a distribution range of the profile was relied on two times of the relative standard deviation. The membrane profile was analysed with the same workflow as the global profile’s, except the newer versions of softwares were applied. Here we used the PeptideShaker software 1.2.2 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/) for interpretation of peptide and protein identifications. Peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 22nd of July, 2015, containing 20,207 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science), MS-GF+ Beta (v10282) and X!Tandem Jackhammer (2013.09.01.1) with the help of searchGUI 2.2.2. Based on the same criteria above with global profile, the membrane proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) at least two unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average log2 ratio < -1.03 or > 1.03 (corresponding to 2.05-fold regulation; log2 ratios of 1.00) for comparative membrane profile considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
SIL1 acts as a co-chaperone for the major ER-resident chaperone BiP and thus plays a role in many BiP-dependent cellular functions such as protein-folding control and unfolded protein response. Whereas the increase of BiP upon cellular stress conditions is a well-known phenomenon, elevation of SIL1 under stress conditions was thus far solely studied in yeast, and different studies indicated an adverse effect of SIL1 increase. This is seemingly in contrast with the beneficial effect of SIL1 increase in surviving neurons in neurodegenerative disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. Here, we addressed these controversial findings. Applying cell biological, morphological and biochemical methods, we demonstrated that SIL1 increases in various mammalian cells and neuronal tissues upon cellular stress. Investigation of heterozygous SIL1 mutant cells and tissues supported this finding. Moreover, SIL1 protein was found to be stabilized during ER stress. Increased SIL1 initiates ER stress in a concentration-dependent manner which agrees with the described adverse SIL1 effect. However, our results also suggest that protective levels are achieved by the secretion of excessive SIL1 and GRP170 and that moderately increased SIL1 also ameliorates cellular fitness under stress conditions. Our immunoprecipitation results indicate that SIL1 might act in a BiP-independent manner. Proteomic studies showed that SIL1 elevation alters the expression of proteins including crucial players in neurodegeneration, especially in Alzheimer's disease. This finding agrees with our observation of increased SIL1 immunoreactivity in surviving neurons of Alzheimer's disease autopsy cases and supports the assumption that SIL1 plays a protective role in neurodegenerative disorders.

### Keywords
Hyou1/ grp170, Neuroprotection, Co-chaperone, Bip/ grp78, Marinesco-sjögren syndrome, Chaperonopathy

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Group Leader Protein Dynamics Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. René P Zahedi
Group Leader Protein Dynamics Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


