### Accession
PXD002186

### Title
Function of clpF in the clp protease complex

### Description
The plant plastid Clp machinery comprises a hetero-oligomeric ClpPRT proteolytic core, ATP-dependent ClpC,D chaperones and an adaptor protein, ClpS1. ClpS1 directs a subset of substrates to the Clp protease-chaperone complex for degradation, but substrate recognition and delivery mechanisms are unknown. Here we describe ClpF, a novel chloroplast adaptor. ClpF is only found in photosynthetic eukaryotes and contains uvr/C and YccV domains and an N-terminal domain conserved across ClpF homologs. We demonstrate that ClpF acts together with ClpS1 in substrate delivery to plastid ClpC chaperones. The molecular domain interactions of ClpF to ClpS1 and the ClpC chaperones were mapped, and in vivo interactions between ClpF and the Clp substrate glutamate t-RNA reductase (GluTR1) are demonstrated. Quantitative proteomics identified subtle molecular phenotype in a ClpF null mutant and we show that GluTR1 degradation is delayed in ClpF and ClpS1 Arabidopsis null mutants.

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplasts were isolated from wt and clpf-1 mutant at leaf stage 1.06 to 1.08 and separated into stromal and membrane fractions.Co-IP experiments were performed  using a specific antibody raised against ClpF, co-IP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 15% glycerol, 0.1% Igepal CA-630 and 5 µg mL−1 aprotinin), 200 μg of stromal fractions isolated from wt and clpf-1 mutant chloroplasts. For the gel filtration experiments chloroplast stroma was fractionated on a size-exclusion column  Stromal proteins were eluted in a buffer containing 25 mM hepes, pH 8.0, 10 mM NaCl and 10 mM MgCl2.  Proteins in combined fractions were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid/acetone and solubilized with 3xLaemmli buffer followed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analyses.3 biological replicates of each wt and clpf were analyzed by LC MS/MS.. Each gel lanes from the 1D SDS-PAGE were cut into 11 bands followed by reduction, alkylation, and in-gel digestion with trypsin. The resuspended peptide extracts were analyzed by data-dependent MS/MS using an on-line LC-LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Electron Corp.). Mass spectrometry data processing, data searching against TAIR10 using Mascot and subsequent filtering and quantification based on normalized and adjusted spectral counts was carried out. Mass spectrometry-derived information, as well as annotation of protein name, location and function for the identified proteins can be found in the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/).  .

### Data Protocol
For the significance analysis of large scale spectral counting based quantification the GLEE software was developed using Python (with packages such as Numpy, SciPy and Matplotlib) and a standalone executable version of the software was created using the PyInstaller program. GLEE was run in a Windows platform with a cubic polynomial equation fitting and 10,000 iterations for estimation of variation. QSpec analysis was performed in LINUX platform using the QPROT software Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations were performed with a "burn-in" period of 5000, and 20,000 iterations to ensure convergence of the algorithm. Protein sequences used in this study can be obtained from the Arabidopsis Genome Initiative or Phytozome databases under the following accession numbers: for A. thaliana: ClpF, AT2G03390; ClpS1, AT1G68660; ClpC1, AT5G50920; ClpC2, AT5G50920. ClpF other species: Ppa, Pp1s136_9V6.1; Sit, Si002169m; Sbi, Sb03g035470.1; Zma, GRMZM2G124321_T05; Bdi, Bradi2g50810.2; Osa1, LOC_Os01g55880.1; Osa2, LOC_Os08g07540.1; Mgu, mgv1a009546m; Csa, Cucsa.327730.1; Stu, PGSC0003DMP400049260; Sly, Solyc05g012620.2.1; Lus, Lus10037120; Egr, Eucgr.G02464.1; Mtr, Medtr5g043480.1; Gma1, Glyma01g06700.2; Gma2, Glyma02g12650.4; Pvu, Phvul.002G069400.1; Bra, Bra024776; Esa, Thhalv10004578m; Cru, Carubv10017613m; Aly, 904615; Aco, Aquca_002_00755.1; Vvi, GSVIVT01012177001; Gra, Gorai.013G091200.1; Tca, Thecc1EG011602t2; Csi, orange1.1g019893m; Ccl, Ciclev10032054m; Ptr, Potri.010G161600.1; Rco, 30174.m009149; Mes, cassava4.1_011439m; Csu, 54839; Vca, Vocar20000321m; Cre, Cre02.g113700.t1.2

### Publication Abstract
Clp proteases are found in prokaryotes, mitochondria, and plastids where they play crucial roles in maintaining protein homeostasis (proteostasis). The plant plastid Clp machinery comprises a hetero-oligomeric ClpPRT proteolytic core, ATP-dependent chaperones ClpC and ClpD, and an adaptor protein, ClpS1. ClpS1 selects substrates to the ClpPR protease-ClpC chaperone complex for degradation, but the underlying substrate recognition and delivery mechanisms are currently unclear. Here, we characterize a ClpS1-interacting protein in Arabidopsis thaliana, ClpF, which can interact with the Clp substrate glutamyl-tRNA reductase. ClpF and ClpS1 mutually stimulate their association with ClpC. ClpF, which is only found in photosynthetic eukaryotes, contains bacterial uvrB/C and YccV protein domains and a unique N-terminal domain. We propose a testable model in which ClpS1 and ClpF form a binary adaptor for selective substrate recognition and delivery to ClpC, reflecting an evolutionary adaptation of the Clp system to the plastid proteome.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Plant cell, Coip, Clp complex, Lc-msms, Stroma, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Plant Biology
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY (USA)

### Submitter
Giulia Friso

### Lab Head
Dr Giulia Friso c/o Klaas van Wijk's Lab
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY (USA)


