### Accession
PXD021246

### Title
Global analysis of lysine acetylation reveals its role in multiple biological processes in Glycine max

### Description
Glycine max was cultivated in China for nearly 5000 years, commonly referred to as soybeans, now it has become one of the important economic crops in the world (Li et al., 2008). Post-translational modifications are known to regulate many cellular processes, which are dynamic and reversible and can make protein functions changed.(Westermann and Weber, 2003). To date, among 400 PTMs have been detected, such as Acetylation, Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Malonylation, Succinylation and Methylation(Colak et al., 2013; Weinert et al., 2013).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from soybean leaves with previous report with some modification. Briefly, embryos were grinded in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. The remaining debris were depleted through centrifugation at 15 000g for 15 min at 4 °C. Then the supernatant was precipitated with ice-cold acetone for more than 4 hour at −20°C and then centrifuged at 15 000g for 15 min at 4 °C. The obtained protein was washed with cold acetone three times and stored at −80 °C for further use. For digestion, the protein was dissolved in buﬀer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0). Then the protein solution was reduced with 5mM DTT for 30min at 56°C following alkylating with 11mM iodoacetamide for 15min at room temperature in darkness. After dilution with 100mM TEAB to reduce urea concentration to less than 2M, a two-step trypsin digestion was carried out according to the method of Zhang et al.(Zhang et al., 2016) After digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS raw data were using Maxquant search engine (version.1.5.2.8) search against the Glycine max database from Uniprot, which contains 74863 sequences https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000008827 and add with reverse decoy database. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for lysine-acetylated peptides and proteins were specified 1%. Trypsin/P was used as cleavage enzyme with up to 2 missing cleavages and set the minimum number of amino acids is 7. Kac site localization probability was set as > 0.75. All the MS data were deposited to ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation (kac), Post-translational modifications, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Glycine max., Bioinformatics, Metabolic process

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, Shandong 271018, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Li
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, Shandong 271018, China


