### Accession
PXD003091

### Title
Yeast cell wall glycoproteomic SWATH-MS

### Description
Identification and relative quantification of cell wall proteins and glycan micro- and macroheterogeneity, in various mutants in N-glycan biosynthesis, measured by SWATH-MS

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains grown to midlog phase, lysed by glass beads, reduced/alkylated, cell walls purified by extensive washing, tryptic digest, peptide desalt by C18 Ziptip, peptide identification by LC-MS/MS on TripleTof 5600, SWATH measurement with identical LC on TripleTof5600

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using ProteiPilot 4 searched against yeast proteins in Uniprot. Glycopeptide ion libraries generated based on fragment ions from nonglycosylated peptides and a matrix of potential glycopeptide masses. SWATH data processed using Peakview 2.1. Statistics performed using MSstats in R

### Publication Abstract
Glycan macro- and microheterogeneity have profound impacts on protein folding and function. This heterogeneity can be regulated by physiological or environmental factors. However, unregulated heterogeneity can lead to disease, and mutations in the glycosylation process cause a growing number of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation. We systematically studied how mutations in the N-glycosylation pathway lead to defects in mature proteins using all viable Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with deletions in genes encoding Endoplasmic Reticulum lumenal mannosyltransferases (Alg3, Alg9, and Alg12), glucosyltransferases (Alg6, Alg8, and Die2/Alg10), or oligosaccharyltransferase subunits (Ost3, Ost5, and Ost6). To measure the changes in glycan macro- and microheterogeneity in mature proteins caused by these mutations we developed a SWATH-mass spectrometry glycoproteomics workflow. We measured glycan structures and occupancy on mature cell wall glycoproteins, and relative protein abundance, in the different mutants. All mutants showed decreased glycan occupancy and altered cell wall proteomes compared with wild-type cells. Mutations in earlier mannosyltransferase or glucosyltransferase steps of glycan biosynthesis had stronger hypoglycosylation phenotypes, but glucosyltransferase defects were more severe. ER mannosyltransferase mutants displayed substantial global changes in glycan microheterogeneity consistent with truncations in the glycan transferred to protein in these strains. Although ER glucosyltransferase and oligosaccharyltransferase subunit mutants broadly showed no change in glycan structures, ost3&#x394; cells had shorter glycan structures at some sites, consistent with increased protein quality control mannosidase processing in this severely hypoglycosylating mutant. This method allows facile relative quantitative glycoproteomics, and our results provide insights into global regulation of site-specific glycosylation.

### Keywords
Yeast, Swath, Cell wall

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Benjamin Schulz

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Luke Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Australia


