### Accession
PXD016816

### Title
Interactomes of WT and H1069Q variants of ATP7B

### Description
The H1069Q substitution in the liver-specific copper transporter ATP7B represents the major cause of Wilson disease. The mutated ATP7B undergoes rapid degradation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and fails to reach copper excretion compartments thus causing severe copper toxicosis in patients. Modulating the ATP7B-H1069Q interactome was proposed as a rescue strategy but specific binding partners that might be targeted for mutant correction remain elusive. Here we try to identify a mutant-specific interactor for the pharmacological rescue of ATP7B-H1069Q.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC proteomics analysis was used to evaluate quantitative differences in ATP7B-H1069Q and ATP7B-WT interactomes. HepG2 cells were grown in DMEM containing medium R6K4, heavy R10K8 or light R0K0 isotopes (Dundee Cell Products) and supplemented with 10% SILAC dialyzed FCS for six passages. Medium, heavy and light cells were then transduced with ATP7B-WT-GFP, ATP7B-H1069Q-GFP or GFP (control) adenoviruses, respectively, incubated with lysis buffer and subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) procedure with an anti-GFP antibody. The GFP signal was analyzed by Western blot in pull downs from HepG2 cells expressing ATP7B-H1069Q-GFP, ATP7B-WT-GFP or GFP alone. The samples were then pooled in a 1:1:1 ratio according to the GFP quantification, resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal Coomassie. Protein bands were excised from the gel and sent to Oxford University Proteomics Facility (Oxford, UK), where they were subsequently digested and subjected to nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The quantitative analysis of the data was performed in Proteome Discoverer (commercial software from Thermo Fischer Scientific), which passed spectral data for peptide identification to another program (Mascot, commercial software from Matrix Science).  The results from Mascot were then integrated into the Proteome Discoverer analysis with accompanying false discovery rate statistics calculated by a non-commercial algorithm, Percolator. The following versions of the software were used: Proteome Discoverer v 1.4 Mascot v 2.4.1 Percolator v 2.04

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic mutations in the copper transporter <i>ATP7B</i> have been hypothesized to affect its protein interaction landscape contributing to loss of function and, thereby, to hepatic copper toxicosis in Wilson disease. Although targeting mutant interactomes was proposed as a therapeutic strategy, druggable interactors for rescue of ATP7B mutants remain elusive. Using proteomics, we found that the frequent H1069Q substitution promotes ATP7B interaction with HSP70, thus accelerating endoplasmic reticulum (ER) degradation of the mutant protein and consequent copper accumulation in hepatic cells. This prompted us to use an HSP70 inhibitor as bait in a bioinformatics search for structurally similar Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs. Among the hits, domperidone emerged as an effective corrector that recovered trafficking and function of ATP7B-H1069Q by impairing its exposure to the HSP70 proteostatic network. Our findings suggest that HSP70-mediated degradation can be safely targeted with domperidone to rescue ER-retained ATP7B mutants and, hence, to counter the onset of Wilson disease.

### Keywords
Atp7b, Wilson disease, Copper

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM)

### Submitter
Roman Polishchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Polishchuk
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM)


