### Accession
PXD040269

### Title
Host innate immune responses and microbiome profile of neonatal calves challenged with Cryptosporidium parvum and the effect of bovine colostrum supplementation

### Description
Calves are highly susceptible to gastrointestinal infection with Cryptosporidium parvum (C. parvum), which can result in watery diarrhea and eventually death or impaired development. With little to no effective therapeutics, understanding the host’s microbiota and pathogen interaction at the mucosal immune system has been critical to identify and test novel control strategies. We used an experimental model of C. parvum challenge in neonatal calves to describe the clinical signs and mucosal innate immune and microbiota hallmarks in the ileum and colon during cryptosporidiosis and investigated the impact of supplemental colostrum feeding on C. parvum infection. The C. parvum challenged calves experienced clinical signs including pyrexia and diarrhea 5 days post challenge. These calves showed ulcerative neutrophil ileitis with a proteomic signature driven by inflammatory effectors, including reactive oxygen species and myeloperoxidases. Colitis was also noticed with an aggravated mucin barrier depletion and lack of full filled mucin granule in goblet cells. The C. parvum challenged calves also displayed a pronounced dysbiosis with a high prevalence of Clostridium species (spp.) and number of exotoxins, adherence factors, and secretion systems related to Clostridium spp. and other enteropathogens, including Campylobacter spp., Escherichia sp., Shigella spp., and Listeria spp. Daily supplementation with a high-quality bovine colostrum product mitigated some of the clinical signs and modulated the gut immune response and concomitant microbiota to a pattern more similar to that of healthy unchallenged calves.

### Sample Protocol
Ileum samples from each calf were subjected to a quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis including high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry. Tissues were lysed in a buffer composed of 1% SDS, 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM EDTA and protease inhibitor cOmplete tablets (Roche, 4693159001). Disulfide bonds of 100 μg of total protein were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C for 1 h. The proteins were alkylated by incubation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (VWR) for 25 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated out of solution by adding 600 μL of ice-cold acetone and incubated at -20 °C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 10 min before resuspension in 100 μL of 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were trypsinized (Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight at a 1:10 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. For Tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling (TMTsixplex™ isobaric label reagent set, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.8 mg of TMT reagent was resuspended in 41 μL of acetonitrile (Gordon et al., 2019), and samples were spun down quickly at 2,000 rpm (380 x g) for 10 s and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. A total of 4 biological replicates per group (n = 4 calves per group) were labelled with TMT reagents and one TMT tag (131) contained the pooled samples (i.e., equal amounts of peptides (20 ug) of each sample per group) and served as internal standards for normalising the data across the groups. For labelling, peptides were incubated with TMT reagents (room temperature, 1 h) and the reaction was quenched by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at 25 °C. Peptides with different labels were combined before 100% formic acid was added to each sample to reach a volumetric concentration of 1% formic acid. Samples were spun at 5,000 rpm (2350 x g) for 10 min and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, 130 mg WAT023501). Sep-Pak columns were conditioned with 1 x 3 mL 90% methanol/0.1% TFA, 1x 2 mL 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto a column and washed with 1x 3 mL 0.1% TFA/5% methanol. Peptides were eluted off the column with 1 x 1 mL 50% ACN/0.1% formic acid and lyophilized. Peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid and a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine the concentration of peptide in each sample. Samples were dried down and stored at -80°C. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system (Gordon et al., 2019). Tryptic peptides (2 μg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 μm x 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC mass spectrometry grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC- mass spectrometry grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full mass spectrometry scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) between 375 and 1,575 and a + 2 to + 4 charges. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4 x 105 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 s cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 2 x 104 were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window of m/z 0.7) and fragmented with HCD (38% collision energy) in the ion routing Multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The AGC, the maximum injection time and the first mass were set at 1 x 105, 105 ms and 100, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s to avoid the acquisition of same precursor ions having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
For bioinformatic analysis, Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences against bovine and C. parvum UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm (Cox et al., 2011) as implemented in the MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software package v.1.6.0.1, at a peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+ 42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+ 15.994915 Da). TMT 6-plex labels 126–131 were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to trypsin/P (search for free N-terminus and for only lysine), with up to two missed cleavages allowed. An average of the normalized results for each group was calculated and followed by the ratio of each group comparison. The ratios were log (2) transformed and the significant outlier cut-off values were determined after log (2) transformation by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptosporidium parvum; cattle; enterocolitis; colostrum; microbiota

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


