### Accession
PXD008070

### Title
Repurposing human kinase inhibitors to create an antibiotic active against drug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, persisters and biofilms

### Description
To combat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections novel drugs addressing unprecedented and resistance-free targets are desperately needed. From a screen of human kinase inhibitors, we find that the anti-cancer drug sorafenib effectively kills MRSA strains. By dissection of the sorafenib scaffold and systematic synthesis of 72 analogs, we identify a potent compound – PK150 – exhibiting a minimal inhibitory concentration of 300 nM against several MRSA strains. The antibiotic induced rapid killing of S. aureus, including challenging persisters, and eradicated established biofilms. PK150 holds promising therapeutic potential as it did not induce in vitro resistance and exhibited good oral bioavailability and in vivo efficacy in a mouse infection model. Mode of action analysis by chemical proteomics revealed several targets including stimulation of protein secretion by signal peptidase IB (SpsB). Enhanced levels of extracellular proteins and resulting imbalances in secreted autolysin levels of PK150-treated bacteria support this target hypothesis. The associated antibiotic effects, especially the lack of resistance development, likely stem from the polypharmacology attribute of the compound. PK150 is therefore the founding member of a new class of highly active antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-based protein profiling S. aureus NCTC 8325 cells were grown to stationary phase, washed and resuspended in PBS. For competition experiments, bacterial cells were preincubated (37°C, 45 min) with sorafenib (0.5 mM) or DMSO. After preincubation, cells were treated (37°C, 45 min) with photoprobe (SFN-P, 50 µM), minimal photoprobes (DA-1, DA-2 or DA-3, 50 µM) or DMSO. Subsequently, samples were irradiated (360 nm, 4°C, 30 min), bacteria harvested and washed with PBS. Cells were resuspended in PBS containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche Diagnostics) and mechanically disrupted (Precellys 24 Homogenizer, Bertin Technologies), followed by treatment with lysostaphin (8 µg/mL; from S. staphylolyticus, Sigma-Aldrich). After separation of soluble and insoluble fraction by centrifugation, the insoluble fraction was washed with PBS (2x). Note that no separation of soluble and insoluble fractions was done for labeling experiments with minimal photoprobes (DA-1, DA-2 and DA-3). Samples were normalized to equal protein amounts based on Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology). For click chemistry, samples were treated (25°C, 1h) with trifunctional linker (TFL, 60 µM), TCEP (1 mM), TBTA ligand (0.1 mM) and CuSO4 (1 mM).  Subsequently, proteins were precipitated by acetone precipitation and washed with methanol (2x). Pellets were resuspended in 0.4% SDS in PBS and labeled proteins enriched on avidin-agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich, 25°C, 1h). Beads were washed with 0.4% SDS in PBS (3x), 6 M urea in water (2x) and PBS (3x). After resuspending the beads (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM pH 7.5 HEPES buffer), proteins were reduced on-bead with TCEP (5 mM; 37°C, 1 h) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM; 25°C, 30 min). Alkylation was quenched by treatment with dithiothreitol (10 mM; 25°C, 30 min). Samples were digested with Lys-C (2.5 ng/µL, Wako, 25°C, 2 h), then diluted with 50 mM TEAB buffer (1:4) and further digested with trypsin (3.75 ng/µL; sequencing grade, modified, Promega; 37°C, overnight). The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid (FA; final concentration of 0.5%). Peptides were desalted and labeled by stable isotope dimethyl labeling on-column using 50 mg SepPak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters). For technical replicates isotopic labels were permuted. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% FA, filtered and analyzed via HPLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Refer to the publication for more details. Secretome / Surfaceome S. aureus NCTC 8325 cells were grown for 5 h and washed with PBS. Cells were resuspended in fresh B medium to a cell density of 1.5 x 109 CFU/mL and incubated (37°C, 75 min) with sorafenib or SFN-C (1.5 µM, 0.5 x MIC), PK150 or PK150-C (0.15 µM, 0.5 x MIC) or DMSO. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and resulting pellets used for surfaceome analysis (see below). Supernatants (for secretome analysis) were filtered (0.22 µM) and proteins precipitated by trichloroacetic acid. Precipitated proteins were washed with 90% acetone (2x) and subsequently dissolved in 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0. Protein concentrations were adjusted according to BCA assay (Pierce BCA Protein assay kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology). For surfaceome analysis, cell pellets were washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, (3x) and carefully resuspended in hydrolysis buffer (0.4 mL; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 0.6 M sucrose). Samples were adjusted to equal turbidity (OD600 values) and equal volumes with hydrolysis buffer. Surface proteins were shaved with trypsin (15 µg; 37°C, 25 min) and supernatants collected by centrifugation, followed by filtration (0.22 µm) to eliminate residual cells. Filtrates were normalized to equal protein amounts based on Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology). Proteins for secretome and surfaceome analyses were reduced with TCEP (10 mM; 25°C, 1 h) and alkylated with IAA (12.5 mM; 25°C, 30 min). Alkylation was quenched with DTT (12.5 mM; 25°C, 30 min). Samples were digested with Lys-C (2.5 ng/µL, Wako, 25°C, 2 h), then diluted with 50 mM TEAB buffer (1:5) and further digested with trypsin (3.75 ng/µL; sequencing grade, modified, Promega; 37°C, overnight). The reaction was stopped by FA (final concentration of 0.5%). Peptides were desalted on-column using 50 mg SepPak C18 Vac cartridges and lyophilized. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% FA and analyzed via HPLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion. See the publication for more details.

### Data Protocol
Affinity-based protein profiling Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) with Andromeda as search engine with following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches for AfBPP analyses were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC 8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 02.12.2014, Note: SpsB, Q2FZT7 is incorrectly annotated in the Fasta-file, amino acids 1-36 are missing) and for secretome/surfaceome analyses using the same database, but with a manually curated entry for SpsB. Quantification of the labeled AfBPP samples was performed using following settings: DimethLys0, DimethNter0 (“light” isotopes), DimethLys4, DimethNter4 (“medium” isotopes) and DimethLys8, DimethNter8 (“heavy” isotopes) with a maximum of four labeled amino acids. “I = L”, “requantify” and “match between runs” (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Three biological replicates consisting of three technical replicates each were analyzed for SFN-P and competition experiments of SFN and SFN-P as well as for DA-1 and DA-2. For DA-3 three biological replicates were prepared and analyzed.  Quantification of Secretome / Surfaceome samples was performed using MaxQuant’s LFQ algorithm. The “I = L”, “requantify” and “match between runs” (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Four biological replicates were analyzed. See the publication for more details.

### Publication Abstract
New drugs are desperately needed to combat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections. Here, we report screening commercial kinase inhibitors for antibacterial activity and found the anticancer drug sorafenib as major hit that effectively kills MRSA strains. Varying the key structural features led to the identification of a potent analogue, PK150, that showed antibacterial activity against several pathogenic strains at submicromolar concentrations. Furthermore, this antibiotic eliminated challenging persisters as well as established biofilms. PK150 holds promising therapeutic potential as it did not induce in vitro resistance, and shows oral bioavailability and in vivo efficacy. Analysis of the mode of action using chemical proteomics revealed several targets, which included interference with menaquinone biosynthesis by inhibiting demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase and the stimulation of protein secretion by altering the activity of signal peptidase IB. Reduced endogenous menaquinone levels along with enhanced levels of extracellular proteins of PK150-treated bacteria support this target hypothesis. The associated antibiotic effects, especially the lack of resistance development, probably stem from the compound's polypharmacology.

### Keywords
Drug repurposing; antibacterial screening; bactericidal activity; spsb; staphylococcus aureus; mrsa; biofilm; persister; secretome; affinity-based protein profiling; chemical proteomics; photocrosslinker

### Affiliations
Technische Universität München Department of Chemistry Lehrstuhl Organische Chemie II Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching (bei München)
TU München

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Technische Universität München Department of Chemistry Lehrstuhl Organische Chemie II Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching (bei München)


