### Accession
PXD013895

### Title
Systematic analysis of lysine acetylome reveals potential functions of lysine acetylation in Shewanellabaltica, the specific spoilage organism of aquatic products

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is a major post-translational modification and plays a critical regulatory role in almost every aspect in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, yet there have been no data on Shewanellabaltica, which is one of the specific spoilage organism (SSO) of aquatic products.Here, we performed the first global acetylproteome analysis of S. baltica. 2929 lysine acetylation sites were identified in 1103 proteins, accounting for 26.1% of the total proteins which participate in a wide variety of biological processes, especially in the constituent of ribosome, the biosynthesis of aminoacyl-tRNA, the amino acids and fatty acid metabolism. Besides, 14 conserved acetylation motifs were detected in S. baltica. Notably, various directly or indirectly spoilage-related proteins were prevalently acetylated, including enzymesinvolved in the unsaturated fatty acids biosynthesis closely related to the cold adaptability,coldshock proteins,pivotal enzymesinvolved in the putrescinebiosynthesis,and a LuxR-type protein in quorum sensing system. The acetylome analysis in Shewanella can supplement the database and provide new insight into uncovering the spoilagemechanisms of S. baltica. The provided dataset illuminates the potential role of reversible acetylation in S. baltica, and serves as an important resource for exploring the physiological role of lysine acetylation in prokaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Cell Culture and Protein Extraction S. baltica was grown overnight in LB broth medium at 30 °C and the seed culture was inoculated in fresh LB broth medium at a ratio of 1:100. Three replicates of cells were harvested at an OD600 of 0.7 by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the cell pellets were washed three times with ice-cold PBS. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and deacetylase inhibitor mix (50mM nicotinamide, 3 μMtrichostatin A) was added to the cell pellets, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times[31]. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.2 Trypsin Digestion, HPLC Fractionation, and Affinity Enrichment of Acetylated Peptides  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio, Hangzhou China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking[32, 33]. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore Thermo scientific Waltham USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8)[34]. Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProtShewanellabaltica (4223 proteins) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn/Gln), acetylation (Lys) and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%.Thesite localization probability was set as ≥ 0.75. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to defaultvalues.All the raw data were deposited in a publicly accessible database PeptideAtlas(www.peptideatlas.org)

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation is a major post-translational modification and plays a critical regulatory role in almost every aspect in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, yet there have been no data on Shewanella baltica, which is one of the specific spoilage organism (SSO) of aquatic products. Here, we performed the first global acetylproteome analysis of S. baltica. 2929 lysine acetylation sites were identified in 1103 proteins, accounting for 26.1% of the total proteins which participate in a wide variety of biological processes, especially in the constituent of ribosome, the biosynthesis of aminoacyl-tRNA, the amino acids and fatty acid metabolism. Besides, 14 conserved acetylation motifs were detected in S. baltica. Notably, various directly or indirectly spoilage-related proteins were prevalently acetylated, including enzymes involved in the unsaturated fatty acids biosynthesis closely related to the cold adaptability, cold shock proteins, pivotal enzymes involved in the putrescine biosynthesis, and a LuxR-type protein in quorum sensing system. The acetylome analysis in Shewanella can supplement the database and provide new insight into uncovering the spoilage mechanisms of S. baltica. The provided dataset illuminates the potential role of reversible acetylation in S. baltica, and serves as an important resource for exploring the physiological role of lysine acetylation in prokaryotes. SIGNIFICANCE: The psychrotrophic nature and the ability of S. baltica to make good use of "habitat" nutrients explain its importance in spoilage of seafood stored at low temperatures. However, the underlying mechanism of spoilage potential from the perspective of protein post-translational modification was rarely studied. This work identifies the first comprehensive survey of a lysine acetylome in S. baltica and uncovers the involvement of lysine acetylation in the diverse biological processes, especially in the closely spoilage-related pathways. This study provides a resource for functional analysis of acetylated proteins and creates opportunities for in-depth elucidation of the physiological role of protein acetylation in Shewanella spp.

### Keywords
Shewanella. baltica, Cold adaptability, Lysine acetylation, Quorum sensing, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory for Food Microbial Technology of Zhejiang Province, School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 
Key Laboratory for Food Microbial Technology of Zhejiang Province, School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China

### Submitter
Feifei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Linglin Fu
Key Laboratory for Food Microbial Technology of Zhejiang Province, School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China


