### Accession
PXD005671

### Title
Comprehensive Proteomic Characterization of Human Pancreatic Cyst Fluid from Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is a duct-dilating precancerous lesion that grows in pancreatic ducts and is accompanied by the production of mucinous fluid. In recent years, its cystic fluid has been used molecularly for the differential diagnosis of other cystic tumors and malignancies. Thus, proteomic research of IPMN cyst fluid must be performed to identify an effective diagnostic biomarker. We examined the IPMN cyst fluid proteome using a novel proteomic strategy, combined with high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Although we did not deplete any high-abundance proteins, our dataset consistently detected thousands of proteins including pancreatic tumor markers, such as mucin family members, S100 proteins, and CEA-related proteins. In addition, we found 590 protein mutations through a variant sequence database search. Bioinformatics analyses were performed to determine biological functions and clinical meanings of canonical IPMN proteins and mutated proteins. Our proteomic platform and in-depth proteome dataset are valuable references that can be used in future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Human pancreatic cyst fluid samples from 6 IPMN patients were used. First, a 100-ul aliquot of each cyst fluid sample was prepared. Substances floating in the samples were initially pelleted by centrifugation. Then, we prepared each supernatant and pellet sample in parallel. Protein concentrations were using a BCA kit. Prior to the digestion step, 100 ug of protein was precipitated by adding a 5-fold volume of ice-cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in SDS-containing lysis buffer. After being heated at 99℃, the denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30-kDa spin filter. The digestion step was performed via FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) process. The proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) at 37℃ overnight. All samples were desalted using homemade C18-StageTips. Then, a StageTip-based high-pH peptide fractionation was performed for the library samples (Each supernatant and pellet library). The desalted peptide samples and the high-pH fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The peptide samples were analyzed using the LC-MS system, which comprised an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) that was coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on the 2-column setup with a trap column (75 um I.D. x 2 cm, C18 3 um, 100 Å) and an analytical column (50 um I.D. x 15 cm, C18 1.9 um, 100 Å). Prior to sample injection, the dried peptide samples were redissolved in solvent A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). After the samples were loaded onto the nano LC, a 180-minute gradient from 8% to 26% solvent B (100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) was applied to all samples. The spray voltage was 2.0 kV in the positive ion mode, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 320°C. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode using a top 15 method on a Q Exactive. The Orbitrap analyzer scanned precursor ions with a mass range of 300–1650 m/z and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. HCD scans were acquired on the Q Exactive at a resolution of 17,500. HCD peptide fragments were acquired at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. The maximum ion injection time for the survey and MS/MS scans was 20 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to perform a database search. The tandem mass spectra search was performed using the SEQUEST HT algorithm against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (April, 2014 released; 88,708 protein entries, http://www.uniprot.org). In addition to the canonical protein database, the XMan database was included to identify mutated peptides. This mutation database combined the UniprotKB (70,382 variant entries, http://www.uniprot.org/docs/humsavar), COSMIC (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic), OMIM (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim), and IARC P53 (http://p53.iarc.fr) databases and was then converted to facilitate the MS-based SAAV analysis.  The database search was conducted according to a target-decoy search strategy. The parameters were: full enzyme digest using trypsin (After KR/−) and up to 2 missed cleavages; a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm (monoisotopic mass); a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm (monoisotopic mass); a static modification of 57.02 Da on cysteine residues for carbamidomethylation; and a dynamic modification of 42.01 Da for protein N-term acetylation and 15.99 Da for methionine oxidation. Confidence criteria were set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% at the peptide and protein levels. To remove mutant peptides that are identified as false positives that do not cover the exact mutation sites, all identified peptides were inspected manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cyst, Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, Protein mutation

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical research institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical research institute, Seoul National University Hospital


