### Accession
PXD020949

### Title
Coexistence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa with Candida albicans enhances biofilm thickness through increased extracellular matrix from both organisms, but is attenuated by N-acetyl-L-cysteine

### Description
Biofilms are a communal of one or several kinds of microorganisms that growing on of both non-living and biotic surfaces by the production of multi-layers high-abundance extracellular matrix (ECM) to survive in the harsh environments (1-4). Biofilms consist of 85% (by volume) of matrix materials and 15% microbial cells (5). Biofilm ECM, consists of proteins, polysaccharides and/or extracellular DNAs, is important for biofilm integrity that increases environmental adaptability and induces antimicrobial resistance (6-7). Surface-adherent (sessile) bacteria in biofilms are more difficult to eradicate as minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of antibiotics against bacterial biofilms is 100-1000 folds higher than the free living (planktonic) form that resulting in recurrent infections (8). Biofilms also possibly form nidus at the surface for the attachment of other pathogens lead to biofilms of multiple bacteria or multi-organisms (9ref). The communication, among organisms within biofilm, controls density of cell population refers to as “quorum sensing” (10) and different combinations of organisms in biofilms with either multiple bacteria or multi-species might induce different biofilm properties. While catheter-related colonization of Gram-positive bacteria from skin microbiota such as Streptococcus spp. and Staphylococcus spp. is common, biofilms in the inner lumen of catheter consist of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Because i) translocation of gut microbiota (eg. Enterococcus spp., Gram-negative bacteria and Candida albicans) into blood circulation during sepsis is one of the common causes of severe sepsis , ii) mixed systemic infection between bacteria and Candida spp. is even more severe than the infection by each organism in separation  and iii) biofilms could be formed during bacteremia and fungemia, the biofilms from mixed species between bacteria and Candida spp. during sepsis is possible.  In addition, central venous catheter-related candidiasis is common in intensive care units (ICU) patients refer to as “Candida catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRCBSI)”. Moreover, synergistic interaction between Candida albicans and several Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli (in peritonitis), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (in cystic fibrosis and ventilation associated pneumonia) and Acinetobacter baumannii (in ventilation associated pneumonia) has been mentioned. Hence, the collaboration between bacteria and Candida spp. might affect biofilm production as C. albicans in coexistence with the sessile microbes possibly enhance biofilms production that is detectable by crystal violet color (16,7). It is interesting to note that C. albicans are normal microbiota in human intestine and gut-translocation from intestine into blood circulation during severe sepsis (gut leakage) is demonstrated. Furthermore, both Gram-negative bacteria and C. albicans are the most and the second most predominant intestinal human microbiota, respectively, in which the natural interactions between these organisms is possible. Accordingly, catheter-related bacteremia is common among patients in ICU. Gut translocation of Candida spp. during sepsis, due to gut leakage, might induce the collaboration between bacteria and fungi results in persistent infection (20-21Chen L, 2011, 66//Wu H, 2015, 1, IJOS). Although the understanding in the interaction between organisms in biofilms should be beneficial for eradication strategies, the data of biofilms from the combination between gut-derived bacteria and fungi is still limited.  As such, production of exo-polymers for biofilm-forming is a pathogenic virulent factor because biofilms is one of the important defend-mechanisms against host immune responses and antibiotics. Because i) antibiotic resistance caused by biofilm is a current serious medical problem , ii) the eradication of both bacterial and fungal biofilms is difficult and iii) antimicrobial treatment without biofilms-removal resulting in recurrent or persistent infection (23ref), biofilm prevention agent is needed (2410). Here, we explored i) the interaction between Gram-negative bacteria and C. albicans, in vitro, ii) macrophage responses against biofilm components, iii) biofilms in catheter-insertion mouse model and an evaluation on an interesting anti-biofilm.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with cold acetone by using equal volume of each supernatant conditions. The pellet was redissolved with 8 M urea and 50 mM Tris‐Hcl (pH = 8), and measured a protein concentration by BCA protein assay kit as per the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Equal volume of the soluble proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA). After that, proteins were digested with trypsin and added trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion reaction. Peptides in supernatant were dried by a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were  separated and analyzed by using the EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometry (Thermo) was used for peptide analysis. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 70 min followed by a linear gradient from 40 to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 20 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a 10 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS scan range of 350-1400 m/z accumulated at a resolution of 70000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) followed by at a resolution of 17500 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of sec. The normalized collision energy of higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was controlled at 32%. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state of +1 or those of greater than +8 were excluded, and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 sec.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria and <i>Candida</i><i>albicans</i> are prominent gut microbiota, and the translocation of these organisms into blood circulation might induce mixed-organism biofilms, which warrants the exploration of mixed- versus single-organism biofilms <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. In single-organism biofilms, <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> (PA) produced the least and the most prominent biofilms, respectively. <i>C. albicans</i> with <i>P. aeruginosa</i> (PA+CA) induced the highest biofilms among mixed-organism groups as determined by crystal violet straining. The sessile form of PA+CA induced higher macrophage responses than sessile PA, which supports enhanced immune activation toward mixed-organism biofilms. In addition, <i>Candida</i> incubated in pre-formed <i>Pseudomonas</i> biofilms (PA&gt;CA) produced even higher biofilms than PA+CA (simultaneous incubation of both organisms) as determined by fluorescent staining on biofilm matrix (AF647 color). Despite the initially lower bacteria during preparation, bacterial burdens by culture in mixed-organism biofilms (PA+CA and PA&gt;CA) were not different from biofilms of PA alone, supporting <i>Candida</i>-enhanced <i>Pseudomonas</i> growth. Moreover, proteomic analysis in PA&gt;CA biofilms demonstrated high AlgU and mucA with low mucB when compared with PA alone or PA+CA, implying an alginate-related mucoid phenotype in PA&gt;CA biofilms. Furthermore, mice with PA&gt;CA biofilms demonstrated higher bacteremia with more severe sepsis compared with mice with PA+CA biofilms. This is possibly due to the different structures. Interestingly, l-cysteine, a biofilm matrix inhibitor, attenuated mixed-organism biofilms both <i>in vitro</i> and in mice. In conclusion, <i>Candida</i> enhanced <i>Pseudomonas</i> alginate-related biofilm production, and <i>Candida</i> presentation in pre-formed <i>Pseudomonas</i> biofilms might alter biofilm structures that affect clinical manifestations but was attenuated by l-cysteine.

### Keywords
Biofilm, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr poorichaya somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


