### Accession
PXD016470

### Title
Fractionated Human/E. coli Benchmark Data Set

### Description
This benchmark data set is composed of two groups of fractionated samples. The first group contained a mixture of E. coli and human digest, and the second group contained a similar mixture except that the amount of E. coli was twice the amount as the first group.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli and human (K562 cell line) cells were lysed and digested with the FASP protocol. The human sample was split into 2 samples and the E. coli lysate was added to the two human samples. The amount of E. coli added to the second sample was twice that of the first sample. The two mixed samples were then fractionated into 6 fractions each for a total of 12 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
No data analysis is included with this data set. It only contains spectra files in Thermo .raw file format.

### Publication Abstract
Statistical significance tests are a common feature in quantitative proteomics workflows. The Student's <i>t</i>-test is widely used to compute the statistical significance of a protein's change between two groups of samples. However, the <i>t</i>-test's null hypothesis asserts that the difference in means between two groups is exactly zero, often marking small but uninteresting fold-changes as statistically significant. Compensations to address this issue are widely used in quantitative proteomics, but we suggest that a replacement of the <i>t</i>-test with a Bayesian approach offers a better path forward. In this article, we describe a Bayesian hypothesis test in which the null hypothesis is an interval rather than a single point at zero; the width of the interval is estimated from population statistics. The improved sensitivity of the method substantially increases the number of truly changing proteins detected in two benchmark data sets (ProteomeXchange identifiers PXD005590 and PXD016470). The method has been implemented within FlashLFQ, an open-source software program that quantifies bottom-up proteomics search results obtained from any search tool. FlashLFQ is rapid, sensitive, and accurate and is available both as an easy-to-use graphical user interface (Windows) and as a command-line tool (Windows/Linux/OSX).

### Keywords
Technical, Proteomics, Benchmark, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Robert Millikin

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd M. Smith
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States


