### Accession
PXD021675

### Title
Biotin-Labelled Clavulanic Acid to Identify Proteins Target for Haptenation in Serum

### Description
Clavulanic acid (CLV) is a betalactam (BL) which inhibits betalactamases activity and is frequently administered combined with amoxicillin (AX). Both BLs can be independently involved in allergic reactions. Indeed, selective immediate allergic reactions to CLV have recently been reported in 30% of patients allergic to the AX-CLV combination. Although protein haptenation with β-lactams is considered necessary to activate the immune system, currently there are no straight-forward detection tools for the study of protein haptenation by CLV. The aim of this study was to assess the suitability of two biotinylated analogues of CLV,  CLV-B or CLV-TEG-B (containing the later a hydrophilic tetraethylenglycol linker), as probes to study protein haptenation by this β-lactam.   Our results show that tagged CLV keeps some of the features of CLV, as the amide binding by which they haptenate proteins and it could constitute a valuable tool to identify protein targets for haptenation by CLV with high sensitivity to get insights into the activation of the immune system by CLV as well as mechanisms involved in allergy to β-lactams.

### Sample Protocol
We have used biotin detection to detect the haptenation of human serum proteins. Incubation of human serum with CLV-TEG-B resulted in the haptenation of several proteins that were identified by 2D-electrophoresis and peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) as HSA, haptoglobin, and heavy and light chains of immunoglobulins. Interestingly, these proteins had been previously identified as targets for haptenation by amoxicillin.  Prior to PMF analysis,  the  gel spots obtained from a 2D-electrophoresis were reduced, alkylated and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) overnight at 37ºC according to Sechi et al.  After digestion, the supernatant was collected and 1µl was spotted onto a MALDI target plate and allowed to air-dry at room temperature. Then, 0.6 µl of a 3 mg/ml of α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid matrix (Sigma) in 50% acetonitrile were added to the dried peptide digest spots and allowed again to air-dry at room temperature.  MALDI-TOF MS analyses were performed in a 4800 Plus Proteomics Analyzer MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, MDS Sciex, Toronto, Canada) at the Genomics and Proteomics Center, Complutense University of Madrid. The MALDI-TOF/TOF operated in positive reflector mode, and all mass spectra were calibrated internally using peptides from the auto digestion of trypsin.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, SwissProt(553222 sequences; 198133818 residues) with taxonomy restriction to human was searched using MASCOT 2.3 (www.matrixscience.com) through the software Global Protein Server v 3.6 (ABSciex). Search parameters were:   Carbamidomethyl Cystein as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification  Peptide mass tolerance, 50 ppm (PMF)  1 missed trypsin cleavage site  In all protein identification, the probability scores were greater than the score fixed by mascot as significant with a p-value minor than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Clavulanic acid (CLV) and amoxicillin, frequently administered in combination, can be independently involved in allergic reactions. Protein haptenation with &#x3b2;-lactams is considered necessary to activate the immune system. The aim of this study was to assess the suitability of biotinylated analogues of CLV as probes to study protein haptenation by this &#x3b2;-lactam. Two synthetic approaches afforded the labeling of CLV through esterification of its carboxylic group with a biotin moiety, via either direct binding (CLV-B) or tetraethylenglycol linker (CLV-TEG-B). The second analogue offered advantages as solubility in aqueous solution and potential lower steric hindrance for both intended interactions, with the protein and with avidin. NMR reactivity studies showed that both CLV and CLV-TEG-B reacts through &#x3b2;-lactam ring opening by aliphatic amino nitrogen, however with different stability of resulting conjugates. Unlike CLV conjugates, that promoted the decomposition of clavulanate fragment, the conjugates obtained with the CLV-TEG-B remained linked, as a whole structure including biotin, to nucleophile and showed a better stability. This was a desired key feature to allow CLV-TEG-B conjugated protein detection at great sensitivity. We have used biotin detection and mass spectrometry (MS) to detect the haptenation of human serum albumin (HSA) and human serum proteins. MS of conjugates showed that HSA could be modified by CLV-TEG-B. Remarkably, HSA preincubation with CLV excess only reduced moderately the incorporation of CLV-TEG-B, which could be attributed to different protein interferences. The CLV-TEG-B fragment with opened &#x3b2;-lactam was detected bound to the <sup>404-430</sup>HSA peptide of the treated protein. Incubation of human serum with CLV-TEG-B resulted in the haptenation of several proteins that were identified by 2D-electrophoresis and peptide mass fingerprinting as HSA, haptoglobin, and heavy and light chains of immunoglobulins. Taken together, our results show that tagged-CLV keeps some of the CLV features. Moreover, although we observe a different behavior in the conjugate stability and in the site of protein modification, the similar reactivity indicates that it could constitute a valuable tool to identify protein targets for haptenation by CLV with high sensitivity to get insights into the activation of the immune system by CLV and mechanisms involved in &#x3b2;-lactams allergy.

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Clavulanic acid, Haptenation, Biotin tag, Blot and biotin detection, Clavulanate

### Affiliations
UCM
Grupo de Investigación de Enfermedades Alérgica a Alérgenos y Fármacos - Unidad de Gestión clínica de Alergología,Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr María Isabel Montañez Vega
Grupo de Investigación de Enfermedades Alérgica a Alérgenos y Fármacos - Unidad de Gestión clínica de Alergología,Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain


