### Accession
PXD001461

### Title
The E. coli effector EspJ blocks Src kinase activity via amidation and ADP-ribosylation

### Description
In vitro ADP-ribosylated Src-K295M was separated by SDS-PAGE and the Coomassie stained protein band excised and digested with either trypsin, thermolysin or elastase. All digests were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) as well as Electron-Transfer Dissociation (ETD) fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
Digests with trypsin, elastase and thermolysin were performed overnight at 37 °C in 0.05 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). Approximately 0.1 µg of protease was used for one gel band. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 µm ID. PepMap C18 3 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 45 minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Distiller 2.4 was used for raw data processing and for generating peak lists, essentially with standard settings for the Orbitrap Velos (high/high settings). Mascot Server 2.4 was used for database searching with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance: 8 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, enzyme: “trypsin” with 3 missed cleavage sites allowed for trypsin or “none” for elastase and thermolysin; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Gln->pyroGlu (N-term. Q), oxidation (M), and ADP-ribosylation (RKCEDNQ). Database searching was performed against a small custom database containing Src sequence (K295M and K295M + E310Q).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Src kinase, Espj, Amidation

### Affiliations
Rudolf Virchow Center (RVZ), University of Wuerzburg
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Schlosser

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf Virchow Center (RVZ), University of Wuerzburg


