### Accession
PXD015391

### Title
Human MyBP-C PKA-treated C0-C2 LC-MSMS

### Description
Cardiac myosin-binding protein C (cMyBP-C) is a thick filament–associated protein that influences actin–myosin interactions. cMyBP-C alters myofilament structure and contractile properties in a protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation–dependent manner. To determine the effects of cMyBP-C and its phosphorylation on the microsecond rotational dynamics of actin filaments, we attached a phosphorescent probe to F-actin at Cys-374 and performed transient phosphorescence anisotropy (TPA) experiments. Binding of cMyBP-C N-terminal domains (C0-C2) to labeled F-actin reduced rotational flexibility by 20–25º, indicated by increased final anisotropy of the TPA decay. The effects of C0-C2 on actin TPA were highly cooperative (n ~ 8), suggesting that the cMyBP-C N terminus impacts the rotational dynamics of actin spanning seven monomers (i.e. the length of tropomyosin). PKA-mediated phosphorylation of C0-C2 eliminated the cooperative effects on actin flexibility and modestly increased actin rotational rates. Effects of Ser-to-Asp phosphomimetic substitutions in the M-domain of C0-C2 on actin dynamics only partially recapitulated the phosphorylation effects. C0-C1 (lacking M-domain/C2) similarly exhibited reduced cooperativity, but not as reduced as by phosphorylated C0-C2. These results suggest an important regulatory role of the M-domain in cMyBP-C effects on actin structural dynamics. In contrast, phosphomimetic substitution of the glycogen synthase kinase (GSK3beta) site in the Pro/Ala-rich linker of C0-C2 did not significantly affect the TPA results. We conclude that cMyBP-C binding and PKA-mediated phosphorylation can modulate actin dynamics. We propose that these N-terminal cMyBP-C–induced changes in actin dynamics help explain the functional effects of cMyBP-C phosphorylation on actin–myosin interactions.

### Sample Protocol
For the determination of phosphorylated serines, preliminary experiments tested phosphorylation at a wide range of PKA concentrations (0.02, 0.1, 0.5, 2.5, 13, 65, and 250 ng/ug C0-C2). Phosphorylation was monitored by in-gel staining of proteins with Pro-Q Diamond (ThermoFischer, Waltham, MA) and staining total protein with SYPRO-Ruby (ThermoFischer, Waltham, MA), according to the supplier’s instructions. Maximal phosphorylation plateaued at 2.5 ng PKA/ug C0-C2. To ensure that all potential serines were phosphorylated, we used the sample treated with 65 ng/ug C0-C2. We excised the C0-C2 band as we described for LC-MS/MS (Bunch et al. 2019 J Mol Cell Cardiol.) and utilized a probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization (Beausoleil et al., 2006 Nat Biotechnol.). Following SDS-PAGE, the gel bands of human cMyBP-C fragment C0-C2 (~50 kD) was sent to Taplan Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School (Cambridge, MA) to identify protein peptide sequences. Sample identity was determined following in-gel digestion of denatured band (trypsin), micro-capillary LC/MS/MS analysis, protein database search and analysis, and web-based reporting of data (Licklider et al., 2002, Anal Chem.).

### Data Protocol
ReAdW.exe (version 4.3.1) peaklist-generating software and SEQUEST (ver. 28, rev. 13) search engine were used. Only the target sequence was searched for 2 entries of the target protein and the target protein reversed that were actually searched. No specificity of proteases was used to generate peptides, nor was an enzyme specified for the search. However, all peptides were required to be tryptic when filtering data. The fixed modification considered was 57.0215 Da on cysteine residues and the variable modifications were methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da), and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine (79.9663 Da) residues. A search was done with 100 ppm mass tolerance and 1 Da for fragment ion tolerance. For threshold score/expectation value for accepting individual spectra, the peptides must be tryptic, with PPM values less than 10 ppm from expected, along with manual interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac myosin-binding protein C (cMyBP-C) is a thick filament-associated protein that influences actin-myosin interactions. cMyBP-C alters myofilament structure and contractile properties in a protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation-dependent manner. To determine the effects of cMyBP-C and its phosphorylation on the microsecond rotational dynamics of actin filaments, we attached a phosphorescent probe to F-actin at Cys-374 and performed transient phosphorescence anisotropy (TPA) experiments. Binding of cMyBP-C N-terminal domains (C0-C2) to labeled F-actin reduced rotational flexibility by 20-25&#xb0;, indicated by increased final anisotropy of the TPA decay. The effects of C0-C2 on actin TPA were highly cooperative (<i>n</i> = &#x223c;8), suggesting that the cMyBP-C N terminus impacts the rotational dynamics of actin spanning seven monomers (<i>i.e.</i> the length of tropomyosin). PKA-mediated phosphorylation of C0-C2 eliminated the cooperative effects on actin flexibility and modestly increased actin rotational rates. Effects of Ser to Asp phosphomimetic substitutions in the M-domain of C0-C2 on actin dynamics only partially recapitulated the phosphorylation effects. C0-C1 (lacking M-domain/C2) similarly exhibited reduced cooperativity, but not as reduced as by phosphorylated C0-C2. These results suggest an important regulatory role of the M-domain in cMyBP-C effects on actin structural dynamics. In contrast, phosphomimetic substitution of the glycogen synthase kinase (GSK3&#x3b2;) site in the Pro/Ala-rich linker of C0-C2 did not significantly affect the TPA results. We conclude that cMyBP-C binding and PKA-mediated phosphorylation can modulate actin dynamics. We propose that these N-terminal cMyBP-C-induced changes in actin dynamics help explain the functional effects of cMyBP-C phosphorylation on actin-myosin interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylated, C0c2, Lc-msms, Myosin binding protein c, Pka, C0-c2, Cmybp-c

### Affiliations
University of Arizona
Colson lab, Dept. of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

### Submitter
Brett Colson

### Lab Head
Dr Brett Allan Colson
Colson lab, Dept. of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA


