### Accession
PXD015283

### Title
A novel and simple strategy to isolate extracellular vesicles from human plasma and tissue culture medium with high yield and purity

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) function in intercellular communication and can be indicative of the biological status of their producing cells, for example in disease. Isolation of EVs from blood or tissue culture medium is instrumental for the discovery of novel EV associated disease biomarkers as well as for functional studies. Current protocols for EV isolation from blood are limited by low recovery yield and in their capacity to remove contaminating particles, including lipoprotein particles and protein aggregates. In this study, we designed and evaluated a three step protocol to isolate EVs from blood or tissue culture media, with high yield and purity. EVs were first collected and separated from the majority of soluble plasma protein by precipitation with polyethylene glycol (PEG). PEG precipitation resulted in near to absolute recovery, while the yield of EVs collected by ultracentrifugation was only 15%. PEG precipitated EVs were then separated from co-precipitated proteins and protein complexes, low density lipoproteins (LDL), and the majority of high density lipoproteins (HDL) by upward displacement into a iohexol density gradients, yielding 493 fold purification relative to total plasma protein with 76% recovery. Finally, remaining HDL and iohexol was effectively removed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Near to absolute pure of isolated EVs was confirmed by cryo-electron microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested in 2M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium BiCarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 40mM 2-chloro-acetamide, after which peptides were desalted with homemade C-18 stagetips (3M, St Paul, MN). Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using 240 gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 15000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software, version 1.6.3.4. For identification, the Human Uniprot database (Jan 2019) was searched with oxidation of and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification, while peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EV) are membrane encapsulated nanoparticles that can function in intercellular communication, and their presence in biofluids can be indicative for (patho)physiological conditions. Studies aiming to resolve functionalities of EV or to discover EV-associated biomarkers for disease in liquid biopsies are hampered by limitations of current protocols to isolate EV from biofluids or cell culture medium. EV isolation is complicated by the &gt;10<sup>5</sup>-fold numerical excess of other types of particles, including lipoproteins and protein complexes. In addition to persisting contaminants, currently available EV isolation methods may suffer from inefficient EV recovery, bias for EV subtypes, interference with the integrity of EV membranes, and loss of EV functionality. In this study, we established a novel three-step non-selective method to isolate EV from blood or cell culture media with both high yield and purity, resulting in 71% recovery and near to complete elimination of unrelated (lipo)proteins. This EV isolation procedure is independent of ill-defined commercial kits, and apart from an ultracentrifuge, does not require specialised expensive equipment.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; exosomes; isolation; lipoprotein particles; human plasma

### Affiliations
Department of biochemistry and cell biology, Faculty of veterinary science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Willem Stoorvogel
Department of biochemistry and cell biology, Faculty of veterinary science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


