### Accession
PXD007511

### Title
The interactomes of RUNX1 and RUNX3 from Mus musculus T cells

### Description
Cellular binary fate decisions require the progeny to silence genes associated with the alternative fate. The major subsets of alpha:beta T cells have been extensively studied as a model system for fate decisions. While the transcription factor RUNX3 is required for the initiation of Cd4 silencing in CD8 T cell progenitors, it is not required to maintain the silencing of Cd4 and other helper T lineage genes. The other runt domain containing protein, RUNX1, silences Cd4 in an earlier T cell progenitor, but this silencing is reversed whereas the gene silencing after RUNX3 expression is not reverse. Therefore, we hypothesized that RUNX3 and not RUNX1 recruits other factors that maintains the silencing of helper T lineage genes in CD8 T cells. To this end, we performed a proteomics screen of RUNX1 and RUNX3 to determine candidate silencing factors.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1mm3 pieces and then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Gel pieces were washed and completely dried. Rehydration of gel pieces was carried out with ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were subjected to nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile and formic acid. As peptides were eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into a LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest. Spectral matches were manually examined and multiple identified peptides per protein were required.

### Publication Abstract
Helper versus cytotoxic T lineage decision in the thymus has been studied as a model for silencing of alternative lineage genes. Although the transcription factor RUNX3 is required for the initiation of <i>Cd4</i> silencing in developing CD8 T cells, it is unknown how silencing of <i>Cd4</i> and other helper T lineage genes is maintained. We show that the histone methyltransferase G9a is necessary for silencing helper T lineage genes in proliferating mouse CD8 T cells. Despite normal initial <i>Cd4</i> downregulation, G9a-deficient CD8 T cells derepress <i>Cd4</i> and other helper lineage genes during repeated division in lymphopenia or in response to tumor Ag. However, G9a was dispensable for continued silencing of those genes in CD8 T cells that respond to infection by <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> These results demonstrate that G9a facilitates maintenance of cellular identity of CD8 T cells during cell division, which is further reinforced by inflammatory signals.

### Keywords
Mus musculus runx1 runx3 immunoprecipitation t cells

### Affiliations
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Daniel Verbaro

### Lab Head
Dr Takeshi Egawa
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO


