### Accession
PXD003472

### Title
S. cerevisiae DDA orbitrap-based benchmark datasets. C4PR_LIV

### Description
In this study, label free peptide intensities from a well quantitatively characterised yeast cell lysate were acquired on two orbitrap mass spectrometers (LTQ-Velos and Q Exactive HF). Additionally, samples containing Universal Proteomics Standard and the Proteomics Dynamic range Standard (http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/life-science/proteomics/mass-spectrometry/ups1-and-ups2-proteomic.html) in a yeast background were also acquired.  The absolute abundances of over 340 proteins present in that yeast lysate (determined in a parallel SRM-based study) were then used in order to determine the flyability (or detectability) of thousands of peptides. The flyability scores, termed the ‘F-factors’, reflect how well a peptide ionises in a complex chromatographically separated sample. Specifically, F-factors are calculated by normalising peptide precursor ion intensity by the absolute abundance of its parent protein. Based on the analysis of the six datasets deposited here (reflecting different gradients and instrument platforms) the study found that physicochemical properties including peptide length, charge and hydrophobicity are predictors of peptide detectability. Furthermore, it was established that hydrophobicity has a non-linear relationship with detectability and that coelution with competing ions significantly affects peptide detectability. The analysis based on the data deposited here suggests that F-factors have great utility for understanding peptide detectability and gas-phase ion chemistry in complex chromatographically-separated peptide mixtures. The concept of F-factors will also undoubtedly assist in better surrogate selection in targeted mass spectrometry studies and allow more accurate calibration of peptide ion signal in label-free workflows.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae (EUROSCARF accession number Y11335 BY4742; Mat ALPHA; his3Δ1; leu2Δ0; lys2Δ0; ura3Δ0; YJL088w::kanMX4) cultures were prepared as described previously (see Jarnuczak A, et al., 2015,  Proteomic). Briefly, four biological replicates of yeast cultures grown in carbon-limited medium, in chemostat mode, were collected and the total number of harvested cells was determined using an automated cell counter (Cellometer AUTOM10). For protein extraction, cell pellets were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche Diagnostics Ltd, West Sussex, UK) and the pellet was subjected to 15 cycles of bead-beating. Total protein extracts were collected and protein concentration determined with a Bradford assay.  Proteins corresponding to 25 million cells (~100 μg protein) were digested using the detailed procedure described in (Jarnuczak A, et al., 2015, Proteomic). Briefly, yeast lysate, Universal Proteomics Standard (UPS1; Sigma-Aldrich) or Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (UPS2; Sigma-Aldrich) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, was denatured using 1% (w/v) RapiGestTM (Waters, Manchester, UK), reduced by addition of 60 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated using 180 mM iodoacetamide. Digestion was performed by addition of trypsin at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, followed by another aliquot after 4.5 h, and overnight incubation at 37˚C. The digestion was stopped and RapiGestTM removed by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid. A further aliquot of acetonitrile:water (2:1) was added to aid peptide solubilisation. RapiGestTM and any remaining cell debris were then removed by centrifugation (15000 × g for 20 min). Digested UPS standards were diluted to a final protein concentration of 25 fmol/μL (UPS1 containing equimolar amounts of 48 human proteins) or ranging from 250 fmol/μL to 2.5 amol/μL (UPS2 containing 48 human proteins spanning a concentration range of five orders of magnitude). Each standard was spiked into the S. cerevisiae lysate to an appropriate concentration in order to achieve 25 fmol (or 250 fmol to 2.5 amol range) standard in 500 ng yeast on column.

### Data Protocol
Raw instrument data were processed with MaxQuant (v. 1.5.1.0) software suite ( Cox and Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, (12), 1367-72). Peptide searches were performed against the UniProt S. cerevisiae canonical + isoform protein database (accessed on 9th May 2015, 6721 entries) and a database containing 262 common laboratory contaminants using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Raw data from UPS spike-in experiments were searched against the same S. cerevisiae protein database and UPS fasta file downloaded from the Sigma-Aldrich website (http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/life-science/proteomics-and-protein/ups1-ups2-sequences.fasta). Search parameters were as follows; peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) = 1%, protein FDR = 1%, precursor ion mass tolerance = 5 ppm (Velos) and 4.5 ppm (QEx-HF), product ion mass tolerance = 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Maximum two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed and matching between runs was enabled. All other MaxQuant parameters were left as default.  Individual peptide intensities were extracted by MaxQuant as a value at maximum of the MS1 peptide peak with the intensity threshold set to 500. This corresponds to the raw intensity value listed in the MaxQuant ‘peptides.txt’ file.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics of complex biological samples remains challenging in part due to the variability and charge competition arising during electrospray ionization (ESI) of peptides and the subsequent transfer and detection of ions. These issues preclude direct quantification from signal intensity alone in the absence of a standard. A deeper understanding of the governing principles of peptide ionization and exploitation of the inherent ionization and detection parameters of individual peptides is thus of great value. Here, using the yeast proteome as a model system, we establish the concept of peptide F-factor as a measure of detectability, closely related to ionization efficiency. F-factor is calculated by normalizing peptide precursor ion intensity by absolute abundance of the parent protein. We investigated F-factor characteristics in different shotgun proteomics experiments, including across multiple ESI-based LC-MS platforms. We show that F-factors mirror previously observed physicochemical predictors as peptide detectability but demonstrate a nonlinear relationship between hydrophobicity and peptide detectability. Similarly, we use F-factors to show how peptide ion coelution adversely affects detectability and ionization. We suggest that F-factors have great utility for understanding peptide detectability and gas-phase ion chemistry in complex peptide mixtures, selection of surrogate peptides in targeted MS studies, and for calibration of peptide ion signal in label-free workflows. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003472.

### Keywords
Benchmark dataset, Peptide detectability, Coelution, Peptide ionization, Hydrophobicity

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
University of Manchester, Faculty of Life Sciences,B1072 Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT

### Submitter
Andrew Jarnuczak

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Simon Hubbard
University of Manchester, Faculty of Life Sciences,B1072 Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT


