### Accession
PXD006395

### Title
Global Analyses of Selective Insulin Resitance in Hepatocytes due to Palmitate Lipotoxicity

### Description
Obesity is tightly linked to hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance. One feature of this association is the paradox of selective insulin resistance: insulin fails to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis but activates lipid synthesis in the liver. How lipid accumulation interferes selectively with some branches of hepatic insulin signaling is not well understood. Here we provide a resource, based on unbiased approaches and established in a simple cell culture system, to enable investigations of the phenomenon of selective insulin resistance. We analyzed the phosphoproteome of insulin-treated human hepatoma cells and identified sites in which palmitate selectively impairs insulin signaling. As an example, we show that palmitate interferes with insulin signaling to FoxO1, a key transcription factor regulating gluconeogenesis, and identify a possible mechanism. This model system, together with our comprehensive characterization of the proteome, phosphoproteome, and lipidome changes in response to palmitate treatment, provides a novel and useful resource for unraveling the mechanisms underlying selective insulin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were SILAC (stable isotope labeling of amino acid) labeled and cultured in DMEM media with 10% dialyzed FBS. For palmitate treatment, cells were seeded with 30% confluency, cultured for 18 h and treated with 0.25 mM palmitate for 24 h. Palmitate treated or untreated cells were stimulated with vehicle (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) or 100 nM insulin for 20 min and lysed in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride (GdmCl), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide, alkylating reagent (CAA), 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5). After heating at 95°C for 5 min and sonicating, lysate was diluted 1:3 [lysate: dilution buffer (10% acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris, pH 9.0)], digested with LysC overnight, then further diluted to 1:5 (lysate:dilution buffer) and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted with Sep-pak Waters C18 cartridge and enriched for phosphopeptides by incubating with 3 μl titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads suspended in DHB/buffer B (30 mg/1 ml) for 30 min. Beads were isolated by centrifugation and washed sequentially with 3% TFA and 30% acetonitrile, 0.3% TFA in 60% acetonitrile, and 0.3% TFA in 100% acetonitrile to remove peptides bound nonspecifically. The supernatant was used for the next round of phosphopeptide enrichment, and this cycle was repeated eight times. Phosphopeptides on beads were eluted by 16.5% ammonia in 20% acetonitrile, vacuum dried, resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) for analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Stationary phase buffer was 0.5 % formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5–40 % (v/v) acetonitrile over 265 min. Peptides were separated on self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective) using Reprosil Gold 120 C18 (Dr. Maisch) 1.9 μm particle size resin. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top ten method at a mass range of 300–2000 Da. For proteome profiling, SILAC labeled cell lysate were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Excessive iodoacetamide were quenched using 10 mM dithiotheritol. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 9 volumes of ice-cold acetone and 1 volume of methanol and incubated at -80°C for 2 h. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged for 1 h at 4 500 x g and 4°C.  After washing with methanol, proteins were resolubilized in 100 mM NaOH aided by sonication at 4°C and the solution was brought to pH 7.5 with 200 mM HEPES free acid. Protein concentrations were determined using bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce), followed by equal mixing of proteins at 1:1 ratio (light:heavy labels). Proteins were trypsinized using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from proteome and phosphosproteome analyses were processed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8  using the following setting: “Oxidised Methionene (M)”, “Acetylation (Protein N term)” and “Phospho (STY)” (phosphoproteome only) as variable modification, “Carbamidomethyl (C)” as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Only peptides longer than five amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein is 2. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the UniProt-human database containing 71,579 entires (October 2017). “Matching between runs” algorithm with a time window of 0.7 min was employed to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions.Microsoft Office Excel, R software and Perseus (Version 1.5.0.9, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich) were used to perform bioinformatics analyses. Only proteins and phosphorylation sites passed one sample t-test with a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate of less than 5% were considered. The Gene ontology (GO) annotation enrichment analysis on phospho-sites quantified by Fisher exact test was performed on Perseus and PANTHER (http://pantherdb.org/) was used to categorize proteins into different cell components, biological processes or signaling pathways. Motif analysis was performed on pLogo (21) using sequences of phosphopeptides in the phosphoproteome and human proteome as the background. To identify phospho-sites impacted by insulin/palmitate, normalized heavy/light intensity ratios of quantified phosphosites were transformed to log2 data and a 2.5 median absolute deviations (MAD) threshold was used to reveal positively and negatively regulated sites on proteins and the rest sites were considered as unchanged.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is tightly linked to hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance. One feature of this association is the paradox of selective insulin resistance: insulin fails to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis but activates lipid synthesis in the liver. How lipid accumulation interferes selectively with some branches of hepatic insulin signaling is not well understood. Here we provide a resource, based on unbiased approaches and established in a simple cell culture system, to enable investigations of the phenomenon of selective insulin resistance. We analyzed the phosphoproteome of insulin-treated human hepatoma cells and identified sites in which palmitate selectively impairs insulin signaling. As an example, we show that palmitate interferes with insulin signaling to FoxO1, a key transcription factor regulating gluconeogenesis, and identify altered FoxO1 cellular compartmentalization as a contributing mechanism for selective insulin resistance. This model system, together with our comprehensive characterization of the proteome, phosphoproteome, and lipidome changes in response to palmitate treatment, provides a novel and useful resource for unraveling the mechanisms underlying selective insulin resistance.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Insulin resistance, Hepatic steatosis, Lipotoxicity

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard School of Public Health


