### Accession
PXD012491

### Title
An Integrated Systems Approach Unveils New Aspects of Microoxia-mediated Regulation in Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens

### Description
Using an integrated systems approach, the expressed proteome of B. diazoefficiens strain 110scp4 was measured under i) normal, oxic growth, and ii) microoxic growth condtions. This included, as a first step, the sequencing and de novo assembly of the genome of this widely used rhizobial model strain, which turned out to harbor several deletions and insertions compared to the B. diazoefficiens USDA 110 NCBI reference genome. With this optimal basis in hand, a shotgun proteomics approach relying on a slightly adapated FASP protocol was carried out, allowing to identify 2900 (oxia) and 2826 (microoxia) proteins, respectively, thereby largely expanding the proteome known to be expressed under microoxic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
B. diazoefficiens 110spc4, formerly B. japonicum USDA 110, was grown at 30°C in a peptone-salts-yeast extract (PSY) medium. Three replicates of 100 ml of culture grown to mid-exponential phase (OD600 of 0.45 to 0.6) under oxic (21% O2) and microoxic (0.5% O2, 99.5% N2) conditions were subjected to a shotgun proteomics analysis relying on an adapted FASP protocol. Three replicates per condition were collected by centrifugation and pellets were kept at -80°C. Each pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2 buffer supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail, before the cell suspension was sonicated (1 min, cycle 5, 50% amplitude). The above procedure was followed by disruption through an ice-cold French pressure cell at about 120 MPa, and another round of sonication (same settings). 100 µl lysate per sample were mixed with 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) and boiled at 95°C for 6 min with gentle shaking (at 700 rpm) in a thermomixer comfort. Samples were then processed with an Ultrasound cup horn, centrifuged and protein concentration determined. Twenty µg protein of each sample were used for on-filter digestion using a modified version of the FASP protocol. Dissolved peptide containing samples were separated on a self-made reverse-phase column packed with C18 material. The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted using the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile): 0-50 min; 0-25% B, 50-60 min; 25-32% B, 60-70 min; 32-97% B at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min.

### Data Protocol
High accuracy mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) in DDA mode. All precursor signals were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole transmission in the mass range of 300-1,500 m/z. Spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, a target value of 4E5 and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 30% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 2E3 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Precursor signals were selected for fragmentation with a charge state from +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5E3. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 30 seconds and maximum parallelizing ion injections was activated. Mass spectra were searched either against a protein sequence database containing 8348 B. diazoefficiens 110spc4 proteins (or 8317 B. diazoefficiens USDA 110 proteins) and protein sequences of 256 common contaminants using MS-GF+ (MS-GFDB v2017.01.13) and the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines, oxidation of Methionines, and deamination of Asparagines and Glutamines were considered as optional modification. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides and the automatic decoy search option was enabled. Search results were filtered and summarized using in-house tools. Requiring either three spectra or two distinct unambiguous peptides (class 1a and 3a; Qeli & Ahrens, PeptideClassifier, Nat Biotech 2010), 2900 (oxia) and 2826 (microoxia) proteins were identified (at an estimated protein FDR less than 1%; estimated spectral FDR less than 0.4%). Significantly differentially regulated proteins were identified with DESeq2.

### Publication Abstract
The adaptation of rhizobia from the free-living state in soil to the endosymbiotic state comprises several physiological changes in order to cope with the extremely low oxygen availability (microoxia) within nodules. To uncover cellular functions required for bacterial adaptation to microoxia directly at the protein level, we applied a systems biology approach on the key rhizobial model and soybean endosymbiont <i>Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens</i> USDA 110 (formerly <i>B. japonicum</i> USDA 110). As a first step, the complete genome of <i>B. diazoefficiens</i> 110<i>spc</i>4, the model strain used in most prior functional genomics studies, was sequenced revealing a deletion of a ~202 kb fragment harboring 223 genes and several additional differences, compared to strain USDA 110. Importantly, the deletion strain showed no significantly different phenotype during symbiosis with several host plants, reinforcing the value of previous OMICS studies. We next performed shotgun proteomics and detected 2,900 and 2,826 proteins in oxically and microoxically grown cells, respectively, largely expanding our knowledge about the inventory of rhizobial proteins expressed in microoxia. A set of 62 proteins was significantly induced under microoxic conditions, including the two nitrogenase subunits NifDK, the nitrogenase reductase NifH, and several subunits of the high-affinity terminal <i>cbb</i> <sub>3</sub> oxidase (FixNOQP) required for bacterial respiration inside nodules. Integration with the previously defined microoxia-induced transcriptome uncovered a set of 639 genes or proteins uniquely expressed in microoxia. Finally, besides providing proteogenomic evidence for novelties, we also identified proteins with a regulation similar to that of FixK<sub>2</sub>: transcript levels of these protein-coding genes were significantly induced, while the corresponding protein abundance remained unchanged or was down-regulated. This suggested that, apart from <i>fixK</i> <sub>2</sub>, additional <i>B. diazoefficiens</i> genes might be under microoxia-specific post-transcriptional control. This hypothesis was indeed confirmed for several targets (HemA, HemB, and ClpA) by immunoblot analysis.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Rhizobia, Proteogenomics, Genome sequencing, Transcriptomics, Microoxia, Comparative genomics, Fnr/crp proteins, Shotgun proteomics, B. diazoefficiens

### Affiliations
Agroscope 
Department of Soil Microbiology and Symbiotic Systems, Estacion Experimental del Zaidin, Granada, Spain

### Submitter
Christian Ahrens

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Socorro Mesa
Department of Soil Microbiology and Symbiotic Systems, Estacion Experimental del Zaidin, Granada, Spain


