### Accession
PXD012303

### Title
SILAC analysis of long bone osteoblasts isolated from Tgif1+/+ and Tgif1-/- mice

### Description
Eric Hesse   9 Jan 2019, 17:34 (15 hours ago)   to me, Hartmut Lieber Marcel,  unten ist das abstract kopiert, reicht das?  Lg, Eric   Abstract Osteoporosis is caused by increased bone resorption and decreased bone formation. Intermittent administration of a fragment of Parathyroid hormone (PTH) activates osteoblast-mediated bone formation and is used in patients with severe osteoporosis. However, the mechanisms by which PTH elicits its anabolic effect are not fully elucidated. Here we show that the absence of the homeodomain protein TG-interacting factor 1 (Tgif1) impairs osteoblast differentiation and activity, leading to a reduced bone formation. Deletion of Tgif1 in osteoblasts and osteocytes decreases bone resorption due to an increased secretion of Semaphorin 3E (Sema3E), an osteoclast-inhibiting factor. Tgif1 is a PTH target gene and PTH treatment failed to increase bone formation and bone mass in Tgif1-deficient mice. Thus, our study identifies Tgif1 as a novel regulator of bone remodeling and an essential component of the PTH anabolic action. These insights contribute to a better understanding of bone metabolism and the anabolic function of PTH.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, proteins were subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin. The proteins were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3) at 50°C for 10 min, followed by alkylation with 300 mM iodoacetamid (dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were incubated with trypsin for 16 hours at 37°C. The digests were acidified with formic acid (FA) and evaporated. For analysis of the tryptic peptides with liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS), samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% FA. LC-MS measurements were performed by injecting the samples on a nano liquid chromatography system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via electrospray-ionization (ESI) to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated by reversed phase chromatography (buffer A: 0.1% FA, buffer B: 99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA; flow-rate: 250 nL/min; gradient: 2-30% B in 90 min). Every second a MS scan was performed over a m/z range from 400-1500, with a resolution of 120000 FWHM at m/z 200 (transient length= 256 ms, maximum injection time= 50 ms, AGC target= 2e5). Analysis of fragmented peptide ions in the mass spectrometer was carried out in data-dependent-acquisition (DDA) mode, using the top speed mode, a HCD collision energy of 35%, an intensity threshold of 5e3 and an isolation width of 1.5 m/z. Fragment spectra were recorded in in the ion trap (scan-rate= 66 kDa/s, maximum injection time= 70 ms, AGC target= 1e4).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For identification, fragment spectra were searched with Sequest HT against a mouse database (SwissProt, www.uniprot.org, downloaded 1.5.2014). The searches were performed using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Furthermore, two missed cleavages were allowed and a carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as a fixed modification. An oxidation of methionine residues and a 13C6-label on both lysine and arginine residues were allowed as a variable modification. Peptides were identified with a FDR of 1% using Percolator and proteins were kept as correctly identified if at least two unique peptides were identified. For SILAC quantitation, “event detector” and “precursor ion quantifier” algorithms of Proteome Discoverer were used. A mass variability of 2 ppm and a 0.2 min retention time tolerance on precursor ion pairs were used and protein ratios are based on the median peptide ratio. At least two isotopic peaks were required for inclusion, as well as a minimal signal to noise level of three.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tgif1, Silac, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
Molecular Skeletal Biology Laboratory, Department of Trauma, Hand and Reconstructive Surgery, University-Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

### Submitter
Marcel Kwiatkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Hesse
Molecular Skeletal Biology Laboratory, Department of Trauma, Hand and Reconstructive Surgery, University-Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.


