### Accession
PXD023800

### Title
Myocardial proteome profiling reveals disease- and sex-specific alterations in patients with aortic valve stenosis and mitral valve regurgitation

### Description
Heart valve diseases, such as aortic valve stenosis (AS) and mitral valve regurgitation (MR), are leading causes of heart failure. However, myocardial proteome studies in AS and MR are extremely rare. We profiled the proteome of 75 human left ventricular myocardial biopsies (AS=41, MR=17, controls=17) and detected disease- and sex-specific protein expression alterations. Patients with AS, for example, showed higher abundance of fibrosis-related proteins and lower abundance of proteins related to energy metabolism and protein synthesis capacity with prominent sex differences. This might explain the higher amount of myocardial mass and fibrosis and lower systolic cardiac function especially observed in male AS in our cohort and might help to find specific proteins as treatment targets.  Our work provides detailed insight into myocardial protein alterations in AS and MR and expands, in combination with clinical parameters, the understanding of cardiac remodeling in female and male patients, aiming to improve disease- and sex-specific therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Left ventricular myocardial samples were collected from patients with AS and MR during aortic or mitral valve replacement surgery or from healthy donor hearts not used for transplantation due to non-medical reasons. Samples were taken and frozen directly in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C. For protein extraction, biopsies were lysed in 200ul lysis buffer containing: 2% SDS, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Complete, Roche). Samples were homogenized at room temperature using FastPrep-24™ 5G Homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) with 10 cycles of 20 s and 5 s pause between cycles. After heating the samples for 5 min at 95°C, 5 freeze-thaw cycles were applied. 25 U of Benzonase (Merck) was added to each sample and after an incubation for 30 min the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16 000 g for 40 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was measured (Bio-Rad DC Protein assay) and 100 µg of each sample was further processed using the SP3 clean-up and digestion protocol as previously described. Briefly, each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM final, Sigma) for 30 min, followed by alkylation with chloroacetamide (40 mM final, Sigma) for 45 min and quenching with dithiothreitol (20 mM final, Sigma). Beads (1mg) and acetonitrile (70% final concentration) were added to each sample and after 20 min of incubation on an over-head rotor bead-bound protein were washed with 70% ethanol and 100% acetonitrile. 2µg sequence-grade Trypsin (Promega) and 2µg Lysyl Endopeptidase LysC (Wako) in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8) were added and after an overnight incubation at 37°C peptides were collected, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned up using StageTips protocol. Apeptide mix for each experimental group (CON, AS and MR) was generated by collecting 10 µg peptides from each individual sample belonging to the corresponding group. Equal peptide amounts from each group mixture were combined, desalted using a C18 SepPak column (Waters, 100mg) and dried down using a SpeedVac instrument. Peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and 2% acetonitrile, loaded on a XBridge C18 4.6mm x 250mm column (Waters, 3.5µm bead size) and separated on an Agilent 1290 HPLC instrument by basic reversed-phase chromatography, using a 90 min gradient with a flow rate of 1ml/min, starting with solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) followed by increasing concentration of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10). The 96 fractions were collected and concatenated by pooling equal interval fractions. The final 26 fractions were dried down and resuspended in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analyses. Peptide samples were eluted from stage tips (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and after evaporating organic solvent peptides were resolved in sample buffer (3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid). Peptide separation was performed on a 20 cm reversed-phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ; 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a 200 min gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific). Peptides were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion (individual samples) and Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap instrument (reference sample) (ThermoScientific). On the Orbitrap Fusion instrument, peptide precursor survey scans were performed at 120K resolution with a 2×105 ion count target. MS2 scans were performed by isolation at 1.6 m/z with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 32, and rapid scan analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 2x103 and the max injection time was 300 ms. The instrument was operated in Top speed mode with 3 s cycle time, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 scans until the list of non-excluded precursors diminishes to zero or 3 s. On the Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap instrument, full scans were performed at 60K resolution using 3x106 ion count target and maximum injection time of 10 ms as settings. MS2 scans were acquired in Top 20 mode at 15K resolution with 1x105 ion count target, 1.6 m/z isolation window and maximum injection time of 22 ms as settings. Each sample was measured twice, and these two technical replicates were combined in subsequent data analyses.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (v1.6.2.6). The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2019-01, with isoform annotations) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. The FDR (false discovery rate) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the “Match between runs” option, in which the maximal retention time window was set to 0.7 min. The integrated LFQ quantitation algorithm was applied. Gene Symbols assigned by MaxQuant were substituted with gene symbols of the reported UniProt IDs from the FASTA file used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Aortic stenosis, Energy metabolism, Proteostasis, Fibrosis, Mitral regurgitation, Sex differences, Cytoskeleton, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC)
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine; Proteomics Platform; Robert-Rössle-Str. 10; 13092 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Matthias Ziehm

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine; Proteomics Platform; Robert-Rössle-Str. 10; 13092 Berlin, Germany


