### Accession
PXD018024

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of glioblstoma reveals survival related patterns

### Description
In the current work, we present the first proteogenomic dataset of GBM clinical samples to date. We have assembled a cohort of 87 GBM patients of varying survival rates and performed MS-based proteomics analysis as well as RNA-seq in order to identify the molecular differences associated with survival and examine the contribution of each layer to GBM landscape. We show that each layer alone only partially reflects patient survival, but RNA-protein integration identifies clear patterns of layer-specific and layer-common processes specifically contributing to either short-term or long-term survival of patients. Furthermore, we compare our data to published single-cell RNA-seq of GBM tumors and evaluate the RNA-protein variability within single-cell based tumor subpopulations. We found that while all signatures of the four subpopulations tend to have high RNA-protein correlation, each signature is associated differently with survival. Altogether, these results highlight the potential of proteogenomics to further stratify heterogeneity in GBM tumors and identify processes contributing to poorer survival.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 54 FFPE blocks were macro-dissected from tissue slices by overlaying H&E staining, in order to enrich for cellular areas and exclude stromal components as much as possible. Dissected samples were lysed in 50% 2-2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE) in 25mM ammonium bi-carbonate (ABC), incubated with 5mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 15mM Iodoacetamide (IAA). Prior to protein digestion, samples were diluted 1:10 with 5mM ABC, and then digested overnight with LysC/Trp mix and Trypsin in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 and 1:50, respectively. Prior to labeling, clean-up of digested peptides was performed using C18 Stage-Tips. We proceeded to tandem-mass-tags (TMT) 10plex labeling according to the manufacturer's instructions (Pierce). The 54 samples were divided into six sets of 10plex-TMT, while the tenth sample in each set consisted of a tumor-mix to be used as a quantification standard between different sets. Following labeling, samples were clubbed and vacuum-concentrated, and then resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Resuspended samples were loaded into high-pH reverse phase columns (Thermo Scientific) for sample fractionation. Each 10plex-TMT set was fractionated into eight fractions according to the manufacturer's instructions. Resulting fractions were then vacuum-concentrated and resuspended in MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016b). Peptide search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the Uniprot human protein database release April 2018, with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) in the  PSM and in the protein level. MS level mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Peptides were allowed to have methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbimdomethyl as a fixed modification. Quantification was defined based on MS2 reporter ion intensity with TMT channels correction factors supplied by the manufacturer.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of glioma, with poor prognosis exhibited by most patients, and a median survival time of less than 2 years. We assemble a cohort of 87 GBM patients whose survival ranges from less than 3&#xa0;months and up to 10 years and perform both high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Integrative analysis of protein expression, RNA expression, and patient clinical information enables us to identify specific immune, metabolic, and developmental processes associated with survival as well as determine whether they are shared between expression layers or are layer specific. Our analyses reveal a stronger association between proteomic profiles and survival and identify unique protein-based classification, distinct from the established RNA-based classification. By integrating published single-cell RNA-seq data, we find a connection between subpopulations of GBM tumors and survival. Overall, our findings establish proteomic heterogeneity in GBM as a gateway to understanding poor survival.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Rna-seq, Proteomics, Glioblstoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Isrel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Isrel


