### Accession
PXD002320

### Title
Panorama of ancient metazoan macromolecular complexes: Dictyostelium discoideum

### Description
By combining extensive biochemical fractionation with quantitative mass spectrometry, we directly examined the composition of soluble multiprotein complexes among diverse animal models. The project has been jointly supervised by Andrew Emili and Edward M. Marcotte.  Project website: http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca

### Sample Protocol
Ax4 cells were kindly provided by Chi-Hung Siu (University of Toronto). 1 liter of cells were grown in HL5 medium, harvested at a cell density of 4-5 x 106 cells/ml, transferred to 17 mM phosphate buffer for 2h, then pelleted and frozen in aliquots of 5x108 cells each. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer (10mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl) containing freshly added EDTA-free protease (Complete-Mini; Roche) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP; Roche) inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet each per 10ml), then lysed by 3 x 10 second sonication on ice using a Sonifier 450 (Branson, output 6.0, duty cycle 60%).  Prior to biochemical fractionation, soluble protein extracts were treated with benzonase nuclease (100u/ml; Millipore, USA) on ice for 30min to remove nucleic acids. The lysates then were subjected to ion exchange fractionation using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system.Proteins from the HPLC fractions were precipitated, resuspended and digested in solution with trypsin, dried and re-solubilised before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC System (EASY-nLC; Proxeon) coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
FASTA file was downloaded as described in the manuscript and processed to retain only the longest sequence for each gene, to simplify orthology mapping between species, as the project was focused on conserved complexes. Samples were searched using 3 search engines: Tide, INSPECT, and MSGFDB and combined to create quantification using MSblender (Kwon, Choi et. al. J. Proteome Research 2011). Tide search output is provided in a form processed for best hits with MSblender; MSGFDB and INSPECT search output is provided directly, when available.

### Publication Abstract
Our analysis examines the conservation of multiprotein complexes among metazoa through use of high resolution biochemical fractionation and precision mass spectrometry applied to soluble cell extracts from 5 representative model organisms Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and Homo sapiens. The interaction network obtained from the data was validated globally in 4 distant species (Xenopus laevis, Nematostella vectensis, Dictyostelium discoideum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and locally by targeted affinity-purification experiments. Here we provide details of our massive set of supporting biochemical fractionation data available via ProteomeXchange (PXD002319-PXD002328), PPIs via BioGRID (185267); and interaction network projections via (http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca) made fully accessible to allow further exploration. The datasets here are related to the research article on metazoan macromolecular complexes in Nature [1].

### Keywords
Across species, Lc-msms, Metazoan, Conservation, Biofractionation

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin 
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Blake borgeson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


