### Accession
PXD036292

### Title
Ketolysis is a metabolic driver of CD8+ T cell effector function through histone acetylation

### Description
Environmental nutrient availability influences T cell metabolism, impacting T cell function and shaping immune outcomes. However, the metabolic pathways critical for optimal T cell responses remain poorly understood. Here, we identify ketone bodies (KBs) – including -hydroxybutyrate (OHB) and acetoacetate (AcAc) – as essential fuels supporting CD8+ T cell metabolism and effector function. Ketolysis is an intrinsic feature of highly functional CD8+ T effector (Teff) cells and OHB directly increases CD8+ Teff cell IFN- production and cytolytic activity. Using metabolic tracers, we establish that CD8+ Teff cells preferentially use KBs over glucose to fuel the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in vitro and in vivo. KBs directly boost the respiratory capacity of CD8+ T cells and TCA cycle-dependent metabolic pathways that fuel T cell growth. Mechanistically, we find that OHB is a major substrate for acetyl-CoA production in CD8+ T cells and regulates effector responses through effects on histone acetylation. Together, our results identify cell-intrinsic ketolysis as a metabolic and epigenetic driver of optimal CD8+ T cell effector responses.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of histone proteins For proteomic analysis of histones, activated CD8+ T cells were cultured in VIM medium (5 mM glucose, 0.5 mM glutamine) containing 5 mM standard [12C4]-OHB or [13C4]-OHB for 24 h. Histone isolation was carried out using the same methodology for immunoblotting, with the addition of 2 ice-cold PBS washes. Histone extracts were lyophilized and resuspended in 50 μL of 8M urea with 10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5.  Proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM and by heating at 95°C for 2 minutes, followed by a 30 minutes incubation at room temperature. The alkylation of the proteins was carried out by adding chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis) to a final concentration of 7.5 mM followed by a 20 minutes incubation in the dark at room temperature. The urea concentration was then diluted to a final concentration of 2 M by adding 150 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis). Digestion was started by adding 1 μg of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham) and incubated overnight at 30°C with shaking. Sample was then acidified by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis) to a final concentration of 0.2%.  The peptides were purified with ZipTip 100-μl micropipette tips containing a C18 column, according to the manufacturer’s protocol (EMD Millipore, Burlington, VT) and eluted with 300 μL of 50% ACN/1% FA buffer in a new low-binding microtube. The peptides were then concentrated by centrifugal evaporator at 60°C until complete drying (∼3 h) and then resuspended in 50 μL of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −20 °C until analysis by mass spectrometry.  For LC/MS analysis, 250 ng of peptides were injected into an HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation) with a constant flow of 4 µl/min, then eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were eluted over a 2-hour gradient of ACN (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 400 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility mass spectrometer equipped with a Captive Spray nano electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled with a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.17 seconds duty cycle) and a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 min, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) and the Uniprot human proteome database (21/03/2020, 75,776 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis (with TIMS-DDA type in group-specific parameters) were:; 4 miscleavages were allowed; the minimum peptide length was set to 5; enzyme was Trypsin (K/R not before P); fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation (12C, 13C), lysine (K) acetylation (12C, 13C) and  protein carbamylation (K, N-terminal). A mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for both precursor and fragment ions. Identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" were set to 0.05. Minimum peptide count was set to 1. Both the "Second peptides" and "Match between runs" options were also allowed. Compass DataAnalysis (version 5.3, Bruker Daltonics) was further used to represent both spectral and graphical MS1 results for specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental nutrient availability influences T&#xa0;cell metabolism, impacting T&#xa0;cell function and shaping immune outcomes. Here, we identified ketone bodies (KBs)-including &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate (&#x3b2;OHB) and acetoacetate (AcAc)-as essential fuels supporting CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell metabolism and effector function. &#x3b2;OHB directly increased CD8<sup>+</sup> T effector (Teff) cell cytokine production and cytolytic activity, and KB oxidation (ketolysis) was required for Teff cell responses to bacterial infection and tumor challenge. CD8<sup>+</sup> Teff cells preferentially used KBs over glucose to fuel the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. KBs directly boosted the respiratory capacity and TCA cycle-dependent metabolic pathways that fuel CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell function. Mechanistically, &#x3b2;OHB was a major substrate for acetyl-CoA production in CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells and regulated effector responses through effects on histone acetylation. Together, our results identify cell-intrinsic ketolysis as a metabolic and epigenetic driver of optimal CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell effector responses.

### Keywords
Ketolysis, Acetylation, Cd8+, Histone, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Department of Metabolism and Nutritional Programming, Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USA

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Russel G Jones
Department of Metabolism and Nutritional Programming, Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USA


