### Accession
PXD044139

### Title
Casein kinase 1 and 2 phosphorylate a conserved cluster of Argonaute to control microRNA functionCasein kinase 1 and 2 phosphorylate a conserved cluster of Argonaute to control microRNA function

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) together with Argonaute (AGO) proteins form the core of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to regulate gene expression of their target RNAs post-transcriptionally. Argonaute proteins are subjected to intensive regulation via various post-translational modifications that can affect their stability, silencing efficacy and specificity for targeted gene regulation. We report here that in C. elegans, two conserved serine/threonine kinases - Casein Kinase 1 alpha 1 (CK1A1) and Casein Kinase 2 (CK2) - regulate a highly conserved phosphorylation cluster of 4 Serine residues (S988:S998) on the miRNA-specific AGO protein ALG-1. We show that CK1A1 phosphorylates ALG-1 at sites S992 and S995, while CK2 phosphorylates ALG-1 at sites S988 and S998. Furthermore, we demonstrate that phospho-mimicking mutants of the entire S988:S998 cluster rescue the various developmental defects observed upon depleting CK1A1 and CK2. In humans, we show that CK1A1 also acts as a priming kinase of this cluster on AGO2. Altogether, our data suggest that phosphorylation of AGO within the cluster by CK1A1 and CK2 is required for efficient miRISC-target RNA binding and silencing

### Sample Protocol
SDS-gel bands of affinity-purified Ago proteins were excised, transferred into 2ml micro tubes  (Eppendorf), washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50 mM NH4HCO3/acetonitrile (3/1), 50 mM  NH4HCO3/acetonitrile (1/1) and lyophilized. After reduction and alkylation of cysteines with DTT and  Iodoacetamide, gel slices were again washed as described above and lyophilized. Proteins were  subjected to in gel tryptic digest overnight at 37°C with approximately 2 µg trypsin per 100 µl gel  volume (Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega).  Peptides were first extracted with 100 mM NH4HCO3, followed by 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50%  acetonitrile. Combined eluates were lyophilized and reconstituted in 20 µl 1% TFA prior toLC-MS/MS.Separation of peptides by reversed-phase chromatography was carried out on an UltiMate 3000  RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich) which was equipped with a C18 Acclaim  Pepmap100 preconcentration column (100µm i.D.x20mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by an  Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 nano column (75 µm i.d.x250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A linear  gradient of 4 % to 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid over 90 min was used to separate peptides at  a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Via a CaptiveSpray nanoflow electrospray source the LC was coupled to a  maXis plus UHR-QTOF System (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen). Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS  spectra by CID fragmentation was performed at a resolution of minimum 60000 for MS and MS/MS  scans. The MS spectra rate of the precursor scan was 2 Hz processing a mass range between m/z 175  and m/z 2000. Via the Compass 1.7 acquisition and processing software (Bruker Daltonics) a dynamic  method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s and an m/z dependent collision energy adjustment between 34 and  55 eV was applied. Raw data processing was performed in Data Analysis 4.2 (Bruker Daltonics). Protein  Scape 3.1.3 (Bruker Daltonics) in connection with Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) facilitated database  searching.

### Data Protocol
For database searching the following search parameters were applied: database Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens with mutant Ago2 protein sequences added, enzyme specificity trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor tolerance 0.02 Da, MS/MS tolerance 0.04 Da, variable modifications: carbamidomethylation and propionamide modification of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Mascot peptide ion-score cut-off was set 15. Phosphopeptide fragment spectra were evaluated manually. Calculation of relative abundances of phosphopeptide species at the S824-S834 phospho-cluster was based on peptide intensities. The sum of peptide intensities of all peptide species detected at the cluster position was considered as 100%. Peptide intensities of individual phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated species were then used to determine the relative abundance of each peptide as a percentage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Argonaute/ck1a1/ck2/microrna/phosphorylation

### Affiliations
University Regensburg Biochemistry I  Mass Spectrometry group
University Regensburg

### Submitter
Astrid Bruckmann

### Lab Head
Dr Astrid Bruckmann
University Regensburg Biochemistry I  Mass Spectrometry group


