### Accession
PXD025821

### Title
Bi-directional epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk provides self-sustaining pro-fibrotic signals in pulmonary fibrosis

### Description
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the prototypic progressive fibrotic lung disease with a median survival of 2-4 years. Injury to and/or dysfunction of alveolar epithelium are strongly implicated in IPF disease initiation, but what factors determine why fibrosis progresses rather than normal tissue repair occurs remain poorly understood. We previously demonstrated that ZEB1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human alveolar epithelial type II (ATII) cells augments TGF-β-induced profibrogenic responses in underlying lung fibroblasts by paracrine signalling. Here we investigated bi-directional epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk and its potential to drive fibrosis progression. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of lung fibroblasts exposed to conditioned media from ATII cells undergoing RAS-induced EMT identified many differentially expressed genes including those involved in cell migration and extracellular matrix (ECM) regulation. We confirmed that paracrine signalling between AS-activated ATII cells and fibroblasts augmented fibroblast recruitment and demonstrated that this involved a ZEB1-tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) axis. In a reciprocal fashion, paracrine signalling from TGF-β-activated lung fibroblasts or IPF fibroblasts induced RAS activation in ATII cells, at least partially via the secreted protein, SPARC. Together these data identify that aberrant bi-directional epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk in IPF drives a chronic feedback loop that maintains a wound-healing phenotype and provides self-sustaining pro-fibrotic signals.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lyzed in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate containing 1% SDS followed by pulsed sonication. Lysates were then centrifuged at 13,000 x g, for 20 min at 4°C, supernatant removed and protein concentration measured using a DirectDetect spectrometer (Merck, United Kingdom).  Methanol/chloroform extraction was then performed on 25 μg of protein for each lysate. Samples were prepared in 100 μL using lysis buffer (0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate). Samples were resuspended in 100 μl of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1% SDS and reduced with 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Scientific) at 56°C for 60 min. Samples were subsequently alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Samples were digested by addition of 2 μg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C. After digestion, samples were lyophilized in vacuo.  Enolase protein digest internal standard (Waters) was spiked into each cellular peptide sample at a concentration of 150 fmol prior to isoelectric focusing by OFFGEL fractionation using a 3–10 pH gradient (Agilent) into 12 peptide fractions. Each fraction was purified using an Empore™ C18 solid phase extraction plate (ThermoScientific Pierce) to remove residual salts, buffers and contaminants before lyophilization and resuspension in loading buffer (3% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for mass spectrometry analysis.  Separations were performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptide digests were injected onto a Symmetry C18, 180 µm × 20 mm trapping cartridge (Waters). After 5 min washing of the trap column, peptides were separated using a 75 µm i. d. x 500 mm, 1.7 µm BEH130 C18, column (Waters) using a linear gradient of 5–40% B (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min with a wash to 85% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All separations were automated, performed on-line and sprayed directly into the nanospray source of the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server Ver 3.0 (Waters, Manchester, United Kingdom) enabled using an in-house developed script and the data processed to generate reduced charge state and de-isotoped precursor and associated product ion mass lists. These peak lists were searched against the human UniProt protein sequence (downloaded March 2017). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic digestion and the variable modification was set to contain oxidation of methionine and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with decoy-fusion database searches and were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ras, Proteomics, Tgf-β, Secretome

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton

### Submitter
Paul Skipp

### Lab Head
Dr Paul James Skipp
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton


