### Accession
PXD032216

### Title
CDK6 degradation is counteracted by p16INK4A and p18INK4C in AML

### Description
Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) represents a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of certain subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). CDK4/6 kinase inhibitors have been widely studied in many cancer types and their effects may be limited by primary and secondary resistance mechanisms. CDK4/6 degraders, which eliminate kinase dependent and kinase independent effects, have been suggested as alternative therapeutic option. We show that efficacy of the CDK6 specific protein degrader BSJ-03-123 varies among AML subtypes and depends on low expression of the INK4 proteins p16INK4A and p18INK4C. INK4 protein levels are significantly elevated in MLL-AF9+ compared to AML1-ETO+ cells, contributing to the different CDK6 degradation efficacy. We demonstrate that CDK6 complexes containing p16INK4A or p18INK4C are protected from BSJ-mediated degradation and that INK4 levels define the proliferative response to CDK6 degradation. These findings define INK4 proteins as predictive marker for CDK6 degradation – targeted therapies in AML.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  Eluates were processed using an adapted Single-Pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) methodology. Briefly, equal volumes (125 μl containing 6250 µg) of two different kind of paramagnetic carboxylate modified particles (SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250; GE Healthcare) were mixed, washed three times with 250 µl water and reconstituted to a final concentration of 50 μg/μl with LC-MS grade water (LiChrosolv; MERCK KgaA). Samples (50 µL) were filled up to 100 µL with 2% SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and proteins were reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 1 hour. After cooling down to room temperature, reduced cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 55 mM for 30 min in the dark. For tryptic digestion, 400 μg of mixed beads were added to reduced and alkylated samples, vortexed gently and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. The formed particles-protein complexes were precipitated by addition of acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70% [V/V], mixed briefly via pipetting before incubating for 18 minutes at room temperature. Particles were then immobilized using a magnetic rack (DynaMag-2 Magnet; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and supernatant was discarded. SDS was removed by washing two times with 200 μl 70% ethanol and one time with 180 μl 100MS% acetonitrile. After removal of organic solvent, particles were resuspended in 100 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and samples digested by incubating with 2 μg of Trypsin overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (Uvasol; MERCK KgaA) prior to immobilizing the beads on the magnetic rack. Samples were then desalted and concentrated using stage tips with two stacked C18 plugs (Empore; MERCK KgaA).  Stage tips were activated with three times 100 µl acetonitrile and equilibrated with three times 100 µl of 0.4% formic acid, 2% TFA in water before loading the samples. Salts were cleaned up with 100 µl of 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted using two times 50 µl 90% acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid. Finally, eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA.  Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via nanoflex source interface. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Pepmap 100 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nL/min and a 90 min gradient used (4 to 24% solvent B within 82 min, 24 to 36% solvent B within 8 min and, 36 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before bringing back solvent B at 4% within 1 min and equilibrating for 18 min). Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired with a mass range of 375 - 1650 m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z). Monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptides with inclusion of charge states between 2 and 5, Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 2 × 105, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was applied. Precursor ions for MS2 analysis were selected using a TopN dependent scan approach with a cycle time of up to 20 scans. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (FT) using a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da and higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a fixed normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. The resolution was set to 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z, an AGC target set to 5 × 104, and a maximum injection time set to 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30 s, and isotopes were excluded. An unscheduled inclusion mass list (550 m/z values) was built using Skyline version 20.2.0.343 for 19 proteins of interest (P51480, Q64364, P39689, P46414, P30280, P30282, P30285, P54071, Q8CIG8, Q4JK59, P25322, Q61937, P02340, P42227, P05627, O89090, P13864, O88508, O88509). The option ‘Perform dependent scan on most intense ion if no target ions are found’ was enabled. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed. Xcalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the mouse SwissProt database v2020.01 (25,097 sequences plus 298 appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) of serine, threonine or tyrosine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. For the protein N-terminus, acetylation of methionine (+42.0110 Da), and loss of methionine with or without acetylation (respectively -89.030 Da and -131.040 Da) was set as variable modification. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm on the precursor ions and 0.025 Da on the fragment ions. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence, as well as ptmRS site probabilities of ≥75. Only proteins were included that were identified by at least two peptides and one unique peptide sequence. For calculation of protein areas, Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were used. Automated chromatographic peak alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled with total peptide amount used for normalization between individual runs. Protein abundances were calculated using sum intensities of respective peptide features including only unique peptide groups. Protein ratios were generated using the non-nested approach and p-value calculation was performed applying t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Normalized abundances and log2 transformed fold-changes (log2FC) for Ctrl/ Cdk6-/- or BSJ/Cdk6-/- were calculated and plotted.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) represents a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of certain subtypes of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). CDK4/6 kinase inhibitors have been widely studied in many cancer types and their effects may be limited by primary and secondary resistance mechanisms. CDK4/6 degraders, which eliminate kinase-dependent and kinase-independent effects, have been suggested as an alternative therapeutic option. We show that the efficacy of the CDK6-specific protein degrader BSJ-03-123 varies among AML subtypes and depends on the low expression of the INK4 proteins p16<sup>INK4A</sup> and p18<sup>INK4C</sup>. INK4 protein levels are significantly elevated in KMT2A-MLLT3+ cells compared to RUNX1-RUNX1T1+ cells, contributing to the different CDK6 degradation efficacy. We demonstrate that CDK6 complexes containing p16<sup>INK4A</sup> or p18<sup>INK4C</sup> are protected from BSJ-mediated degradation and that INK4 levels define the proliferative response to CDK6 degradation. These findings define INK4 proteins as predictive markers for CDK6 degradation-targeted therapies in AML.

### Keywords
Degrader, Aml, Cdk6, P16, P18, Cdkn2a, Ink4, Cdkn2c

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Frédéric FONTAINE

### Lab Head
Dr Karoline Kollmann
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.


