### Accession
PXD032054

### Title
Mutations in epitope flanking regions for SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein affect proteasomal processing to alter CD8+ T cell responses

### Description
Viral CD8+ epitopes are generated by the cellular turnover of viral proteins, predominantly by the proteasome1. Mutations located within viral epitopes can result in escape from memory T cells2. Focussing on two of the most dominant SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein CD8+ epitopes3,4, we identified mutations in epitope flanking regions. Using SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein transduced B cell lines and in vitro proteasomal processing of peptides, we investigated the contribution of these mutations to antigen processing and T cell activation. We found that decreased NP9-17-B*27:05 CD8+ T cell responses to the NP-Q7K mutation correlated with lower epitope surface expression, likely due to a lack of efficient epitope production by the proteasome and suggesting an immune escape caused by this mutation. In contrast, NP-P6L and NP-D103N/Y mutations flanking the NP9-17-B*27:05 and NP105-113-B*07:02 epitopes, respectively, increased CD8+ T cell responses associated with enhanced epitope production by the proteasome. Our results provide evidence that SARS-CoV-2 mutations outside the epitope could have significant impact on antigen processing and presentation, thereby contributing to escape from immunodominant T cell responses. Alternatively, mutations could enhance antigen processing and T cell efficacy, opening new avenues for improving future vaccine designs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteasomal digestion of peptides   Peptides were purchased from GenScript and reconstituted to 20mg/ml in DMSO. Recombinant human proteasomes (Human 20S Proteasome Protein, E360-050, bio-techne; Human 20S Immunoproteasome Protein, E370-025, bio-techne) and peptides were combined at a ratio of 50:1 for a period of 15, 60 or 180 minutes prior to the addition of 0.1ml formic acid to terminate the function of the proteasome. Incubations were carried out at 37°C with rotation to increase proteasome activity. Digested samples were frozen and stored at -80°C until they could be run on the mass spectrometer.    Analysis of in vitro proteasome antigen processing products by mass spectrometry   Products generated by in vitro proteasome digestion of antigen precursor peptides were analysed by nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo) coupled to a timsTOF Pro timed ion mobility shift time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a 75 µm x 150 mm C18 column with 1.6 µm particles (IonOpticks) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 40 °C. The gradient used was a 17-minute increase from 2 % buffer B to 30 % buffer B, followed by an increase to 95 % B in 30 seconds and a 2.5-minute wash and 5 minutes re-equilibration at 2 % B (A: 0.1 % formic acid in water. B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile).   The TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition - parallel accumulation, serial fragmentation (ddaPASEF) mode. The TIMS accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms, and mass spectra were recorded from 100 – 1700 m/z, with a 0.85 – 1.30 Vs/cm2 ion mobility range. Precursors were selected for fragmentation from an area of the full TIMS-MS scan that excludes the majority of ions with a charge state of 1+. Those selected precursors were isolated with an ion mobility dependent collision energy, increasing linearly from 27 – 45 eV over the ion mobility range. Four PASEF MS/MS scans were collected per full TIMS-MS scan using a 3-cycle overlap, giving a duty cycle of 0.53 s. Ions were included in the PASEF MS/MS scan if they met the target intensity threshold of 2000 and were sampled multiple times until a summed target intensity of 10000 was reached. A dynamic exclusion window of 0.015 m/z by 0.015 Vs/cm2 was used, and sampled ions were excluded from reanalysis for 24 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were searched against a database containing the full synthetic antigen peptide precursor sequences using Peaks Studio Version 10 with mass tolerances of 20.0 ppm for precursors and 0.04 Da for fragment ions. Nonspecific cleavage was used and oxidation and deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. Peptide abundance was measured as accumulated ion counts after extraction of the chromatographic peak profiles of the precursor masses using Skyline version 21 and Bruker Compass DataAnalysis Version 5.3.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations within viral epitopes can result in escape from T cells, but the contribution of mutations in flanking regions of epitopes in SARS-CoV-2 has not been investigated. Focusing on two SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein CD8<sup>+</sup> epitopes, we investigated the contribution of these flanking mutations to proteasomal processing and T cell activation. We found decreased NP<sub>9-17</sub>-B*27:05 CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses to the NP-Q7K mutation, likely due to a lack of efficient epitope production by the proteasome, suggesting immune escape caused by this mutation. In contrast, NP-P6L and NP-D103&#xa0;N/Y mutations flanking the NP<sub>9-17</sub>-B*27:05 and NP<sub>105-113</sub>-B*07:02 epitopes, respectively, increased CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses associated with enhanced epitope production by the proteasome. Our results provide evidence that SARS-CoV-2 mutations outside the epitope could have a significant impact on proteasomal processing, either contributing to T cell escape or enhancement that may be exploited for future vaccine design.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Antigen, T-cell, Epitope, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute,University of Oxford
TDI, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Zhanru Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute,University of Oxford


