### Accession
PXD035899

### Title
Proteomic  identification of beer brewing products in the ground layer of Danish Golden Age paintings

### Description
The application of mass spectrometry-based proteomics to artworks provides accurate and detailed characterisation of the protein-based materials used to produce them, which is highly valuable to plan conservation strategies and reconstruct the artwork’s history. In this work, the palaeoproteomic analysis of canvas paintings from the Danish Golden Age led to the confident identification of cereal and yeast proteins in the ground layer. This proteomic profile points to a (by-)product of beer brewing, in agreement with local artists’ manuals.  The chronology of the artworks featuring this unconventional recipe allows us to conclude that it was used by the workshops within the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts. The mass-spectrometric dataset generated from palaeoproteomics was also processed with a metabolomics workflow. The spectral matches observed further supported the palaeoproteomic conclusions, and, in at least one sample, suggested the use of drying oils. These results highlight the value of untargeted proteomics in heritage science, correlating unconventional artistic materials with local culture and practices.

### Sample Protocol
The experimental protocol adopted was previously described by Mackie 2018. Briefly, each canvas sample was placed in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf Protein LoBind tube and processed along with blank controls to monitor for laboratory contamination. Proteins were solubilised via incubation for 2 hours at 80°C with 100 μL of an aqueous buffer containing: 2M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl), 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), 20mM chloroacetamide (CAA), and 100mM trisaminomethane (Tris). The pH was adjusted to approximately 8.0 using 10% ammonium hydroxide when needed. The solid samples and extracted proteins in solution were then subjected to a double-step enzymatic digestion. First, proteins were digested under agitation for 2 hours at 37°C in-solution with 0.2 μg rLysC (Promega). The solution was then brought to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl using 25mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN) in water. The second digestion step occurred overnight under agitation at 37°C with 0.8 μg Trypsin (Promega). Samples were then acidified to pH 2 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion. After centrifugation of the tubes for at least one hour at 21000 xg, to avoid transferring any solid debris into the next step, peptides were collected on in-house made C18 extraction stage-tips. The stage-tips were prepared following a protocol based on Rappsilber 2007, then conditioned with 150 μL of methanol, followed by 0.1% TFA in 80% ACN, and washed with 0.1% TFA in water. The sample solutions were loaded in 200 μL increments, followed by two washings with 0.1% TFA in water. Stage-tips were stored at -18°C until mass spectrometry analysis. The purified peptides were eluted from the stage-tips using 30 μL of 40% ACN in water. Extracts were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C until approximately 3 μL of solution were left, and then rehydrated with 5 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN in water. The peptides were then separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). A 77 min gradient was used: buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in milliQ water; buffer B was 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were separated with increasing buffer B, going from 5% to 30% in 50 min, 30% to 45% in 10 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min, held at 80% for 5 min before dropping back down to 5% in 5 min and held for 5 min. Flow rate was 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven. In order to hinder cross-contamination, a wash-blank method using 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was run in between each sample. The chromatographic parameters were the same for all samples. In a pilot round of measurements, one aliquot of the peptide extracts from paintings A, I, and J were measured using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent top 12 mode. Spray voltage was 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and the heated capillary kept at 275°C. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 350–1400 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded in the m/z range 200-2000 with a maximum ion injection time set to 45 ms. The target value was 2e5 and spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000. Normalised collision energy was set at 28% and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z with the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s. In the main round of measurements, a second aliquot of the peptide extracts from paintings A and I, two aliquots of the peptide extract from painting J, and one aliquot of the peptide extracts from paintings C and G were analysed using Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer with improved instrumental parameters, namely: in data dependent top 10 mode, increasing the MS/MS resolution to 60,000 and the MS/MS maximum injection time to 108 ms. The peptide extracts from paintings B, D, E, F and H were measured on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), due to an instrument upgrade during the study. Experimental parameters for the Q-Exactive HF-X were set as on the Q-Exactive HF in the main round of measurements, but increasing the MS/MS maximum ion injection time to 118 ms, in accordance with the instrument’s optimised acquisition speed. The downstream proteomics data analysis relied exclusively on data generated in the main round of measurements, while the metabolomic analysis relied on data generated in both the pilot and the main round of measurements.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) was performed in three consecutive searches. The MS/MS spectra were first matched against a reference, in-house curated database containing all the publicly available sequences for the most common proteinaceous paint binders (collagens, egg proteins, milk proteins). The following variable modifications were included: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, conversion of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, conversion of N-terminal glutamic to pyroglutamic acid, and hydroxyproline. In order to investigate the presence of protein residues originating from additional sources, the spectra were then matched against the SwissProt database (downloaded January 2017), which contains a large selection of manually reviewed protein sequences from a wide variety of species. The same variable modifications as in the first search were included. Based on the identifications in the second search, a database containing protein sequences from cereal and yeast species was built, and modifications identified in literature in wort and beer were selected as variable modifications to try to further increase peptide identifications. The third database contains all protein sequences publicly available on Uniprot from the following species: Fagopyrum esculentum, Hordeum vulgare, Humulus lupulus, Oryza sativa subsp. japonica, Secale cereale, Triticum aestivum, and the genus Saccharomyces. The following were included as variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of the N-terminal, condensation product of 3-deoxyglucosone, hexose addition, double hexose addition, glycation of the N-terminal.  For all searches, the software was set to search for tryptic peptides with up to a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide, and carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7, with up to two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptides and proteins was set to 0.01, and the minimum Andromeda score for unmodified and modified peptides was set to 40. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Contaminant proteins were assessed using the default “contamination.fasta” file bundled to MaxQuant, containing common laboratory contaminants, including primate keratins, excess trypsin, and bovine serum albumin. Peptides assigned to contaminant proteins were filtered out and not considered any further.   Proteins were considered confidently identified if at least two unique non-overlapping peptides were observed, unless otherwise specified. Peptides were considered species-diagnostic when, after a search against the entire nrNCBI protein database via the BLAST alignment tool, they were assigned to a single species, or if only one of the matching species can be considered plausible, based on the historical and geographical origin of the samples. We performed a blastp (v2.2.26) search against the NCBI non-redundant (nr) nucleotide database using each of the identified peptides as query and the following parameters: -e 200000 -W 2 -G 9 -E 1 -M PAM30 -f 16 -C 0 -A 15 -m 0 -a 30. In order to identify peptides that could be assigned to a single species (species-specific peptides) we only considered blast hits with 100% coverage and 100% identity. A peptide was considered to be species-specific if only one species was present among its hits. Then, from the list of species-specific peptides, we created all possible combinations of protein sequences by substituting the three potential ambiguous amino acids (L/I, N/D and Q/E). We performed a second blast search against NCBI nr database using the same parameters mentioned above and discarded peptides where one or more of their alternative combinations had one or more hits (100% coverage and 100% identity) with a different species than the original peptide.  To validate sample protein identifications and exclude lab contamination and sample cross-contamination, blanks and instrument washes were also analysed, following the same protocol as the sample data (data not reported). The deamidation level was calculated using the deamidation tool described in Mackie 2018 and publicly available on GitHub.

### Publication Abstract
The application of mass spectrometry-based proteomics to artworks provides accurate and detailed characterization of protein-based materials used in their production. This is highly valuable to plan conservation strategies and reconstruct the artwork's history. In this work, the proteomic analysis of canvas paintings from the Danish Golden Age led to the confident identification of cereal and yeast proteins in the ground layer. This proteomic profile points to a (by-)product of beer brewing, in agreement with local artists' manuals. The use of this unconventional binder can be connected to the workshops within the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts. The mass spectrometric dataset generated from proteomics was also processed with a metabolomics workflow. The spectral matches observed supported the proteomic conclusions, and, in at least one sample, suggested the use of drying oils. These results highlight the value of untargeted proteomics in heritage science, correlating unconventional artistic materials with local culture and practices.

### Keywords
Yeast, Danish golden age, Cultural heritage, Cereal, Palaeoproteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 1353 Copenhagen, Denmark
Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana

### Submitter
Fabiana Di Gianvincenzo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 1353 Copenhagen, Denmark


