### Accession
PXD016429

### Title
Discovery-driven target selection from six milk-derived ingredients for consensus detection of casein and whey milk allergens

### Description
Milk is one among the most common food allergens and the proteins representing caseins and whey fractions of milk have been characterized as the major triggers for allergic responses in susceptible individuals. Milk or milk-derived ingredients- varying in their casein and whey protein content and composition- are present as an ingredient in many foods. This project was designed to identify candidate target peptides for casein and whey fractions of milk which can be used for milk allergen detection from foods irrespective of the type of ingredients used in them.

### Sample Protocol
Six milk-derived ingredients of varying casein and whey protein content, nonfat dry milk (NFDM), sodium caseinate (NaC), acid whey (AW), sweet whey (SW), and whey protein concentrates 34 and 80 (WPC34 & WPC80) were subjected to shot gun proteomics. Proteins from 1 g of each milk-derived ingredients were extracted in a reducing buffer containing 6 M urea and 20 mM DTT buffered with Tris at pH 8.6. PVPP was used as a disintegrant. Equal concentration of proteins (10 μg) from each of the milk-derived ingredients were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. The resultant peptides were desalted and separated by reverse phase chromatography and subjected to top 10 DDA using a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled in-line with a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomics data was analyzed on Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer 2.1 SP1 using Sequest HT database search algorithm for peptide spectrum matching. The spectral data were matched against Uniprot Bos taurus reference proteome database (accessed on March 6, 2017) appended with the Global Proteome Machine common contaminants database (crap), after excluding those for bovine entries. Mass errors for precursor matches up to 10 ppm and for fragment matches up to 0.06 Da were tolerated. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were designated as variable modifications. FDR validation of peptide spectrum matches was carried out using percolator and target FDR was kept at 0.01 for a confident identification of peptide and proteins. The precursor ion area of the peptides were quantified using Skyline software by analyzing in MS1 filtering mode to identify the candidate targets proxies for casein and whey fraction proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Milk allergy is among the most common food allergies present in early childhood, which in some cases may persist into adulthood as well. Proteins belonging to both casein and whey fractions of milk can trigger an allergic response in susceptible individuals. Milk is present as an ingredient in many foods, and it can also be present as casein- or whey-enriched milk-derived ingredients. As whey proteins are more susceptible to thermal processing than caseins, conventional methods often posed a challenge in accurate detection of whey allergens, particularly from a processed complex food matrix. In this study, a targeted mass spectrometry method has been developed to detect the presence of both casein and whey allergens from thermally processed foods. A pool of 19 candidate peptides representing four casein proteins and two whey proteins was identified using a discovery-driven target selection approach from various milk-derived ingredients. These target peptides were evaluated by parallel reaction monitoring of baked cookie samples containing known amounts of nonfat dry milk (NFDM). The presence of milk could be detected from baked cookies incurred with NFDM at levels as low as 1 ppm using seven peptides representing &#x3b1;-, &#x3b2;-, and &#x3ba;-casein proteins and three peptides representing a whey protein, &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin, by this consensus PRM method.

### Keywords
Milk allergen detection; casein allergen; whey allergen; thermal processing; prm

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Dept of Food Science & Technology, Food Allergen Research & Resource Program, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States

### Submitter
Bini Ramachandran

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Lynn Downs
Dept of Food Science & Technology, Food Allergen Research & Resource Program, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States


