### Accession
PXD034639

### Title
An improved TurboID-based proximity labeling pipeline in C. elegans by biochemical depletion of endogenously biotinylated carboxylases

### Description
To review an improved proximity-labeling strategy that uses the improved E. coli biotin ligase TurboID to characterize C. elegans protein complexes, the interactome of a presynaptic active zone protein, ELKS-1, was analyzed as proof of principle. A significant constraint on the sensitivity of TurboID-based proximity labeling is the presence of abundant, endogenously biotinylated proteins that take up bandwidth in the mass spectrometer, notably carboxylases that use biotin as a co-factor. We developed ways to remove these carboxylases prior to streptavidin purification and mass spectrometry, by engineering their corresponding genes to add a C-terminal His10 tag. This allows us to deplete them from C. elegans lysates using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC).

### Sample Protocol
The sample processing protocol includes following steps: TurboID-based enzymatic protein labeling and extraction of biotinylated proteins from C. elegans. IMAC-mediated depletion of His-tagged carboxylases. His-tagged protein purification. Streptavidin magnetic bead acetylation. Biotinylated protein pulldown and elution. Mass spectrometry analysis. The full version could be retrieved from https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.22.492627v1 .

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.17.0) (3) and the Uniprot Caenorhabditis elegans reference proteome (www.uniprot.org, release 2020_01), as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. MaxQuant output tables were further processed in R (R Core Team, 2018) (4). Reverse database identifications, contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by a modified peptide, protein groups with less than three quantitative values in one experimental group, and protein groups with less than 2 razor peptides were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution modeled on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, width of distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package (5) at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Proximity-dependent protein labeling provides a powerful in&#xa0;vivo strategy to characterize the interactomes of specific proteins. We previously optimized a proximity labeling protocol for Caenorhabditis elegans using the highly active biotin ligase TurboID. A significant constraint on the sensitivity of TurboID is the presence of abundant endogenously biotinylated proteins that take up bandwidth in the mass spectrometer, notably carboxylases that use biotin as a cofactor. In C.&#xa0;elegans, these comprise POD-2/acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha, PCCA-1/propionyl-CoA carboxylase alpha, PYC-1/pyruvate carboxylase, and MCCC-1/methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase alpha. Here, we developed ways to remove these carboxylases prior to streptavidin purification and mass spectrometry by engineering their corresponding genes to add a C-terminal His<sub>10</sub> tag. This allows us to deplete them from C.&#xa0;elegans lysates using immobilized metal affinity chromatography. To demonstrate the method's efficacy, we use it to expand the interactome map of the presynaptic active zone protein ELKS-1. We identify many known active zone proteins, including UNC-10/RIM, SYD-2/liprin-alpha, SAD-1/BRSK1, CLA-1/CLArinet, C16E9.2/Sentryn, as well as previously uncharacterized potentially synaptic proteins such as the ortholog of human angiomotin, F59C12.3 and the uncharacterized protein R148.3. Our approach provides a quick and inexpensive solution to a common contaminant problem in biotin-dependent proximity labeling. The approach may be applicable to other model organisms and will enable deeper and more complete analysis of interactors for proteins of interest.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Synapse, Imac, Proximity-dependent protein labeling, Hrp, Apex2, Biotinylated carboxylase depletion, Turboid

### Affiliations
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA), Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Mario de Bono
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA), Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria


