### Accession
PXD017352

### Title
Protein EV contents from C. elegans

### Description
The hermaphrodite strain N2 (Bristol), fed with Escherichia coli OP50, was maintained and synchronized. Young adults were thoroughly washed before incubations for 5 h or 24 h in M9 buffer. Between 35,500 and 158,000 worms were used for each experiment. After incuabtion, supernatants were processed by differential centrigugation/ultracentrifugation to pellet extracellular vesicles and characterization of the protein contents by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants were processed by sequential centrifugations at 4 °C: 10 min at 1,500 x g and 45 min at 12,000 x g. Ultracentrifugations were performed in a Beckman ultracentrifuge (Optima L-80 XP), using a SW40Ti rotor,  as follows:  2 h at 120,000 x g; the pellet was washed with cold sterile PBS , and centrifuged again for 2 h at 120,000 x g. samples were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid. Protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone, dried and resuspended in 45 µl 10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, pH = 8.2, and 5 µl trypsin 100 ng/ µl in 10 mM HCl). A microwave assisted digestion of 30 min at 60 °C was observed, after which samples were dried and dissolved in 10 µl ddH20 + 0.1 % formic acid. Protein concentrations were measured by Nanodrop. For the LC-MS/MS analysis, 105 and 195 ng (5h samples), and 212 and 420 ng (24 h samples digested protein were injected, respectively, on a nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed on a Mascot search engine, against the Escherichia. coli, and C. elegans databases.

### Publication Abstract
Among the fundamental biological processes affected by microRNAs, small regulators of gene expression, a potential role in host-parasite communication is intriguing. We compared the miRNA complement of extracellular vesicles released by the free-living nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> in culture to that of other adult parasitic nematodes. Expecting convergent functional roles for secreted miRNAs due to the common parasitic lifestyle of the organisms under investigation, we performed a miRNA sequence analysis as well as target search and pathway enrichment for potential mRNA targets within host immune functions. We found that the parasite miRNA seed sequences were more often identical to those of <i>C. elegans</i>, rather than to those of their hosts. However, we observed that the nematode-secreted miRNA fractions shared more often seed sequences with host miRNAs than those that are not found in the extracellular environment. Development and proliferation of immune cells was predicted to be affected several-fold by nematode miRNA release. In addition, we identified the AGE-RAGE signaling as a convergent targeted pathway by species-specific miRNAs from several parasitic species. We propose a multi-species comparative approach to differentiate those miRNAs that may have critical functions in host modulation, from those that may not. With our simple analysis, we put forward a workflow to study traits of parasitism at the miRNA level. This work will find even more resonance and significance, as an increasing amount of parasite miRNA collections are expected to be produced in the future.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Caenorhabditis elegans, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University of Zurich
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 266a, CH-8057 Zurich, switzeralnd

### Submitter
Lucienne Tritten

### Lab Head
Dr Lucienne Tritten
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 266a, CH-8057 Zurich, switzeralnd


