### Accession
PXD003497

### Title
Quantification of Proteome heterogeneity in benign and malignant prostate tissues

### Description
Intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) has been studied at the morphologic, genomic, and transcriptomic level, but not proteomic level. Recent advances in mass spectrometric (MS) proteome quantification techniques, exemplified by SWATH-MS, a massively parallel targeting method, now also support precise quantitative proteomic comparisons across multiple samples, thus identifying molecular and implied functional differences.   Here we used SWATH-MS to analyze the proteome profiles of a set of fresh-frozen prostate tissue samples derived from radical prostatectomy specimens. A high confidence set of 1,906 proteins were consistently quantified across 60 biopsy-level tissue samples from three prostatectomy patients, each consisting of 1.0 mm punch biopsies from histologically malignant (acinar and ductal adenocarcinoma) and matching benign prostatic hyperplasia tissues.  The quantitative protein profiles allowed independent quantification of the degree of intra-tumor heterogeneity for each protein in benign and malignant tissues. We found that while majority of the proteins showed comparably low intra-tumor variability, 122 proteins were highly variable in malignant and/or matching benign tissues. We observed that proteins that varied between patients or tissue types also tended to be highly variable within prostate tissues,  suggesting that these variability patterns will be a critical selection criterion in future protein biomarker studies. The data also permitted investigation of the heterogeneity of multiple biochemical pathways. The high variability of several of the pathways, including Glypican-1 network, alpha-linolenic acid metabolism and celecoxib pathway, explained contradictory results regarding them in the literature.  In conclusion, we demonstrated a methodology for investigating proteomic intra-tumor heterogeneity from biopsy-level tissue samples, and quantified the degree of intra-tumor heterogeneity of 1,906 proteins in prostate tumors. The method and data presented here have advanced our understanding of tumor biology and offered critical insights for future biomarker development.

### Sample Protocol
SWATH data: biopsy tissues were lysed and digested using pressure cycling technology (PCT) (lys-c and trypsin), and analyzed using SWATH-MS.

### Data Protocol
SWATH data were analyzed using OpenSWATH software using default setting.

### Publication Abstract
It remains unclear to what extent tumor heterogeneity impacts on protein biomarker discovery. Here, we quantified proteome intra-tissue heterogeneity (ITH) based on a multi-region analysis of prostate tissues using pressure cycling technology and SWATH mass spectrometry. We quantified 6,873 proteins and analyzed the ITH of 3,700 proteins. The level of ITH varied depending on proteins and tissue types. Benign tissues exhibited more complex ITH patterns than malignant tissues. Spatial variability of ten prostate biomarkers was validated by immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort (n=83) using tissue microarrays. PSA was preferentially variable in benign prostatic hyperplasia, while GDF15 substantially varied in prostate adenocarcinomas. Further, we found that DNA repair pathways exhibited a high degree of variability in tumorous tissues, which may contribute to the genetic heterogeneity of tumors. This study conceptually adds a new perspective to protein biomarker discovery: it suggests that recent technological progress should be exploited to quantify and account for spatial proteome variation to complement biomarker identification and utilization.

### Keywords
Intra-tumor heterogeneity; prostate cancer; pct-swath

### Affiliations
Westlake University
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich, Switzerland


