### Accession
PXD040633

### Title
Nitric oxide synthase-dependent SNOome identification

### Description
This study aimed to identify proteins whose S-nitrosylation is mediated by each of the three human NOS isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
To identify SNO-proteins, HEK cells were transfected with myc-BioID2, myc-BioID2-nNOS, myc-BioID2-iNOS or myc-BioID2-eNOS plasmids. All cells were treated with 1 mM arginine, and the myc-BioID2-nNOS and myc-BioID2-eNOS transfected cells were also treated with calcium ionophore A23187Total S-nitrosylated proteins were pulled down by SNO-RAC (resin-assisted capture of S-nitrosylated proteins).

### Data Protocol
LC/MS/MS results were analyzed in Mascot (version 2.4.1) (Matrix Science, London, UK). The database used was human Uniprot (20432 proteins). Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 25 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8Da and 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
<b><i>Aims:</i></b> S-nitrosylation of proteins is the main mechanism through which nitric oxide (NO) regulates cellular function and likely represents the archetype redox-based signaling system across aerobic and anaerobic organisms. How NO generated by different nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms leads to specificity of S-nitrosylation remains incompletely understood. This study aimed to identify proteins interacting with, and whose S-nitrosylation is mediated by, human NOS isoforms in the same cellular system, thereby illuminating the contribution of individual NOSs to specificity. <b><i>Results:</i></b> Of the hundreds of proteins interacting with each NOS, many were also S-nitrosylated. However, a large proportion of S-nitrosylated proteins (SNO-proteins) did not associate with NOS. Moreover, most NOS interactors and SNO-proteins were unique to each isoform. The amount of NO produced by each NOS isoform was unrelated to the numbers of SNO-proteins. Thus, NOSs promoted S-nitrosylation of largely distinct sets of target proteins. Different signaling pathways were enriched downstream of each NOS. <b><i>Innovation and Conclusion:</i></b> The interactomes and SNOomes of individual NOS isoforms were largely distinct. Only a small fraction of SNO-proteins interacted with their respective NOS. Amounts of S-nitrosylation were unrelated to the amount of NO generated by NOSs. These data argue against free diffusion of NO or NOS interactions as being necessary or sufficient for S-nitrosylation and favor roles for additional enzymes and/or regulatory elements in imparting SNO-protein specificity. <i>Antioxid. Redox Signal.</i> 39, 621-634.

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation, Nitric oxide synthase

### Affiliations
Institute for Transformative Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA Harrington Discovery Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Divya Seth

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Stamler
Institute for Transformative Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA Harrington Discovery Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA


