### Accession
PXD015823

### Title
The RNA-binding protein ATXN2 controls cellular processes during megakaryopoiesis

### Description
Megakaryocytes accumulate mRNA during their maturation, which is required for the correct spatio-temporal production of cytoskeletal proteins, membranes and platelet-specific granules, and for the subsequent shedding of thousands of platelets per cell. Gene expression profiling identified the RNA binding protein ATAXIN2 (ATXN2) as a putative novel regulator of megakaryopoiesis. ATXN2 expression is high in CD34+/CD41+ megakaryoblasts and sharply decreases upon maturation to megakaryocytes. ATXN2 associates with DDX6 suggesting that it may mediate repression of mRNA translation during early megakaryopoiesis. Comparative transcriptome and proteome analysis on megakaryoid cells (MEG-01) with differential ATXN2 expression identified ATXN2 dependent gene expression of mRNA and protein involved in processes linked to coagulation. Mice deficient for Atxn2 did not display differences in bleeding times, but expression of key surface receptors on platelets, such as ITGB3 (carries the CD61 antigen) and CD31 (PECAM1), were deregulated and platelet aggregation was reduced upon specific triggers.

### Sample Protocol
Non transduced, sh002, sh93 and sh95 transduced MEG-01 cells cultured for 16 days after transduction, lysed and peptides were prepared using the FASP method.

### Data Protocol
Samples were subjected to mass spectrometry using label-free quantification.  All data was processed with MaxQuant for peptide identification and quantification. Downstream statistical analysis was performed with R 3.5.3.  All proteins matching the reverse database, potential contaminants, and those only identified by site were filtered out. To be considered for analysis, a protein had to be detectable within all replicates of at least one sample group (non-transduced and sh002 or sh93 and sh95).  Prior to statistical analysis, a log2 transformation was performed. Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Differential protein expression was determined using LIMMA for sh002 versus sh93 and sh95 with an adjusted p value of >0.05 and an absolute log fold change >1.

### Publication Abstract
Megakaryopoiesis is the process during which megakaryoblasts differentiate to polyploid megakaryocytes that can subsequently shed thousands of platelets in the circulation. Megakaryocytes accumulate mRNA during their maturation, which is required for the correct spatio-temporal production of cytoskeletal proteins, membranes and platelet-specific granules, and for the subsequent shedding of thousands of platelets per cell. Gene expression profiling identified the RNA binding protein ATAXIN2 (ATXN2) as a putative novel regulator of megakaryopoiesis. <i>ATXN2</i> expression is high in CD34<sup>+</sup>/CD41<sup>+</sup> megakaryoblasts and sharply decreases upon maturation to megakaryocytes. ATXN2 associates with DDX6 suggesting that it may mediate repression of mRNA translation during early megakaryopoiesis. Comparative transcriptome and proteome analysis on megakaryoid cells (MEG-01) with differential <i>ATXN2</i> expression identified ATXN2 dependent gene expression of mRNA and protein involved in processes linked to hemostasis. Mice deficient for Atxn2 did not display differences in bleeding times, but the expression of key surface receptors on platelets, such as ITGB3 (carries the CD61 antigen) and CD31 (PECAM1), was deregulated and platelet aggregation upon specific triggers was reduced.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Megakaryopoiesis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr M. van den Biggelaar, PhD
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


